POLAND'S COMMUNIST INFORMERS CAUGHT RED-HANDED ON THE NET

The Windsor building on Madrid's main thoroughfare lies in ruins after the city's biggest fire on Saturday AFP

POLES HAVE been logging on to the internet in record numbers this week after a journalist accidentally posted the names of tens of thousands of Communist-era police informers onto a web site this week. 
The question: "Are you a spy?" is now being heard everywhere, from family gatherings and parliamentary debates to bars and nightclubs.
It is all the work of a journalist, Bronislaw Wildstein, who legally made a copy of a secret police file in Poland's National Remembrance Institute containing the names of thousands of secret police collaborators, informers and the citizens they were monitoring.


But to the shock and fascination of the nation - and the embarrassment of Mr Wildstein - his list of around 240,000 names made its way from his computer, via a chain of colleagues and friends, onto an anonymous website with a dedicated search engine. 
Computer-shy Poles have scrambled online in their hundreds of thousands, all with one goal: to enter their name onto the site, click "search" and find out whether, they have been fingered as a spy.
"Wildstein's List", as it has become known, is widely assumed to be an index of names of Poles who spied for the hated Communist authorities prior to the democratic changes of 1989. Poles dread seeing their name on the list, as they fear they will be associated with the murky world of Cold War espionage. However, the list is in fact an index of spies and their victims, often the very same democratic activists who helped bring down the Communist regime.
Karol Malcuzynski, a journalist who worked for the BBC in Poland in the 1980s is on the list and revealed he was approached by secret police who offered him a job as a spy, which he declined.
"I can talk to the radio or television," Malcuzynski said. "But imagine a situation of a school principal in a small town whose name is on it. He does not stand a chance. People will distance themselves from him."
On 6 February, General Marek Dukaczewski, Poland's head of army intelligence, tried to play down suggestions that the publication of the list represented a breach in national security. He announced that he himself is on the list, and told Radio Zet, a popular independent radio station "there is no threat to active officers of military intelligence."
The confusion between victims and perpetrators that the list creates has caused personal anguish as well as a means by which former and present intelligence officers can conceal their true identity.
The subject of collaboration with the Communists is a delicate issue in Poland, which after the fall of the Berlin Wall, chose the path of reconciliation of former party cadres. Consequently many of the country's bureaucrats and public servants still have some link to the former regime. The current administration, which has a popularity rating of under 10 per cent, are former Communists who have remade themselves as democratic left-leaning politicians.
Political analysts say the leaking of files is often arranged by the conservative opposition, who are expected to win a landslide victory in elections this year.

The former Washington favourite Ahmed Chalabi has staked a claim to be prime minister AP

WITH THE votes counted, Iraq's political parties are discussing who might fill the newly elected 275-member Iraqi National Assembly's most powerful positions. There is broad agreement that the next Iraqi President will be a Kurd, the Prime Minister a Shia and the National Assembly Speaker a Sunni. 
The two main Kurdish parties, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the Kurdish Democratic Party have agreed on Jalal Talabani, the leader of the PUK, as their candidate for President. They have also said they would support Hoyashir Zebari, the present Foreign Minister, to keep his position.


The biggest debate at present appears to be among the religious Shia parties who ran as a coalition in the election but have competing nominations for the position. The Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI) is pushing its number two man and present Finance Minister, Adel Abudl Medhi, while the Dawa party supports its leader, Ibrahim Jaafari. Both sat on the 25-member US-appointed governing council that disbanded last June. 
Jenan al-Obeidy, a SCIRI candidate who will have a seat in the assembly, said: "The other winners like the Kurds, and the Iraqi list all have agreed for him." Members of the Dawa party say the same about Jaafari. Adnan Ali, a spokesman for Jaafari, said an announcement was not expected until early next week. Some think the Shia bloc may not nominate a single candidate.
"Their list has 28 parties," Faraj Haidari, a spokesman for the KDP, said. "Just wait for the coming days; the Shia parties will begin to talk to others."
Ahmed Chalabi, the man who supplied the US government with false information about Saddam Hussein's weapons capabilities and fell further out of favour after he was accused of spying for Iran while a member of the governing council has claimed he is candidate for prime minister as well.
Since then, Mr Chalabi has cast himself as a populist and joined the Shia list to complete what even his detractors admit has been an impressive comeback. "I think Chalabi should just be grateful that we let him join the list," Mr Ali said.
Asked yesterday about the vote, and the extremely low turnout of Sunnis, the Muslim Scholars Association, the most influential group of Sunni clerics in the country, Mr Ali said a statement would be released today. He added that it was too soon to say which Sunni leaders might be involved in the new government.
Those tipped for all three executive positions so far are men, though Jenan al-Obeidy, one of the senior women in the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq, one of the two main Shia parties, said she hoped one of the two vice-presidential seats would be filled by a woman.
The Shia list, members of which had predicted much larger victory than the 48 per cent of the vote they won, said they were considering challenging the results and still have two days to do so, but Mr Ali said it was unlikely.

US AND SAUDI ARABIA ACCUSED OF TRYING TO MUZZLE AL-JAZEERA

A shop owner and his workers in Baghdad watch Osama bin Laden speak on al-Jazeera Samir Mizban/AP

AMERICA AND its key ally Saudi Arabia are being accused of quietly seeking to muzzle al-Jazeera, the Arab satellite news station that has often incurred Washington's ire for its coverage of Iraq and President George Bush's "war on terror". 
According to reports in the US and the Gulf, the Qatari government, owner of al-Jazeera since its foundation in 1996, has ordered privatisation plans for the station to be speeded up. Many al-Jazeera employees fear this could lead to a loss of editorial freedom. A set of proposals is already said to have been presented to al-Jazeera's board of directors.


US officials reject all charges of meddling. Nonetheless, such suspicions are inevitable. Senior US officials, among them the Vice-President Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld, the Defence Secretary, have fiercely criticised al-Jazeera for what they say is biased and inflammatory reporting. 
Washington has been particularly irritated by the station's coverage of civilian casualties and destruction caused by US troops in Iraq, and by its airing of messages from Osama bin Laden, the al-Qa'ida leader. In Iraq and some other Arab countries, al-Jazeera offices have been shut down.
At the same time the Qatari government's ownership of the station has strained diplomatic ties between Washington and one of its traditional allies in the Gulf. In what was seen as a sign of US displeasure, the emirate was conspicuously not invited to a summit on Middle East democracy last summer. Though Qatar has pledged to defend the station's independence (not least as proof of its sincerity in promising greater democracy at home), its diplomats in Washington have reportedly been asked to tone down the station's coverage.
With a regular audience of between 35 and 50 million, al-Jazeera is the most popular source of news in the Arab world. It is a rare beacon of uninhibited reporting and free expression in a region where strict state control of the media is the norm.
But it has rarely been profitable and relies on an estimated $ 100m (£53m) annual funding from its government sponsor. Assuming privatisation goes ahead, the station is likely to be listed on Qatar's stock market, where most of its shares would be available only to citizens of member countries of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC). This could allow Saudi Arabia, the richest GCC member and a prime source of media funding across the region, to gain a major stake in al-Jazeera. The Saudi regime has also been a vigorous critic of al-Jazeera's coverage of opponents of the regime. It has already suspended advertising on the station - adding to its financial problems.
But the quandary is deepest for Washington. Officials maintain that slanted reporting by the station has contributed to the surge of anti- Americanism across the Arab world. But an attempt to silence this inconvenient voice would run contrary to the proclaimed US intention of fostering free speech and democracy in the region.


QXL RICARDO ACCEPTS MANAGEMENT BID

SHARES IN QXL Ricardo, the internet auction site, shot up more than 25 per cent yesterday as the board accepted a new £10-a-share bid from the management, turning its back on the £8-a- share offer made in December by the Dutch group, Florissant. 
The management's bid - which comes several months after it made an initial offer of just £7 a share - could rise to as high as £20 a share. It has said it will pay an extra £10 for each share if its ongoing litigation to regain control of its Polish business is successful.


QXL bought Poland's biggest auction site five years ago, only to discover three years later that new stock, representing about 92 per cent of the business, had been issued without its knowledge or consent. 
The management's increased offer - backed by the private equity group, Great Hill Partners - values QXL at about £17m. However, a successful result in its Polish litigation could double the size of the company. Nevertheless, even with the Polish business, QXL remains worth only a fraction of the £2.5bn at which it was valued at the market's peak in 2000.
It remains unclear whether the group will win in its Polish battle. Last October, a Polish court appointed an administrator to the business. But QXL failed to get the administrator removed after complaining that it was not impartial.
QXL's Polish business made profits of almost 10 million zloty (£1.7m) in the eight months to November, according to results cited by the UK management.
Florissant would not concede defeat yesterday in the auction for QXL, saying it was still considering its options and would make another statement in due course. "Shareholders are urged to take no action at this time," it said in a Stock Exchange announcement.
Florissant made its £8-a-share bid for the company towards the end of last year, prompting the QXL board to withdraw its support for the management's £7-a-share offer last month. However, after failing to get a recommendation for its offer, the Dutch group threatened to go hostile. It is now considering whether to push ahead with a hostile bid.
The QXL management's bidding company, Tiger Acquisition Corporation, is being advised by Deloitte Corporate Finance, while Evolution is advising QXL. Hawkpoint Partners and ISB Corporate Finance are advising Florissant.
Shares in QXL closed 27.5 per cent higher at 1,077.5p yesterday, giving the company a market value of £18.3m.

