Wenger: Thierry needed a break

ARSENE WENGER insists he was right to put Thierry Henry on the bench.
Gunners fans were stunned to find their skipper starting among the subs in the 1-1 home draw against Newcastle on Saturday.
Henry came on at half-time and grabbed the equaliser with a brilliant free kick.
But the supporters felt their side may have won had Henry started.
The Emirates side are 12 points behind Premiership leaders Manchester United and are losing touch in the title race.
But boss Wenger argued Henry, 29, was tired after a midweek game for France against Greece and pointed out the talismanic hitman did not even play when Arsenal won at United in September.
Wenger claimed Henry accepted the decision with no argument and said: "Yes, he was fine. He has played so many games it was very difficult to use him.
"I know him well enough. When I saw him in the last 10 minutes against Greece, I knew he was the way I had seen him before.
"You can discuss every decision but on that front I am sure I was not wrong.
"I made some other wrong decisions today - but that was certainly not the wrong one."
Arsenal entertain German side SV Hamburg in their fifth Champions League group tie of the season tomorrow. The Gunners are currently second in Group G, behind CSKA Moscow and need a victory.
Wenger added: "Henry can't play 90 minutes Sunday, Wednesday, Saturday and then again on Tuesday. It's impossible."


Baby girl survives 'heroin' overdose

A GIRL aged ONE was recovering in hospital last night - after a suspected heroin overdose.
Paramedics found the unconscious child turning blue as her father tried to force her to be sick at her Edinburgh home.
An insider said: "The house was full of people screaming and shouting.
"The paramedics knew instantly drugs were involved but her family tried to deny it.
"Eventually they admitted there had been heroin lying about."
The baby was given oxygen and Narcan, which reverses the effects of heroin. She came round in the ambulance and is expected to make a full recovery.
Her parents could face drug possession and child neglect charges if toxicology tests show there was heroin in her system. She is now set to be placed in care, together with her three-year-old sister.


20,000 too scared for school

BULLIES force 20,000 children to stay away from school every day, according to a report.
A third of pupils aged between 11 and 17 in England admit to skipping classes out of fear at least once, Beatbullying said.
One in three truants blame bullying.
The charity said kids who miss school were most likely to fail exams, get drawn into crime and to be unemployed in the future.
Its report is released today to mark the start of Anti-Bullying Week. The charity's John Quinn said: "Young people have told us how they want the Government to beat bullying."
Beatbullying is launching a TV advert today, voiced by its patron, DJ Sara Cox.
She said: "Bullying affects the life chances and education of the future workforce of Britain."


ASBO book fury

Manual on how to land a court order
A BOOK that gives thugs tips on getting an ASBO was last night slammed by experts.
How To Get An ASBO sells itself on having "all you need to be the most anti social members of your neighbourhood".
The instruction manual tells how to create noise nuisance by chaining up a PIT BULL so its barks all day.
Other advice includes listening to music at FULL BLAST on an iPod while sitting on a packed commuter train.
Virgin Books is publishing the book, right, in time for the Christmas market. But furious councils say the publication is irresponsible.
Alison Parsons, head of Birmingham City Council's Anti-Social Behaviour Unit, said: "This book is absolutely terrible. It certainly isn't funny.
"It seems to propagate the myth that some people actually would like an ASBO.
"But there is nobody I have dealt with who has welcomed an order." The two authors, who use the pseudonyms Mia Wallace and Clint Spanner, defended the book as a humorous critique of ASBO policy.
They said: "We appreciate the ironic situation where the Government thinks it's tackling anti-social behaviour, yet there are also bad guys out there desperately trying to get an ASBO."

Con trick

Killers and armed robbers win right to claim benefits in PRISON
KILLERS and armed robbers are exploiting a benefits loophole to rake in thousands -behind bars.
Lags allowed out of a jail each day to do jobs are topping up their wages by claiming Working Tax Credit.
The bonanza was blasted as a "farce" yesterday -as it emerged taxpayers are footing a bill of more than £ 50,000 a year. Working Tax Credit is meant to help hard-up families.
But prisoners let out to work while serving the last stretch of their sentences at Kirklevington Grange prison near Stockton-on-Tees realised they too could claim.
They are eligible even though they return to cells each day and have no food, accommodation or travel costs. Last night a prison source said: "These benefits are to help people with living expenses prisoners just don't have. It's a farce.
"A couple of guys who know how the system works put in for the benefit and their applications were waved through. Everyone else followed suit. There are a good couple of dozen.
"The prisoners' view is that if the system is willing to pay them this extra money then why shouldn't they take it?" Kirklevington Grange is a resettlement jail which helps cons make the transition back to everyday life by allowing them to work in the community. While most are serving stretches for minor crimes, others are coming to the end of sentences for murder or armed robbery.
More than 100 are let out each morning to work in a variety of jobs for local firms. They have to be aged over 25 and do more than 30 hours a week. That entitles them to claim £ 2,345 a year. Matthew Elliott, of pressure group the Taxpayers Alliance, said: "These prisoners are making a mockery of Working Tax Credits."
A spokesman for HM Revenue and Customs, which administers Working Tax Credit, admitted: "Prisoners out on licence or day release who are working and therefore liable to tax and national insurance could be entitled."
Shadow Home Secretary David Davis demanded an investigation by the Treasury. He said: "This is clearly a ludicrous abuse of a system designed to help decent hard-working families."


Blair: We will crush Taliban

PM's boost for troops on Pakistan visit
TONY Blair pledged last night to crush the Taliban in Afghanistan -and insisted: "We must not be defeated."
The PM delivered a rallying call to the 5,000 UK troops fighting in Helmand province on a visit to neighbouring Pakistan.
He said the Islamic fanatics beaten in the aftermath of 9/11 were trying to recapture a foothold in the country.
Military chiefs have warned Taliban troops may launch a major offensive next year after re-arming in the winter.
And yesterday Mr Blair demanded: "Our will has to be superior to theirs.
"To fail in this would be to be defeated -and we must not be defeated.
"Nobody should be in any doubt at all about our commitment to Afghanistan.
"It's of fundamental importance to our security to stick with it and see it through."
Struggle
Mr Blair, who will today cross the border into Afghanistan, spoke after holding talks with Pakistan's president Pervez Musharraf in Lahore yesterday.
There are fears the Taliban are using remote border areas of the country as safe havens.
President Musharraf admitted they were backed by "elements from this side" and added: "We need to put our house in order and make sure that this support is cut off."
But he rejected claims that Pakistan, which has lost 600 troops fighting the Taliban, was not doing enough.
In a joint announcement after the meeting the two leaders agreed to "curb the violence through effective action against the militant Taliban".
They also pledged to tackle grievances exploited by terrorist recruiters, such as poverty and the Middle East conflict.
Mr Blair said: "We begin to win when we start fighting properly and we are now fighting properly. But we've got to do more." President Musharraf called for an aid programme for Afghanistan like the Marshall Plan which rebuilt Europe after the Second World War.
Downing Street insisted £ 5billion was in place -but not the government infrastructures to distribute the money. And Mr Blair said Afghanistan was just one aspect in a "difficult global struggle" against Islamic fanatics.
The PM blasted "backward and reactionary" extremists, saying: "Our task is to take them on wherever they are."
Mr Blair's call came as Chancellor Gordon Brown visited the southern Iraqi city of Basra to rally British troops. In a passionate speech to 300 soldiers from the Princess of Wales Royal Regiment, known as the Tigers, he yelled: "You are the Tigers. Proud and courageous Tigers."
Meanwhile a global security think-tank warned there was "every prospect" of the War On Terror lasting 30 YEARS.
The Oxford Research Group said if the US leaves Iraq, Muslims fighting a holy war will operate "without restraint". But if it stays, its soldiers will become a "magnet" for radical groups.
US presidential hopeful Republican Senator John McCain yesterday called for more troops to be sent to Iraq. He warned that not doing so could lead to further terror attacks. 

How could he?

Victim's mum blasts cop's soft line on paedos
A TOP cop has caused outrage by saying perverts who have sex with kids over 13 should NOT be called paedophiles.
Terry Grange also claimed that child porn should refer only to images of kids aged 12 and under.
Mr Grange, chief constable of Dyfed-Powys -and the Association of Chief Police Officers' spokesman on child protection -was blasted by a mum whose 14-year old daughter fell prey to a paedophile.
She said jailed pervert Adrian Ringland, 36, right, "took advantage of her" after meeting her on the web.
She added: "Grown men should not be sleeping with young girls. They are paedophiles. This man was sexually attracted to young girls, it wasn't just my daughter. It's disturbing that a man, especially a senior policeman, could say this." Mr Grange said people who targeted "pre-pubescent" children should be treated as paedophiles.
He added: "It is much more of an issue for me if a child is under 13. I think the closer they get to 16 the more it becomes a grey area."
Asked to define paedophiles, he told a Sunday newspaper: "When we are talking about very young people it is paedophilia, and I wouldn't want to mix up kids who are just the wrong side of 16 with paedophiles."
He added: "Child porn is 12 and under. For me, that sort of thing, paedophilia, is with pre- pubescent children."
Mr Grange, left, was also attacked by kids' charities and MPs. Michele Elliott of Kidscape said: "He is irresponsible and misguided. A paedophile is a person sexually attracted to children.
"In this country we class this as children who are under 16. The legal age of consent is 16. Anyone who has sex with a younger child has committed an offence.
Lib Dem MP Roger Williams said: "The law is clear. By bringing doubt into the issue, he hasn't helped."
Michael Hames, a former head of Scotland Yard's obscene publications unit, said it was "dangerous" to make the distinction with pre-pubescent children.
And a spokesman for children's charity NCH said: "Any proposal by a serving child protection officer to define child pornography as that which only involves children 12 years old and under is wholly unhelpful and irresponsible."
Last night Mr Grange said: I was referring to 13, 14 and 15-year-girls and teenage boys and nothing else.
"If the fella concerned...is in his 20s, 30s or 40s then I believe you should prosecute them ruthlessly."

