Anarchy in the UK
Yobs rule streets
Knife crime soars
A NATION UNDER SIEGE
BRITAIN is on the brink of ANARCHY after a weekend of yob violence, campaigners said last night.
As figures revealed knife crime had DOUBLED in two years, a string of incidents left law-abiding citizens living in terror.
A mob BESIEGED a police station.
A man and a teenage boy were MURDERED in separate incidents and paramedics were ATTACKED as they tended a father and son.
In one county, 999 callers were told there were only THREE police on duty in a town of 22,000 people.
Norman Brennan, director of the Victims of Crime Trust and a serving cop, said: "Violent crime has reached epidemic proportions.
"We are experiencing anarchy on the streets of Britain. There is no other way to describe it.
"If the Government doesn't get a grip soon, I predict outbreaks of civil disorder within three to five years."
Mr Brennan branded Labour's election winning tough-on-crime slogan "the biggest deception in British history".
He added: "I met somebody this morning who has just been mugged for the fourth time.
BREAKDOWN
"He didn't report any of the attacks because he has got no faith in the police any more."
Tories accused the Government of taking two years to wake up to the explosion in knife crime.
Shadow Home Secretary David Davis said: "Knife crime is just a symptom of the breakdown in society on our streets.
"The Government owes it to the public to get a grip of drink, drugs and the broken homes that have spawned this plague on Britain."
One of the weekend's murders took place in Croydon, South London.
A man in his 20s was stabbed repeatedly in the street.
Police were called after a nearby resident heard screams and a disturbance. The victim's name had not been released last night.
The other killing happened in Farnworth, Greater Manchester, where Andrew Holland, 16, was knifed after a row at a chip shop.

Shake the hand of a squaddie

They deserve our thanks
GENERAL'S SUN PLEA TO BACK OUR BOYS
BRITAIN'S top soldier today calls on the nation to "shake a squaddie's hand" in thanks for their sacrifices.
General Sir Richard Dannatt chose The Sun to appeal for the recognition Our Boys deserve in putting their lives on the line in Afghanistan and Iraq.
His stand comes amid growing fears the massive efforts of our troops are being ignored.
In an article, below, in the forces' favourite paper, the Chief of the General Staff wrote: "Our troops need your continued support. If you know a soldier, why not drop him a line or shake him by the hand?"
Sir Richard -who visited troops in Afghanistan over the weekend -also demanded the Royal Mail stop ripping off soldiers' families. He said: "I find it irritating for families who want to send a package to their son or brother having to pay a fiver. Come on Royal Mail, I think you can do that for free."
The general revealed he will back the call for a special clasp to the Afghanistan campaign medal that says "Southern Afghanistan" to highlight heroics in the badlands of Helmand.
He defended the mission to defeat the Taliban there, calling it "a misunderstood war".
Sir Richard insisted: "Why is this worth fighting for? The Army is up for it, because we know that the blood that we spill in the deserts of Helmand is in direct defence of our nation. We are fighting the away match of a much wider campaign against terrorism.
"Afghanistan is just the most pressing part of that campaign."
As many as 65 British servicemen have been killed in 16 months. Fighting in Helmand is the most intense in 50 years since the Korean War.
Combat in Iraq -and the battle for Basra -is also hotting up, with 41 dying this year.


Louis: I bagged Xtra viewers

11M SEE SHOW... HE TOOK CREDIT!
THE X Factor's return drew nearly 11 MILLION viewers -and Louis Walsh reckoned it was all down to him.
The cheeky judge told The Sun that it was because show chief Simon Cowell had brought him back.
The ratings of 10.7 million for ITV1 on Saturday were 2.5 million more than the launch show of the last series.
Louis, 55, said: "Well, I wouldn't want to say, 'I told you so' but I think nearly 11 million people is a fair indication that Simon should never have sacked me.
"He thinks it's all about him, of course, but I think deep down inside he knows it's me the viewers really love.
"Seriously, it's a great achievement and I'm so proud for everyone."
Louis was furious after Simon ditched him in favour of American choreographer Brian Friedman. He even made a voodoo doll of him.
The Irish pop manager added that the new signings, presenter Dermot O'Leary, 34, and fourth judge Dannii Minogue, 35, were "fantastic additions." Aussie singer Dannii said of the ratings: "I can't believe it.
"I watched the show on Saturday night with my friends and we were all crying and laughing."
The X Factor blew rival BBC show Dance X out of the water. That managed only 2.9 million viewers. The 10.7 million viewers is more than saw Steve Brookstein and Shayne Ward crowned X Factor champs in earlier series.
ITV2's spin-off The Xtra Factor also bagged its highest audience -1.2 million.

Knife crime every 8 mins

1 in 5 muggers has blade, say shocking crime stats
ANARCHY IN UK: HAVE THE YOBS TAKEN OVER?
A TERRIFYING knife crime now takes place on the streets of Britain every EIGHT MINUTES, chilling figures revealed yesterday.
The explosion in thugs carrying weapons means offences involving blades have more than DOUBLED in just two years.
On average a shocking 175 people are robbed at knifepoint every day -up from 110 last year and 69 two years ago.
Last night the statistics sparked outrage among MPs and law and order campaigners -as the country reeled from another weekend of knife savagery.
Skills Secretary John Denham -former chairman of the Commons Home Affairs committee -admitted more needed to be done to combat armed yobs. He said: "The knife crime we have seen recently and some of the drunken behaviour -we are not where we need to be on those issues."
The figures emerged just days after hero dad Garry Newlove, 47, was murdered by teenage vandals as he tried to defend his home in Warrington, Cheshire. The statistics were issued by London's Centre for Crime and Justice Studies following analysis of Home Office data. They show:
One in five MUGGERS now threatens victims with knives Street ROBBERIES in which a knife was used soared from 25,500 in 2005 to 64,000 in the year to April 2007.
Knives are becoming more COMMON in a wide range of attacks -from booze-fuelled street fights to vicious muggings and rapes.
CCJS deputy director Enver Soloman said grimly: "There is no doubt there are more kids carrying knives."
Furious cop Norman Brennan -director of the Victims of Crime Trust -called for a massive crackdown on "feral youngsters" terrorising inner-city estates and town centres. He demanded mandatory five-year jail terms for those wielding knives. Mr Brennan said: "We are facing a national crisis with knife crime.
"It is not so much a disease now as an epidemic."
Culture
The study revealed that even muggings without knives were rocketing.
There were 320,000 robberies in the 12 months to April 2007, compared with 255,000 in 2005. Minister Mr Denham insisted police had been given powers to combat the crisis. He said: "We have very powerful new legislation in place for the police to use to tackle these problems -and where there are underlying problems, like the acceptance of gang culture among young people, knife carrying or too-readily-available alcohol to young people."
The Home Office stressed knife KILLINGS had not gone up.
A spokesman said: "Public protection is our top priority, which is why we have recently introduced tough legislation -such as increasing the maximum sentence for carrying a knife in public without good reason from two to four years."
A second survey -just days after Cheshire chief constable Peter Fahy said the legal drinking age should be raised from 18 to 21 -revealed 86 per cent of teenagers have consumed alcohol under age.
More than half drink at least once a week -while one in ten hits the booze EVERY DAY. Almost a THIRD admit wanting to get drunk, while a similar proportion confessed to having taken drugs.
More than 12 per cent also said they admired hellraising singer Amy Winehouse - who is currently in rehab.
John Sewell, whose market research firm www.onepoll.com conducted the survey of 2,500 youngsters aged 13 to 18, said: "These results are extremely worrying.
"Teenagers think it is a normal thing to do because they constantly see pictures of their idols going in and out of rehab."
POLICE were yesterday hunting a gang of yobs aged 17 to 19 who attacked a father and his two sons -then hurled bottles at ambulancemen tending the victims.
The three were targeted after trying to stop the thugs vandalising cars outside their home in the upmarket suburb of Edwalton, Nottingham. One brother was beaten unconscious.
MURDERED AT CHIPPY
A LAD knifed to death after a row at a chip shop was yesterday described by his shattered family as a lovable "cheeky monkey".
Andy Holland, 16, who hoped to join the Army, was left dying in the street on Friday.
Yesterday his mum Joan, 44, was being comforted by relatives in Farnworth, Gtr Manchester.
An uncle said: "Andy was a bit of a cheeky monkey but a good kid at heart." Police are quizzing a man aged 21.
JUST 3 COPS IN TOWN
A HOUSEHOLDER called cops after a vandal attack but nobody came because only THREE officers were on duty in a town of 22,000 people.
Keith Welch, 27, said he waited in vain for four hours for police to arrive on Saturday night after hoodies stoned a neighbour's house.
He was told all the cops in Spalding, Lincs, had been busy. He said: "It is crazy."
ANGUISH OF STAB MUM
THE mother of a student murdered in a row over a chocolate bar collapsed yesterday as 200 friends and relatives remembered him.
Altun Anil, left, was overcome by emotion at the tribute to Evren, 23, who died after confronting thugs for throwing the half-eaten snack into his sister's car in Crystal Palace, South East London.
Evren's cousin Mehmet Aray said: "We will never stop unless we find the thugs who did this."

100 thugs in siege at police station

A MOB of more than 100 thugs besieged a police station early yesterday after cops seized music gear being taken to an illegal rave party.
Two patrol cars were damaged and officers narrowly escaped serious injury as their base was pelted with beer and wine bottles.
The attack began after the arrest of three men in a van on an industrial estate in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk.
Cops stopped them after they were seen behaving suspiciously shortly after midnight.
Powerful sound equipment was found in the back of the vehicle. Reinforcements from neighbouring counties were rushed to the resort as screaming yobs gathered outside the police station to demand the release of the trio.
Officers in riot gear tried to control the crowd but several suffered minor injuries after being hit by missiles. No members of the public were hurt.
The mob drifted away after an hour and went to the party on an industrial estate.
The event, held illegally in a warehouse, was attended by around 300 people.
Officers with protective gear and dogs monitored it then moved in to break it up at about 10am. Twelve people were arrested. More than 100 officers from Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, Suffolk and Essex took part in the operation.
Many came under attack from a missiles, including lumps of wood.
A woman officer needed hospital treatment for a hand injury.
Chief Supt Bob Scully, of Norfolk Police, described the attack on the police station and his officers as "shameful" and promised to track down those involved.
But ravers accused cops of being heavy-handed as they broke up the party.
Lauren Davies, 18, of Harleston, Norfolk, said: "They pushed people back with batons even though the music was switched off."

