Storms leave trail of destruction across Yorks

YORKSHIRE was picking up the pieces today after savage storms triggered mayhem across the county. One person died as 90mph winds battered the Broad Acres yesterday, leaving a trail of destruction in their wake. Buildings were damaged, roads were closed and scores of train services cancelled during some of the most extreme weather conditions of the last 20 years. 
One of the places hardest hit was Dewsbury Moor, where nearly 60 homes had to be evacuated after the gales tore the roof off a house and debris began smashing through the windows of properties on School Lane. Thousands of homes in Yorkshire were today without power. Towns and cities affected by blackouts last night included Leeds, Wakefield, Dewsbury, Bradford and Halifax. In Leeds, Primrose High School and Shakespeare Primary School, both in Burmantofts, were due to be closed today. Pupils were also told to stay from Ilkley Grammar and Knottingley High, where part of the roof was blown off by the gales. At the height of the storms, the Headrow in Leeds city centre was shut between Park Row and East Parade amid fears that a section of scaffolding had become unsafe. Houses in Rodley and Drighlington had part of their gable ends ripped away. Torrential rain added to the problems, with the Environment Agency issuing a flood warning for the River Aire at Allerton Ings, near Castleford. The A659 was closed westbound today between Otley and Pool because of standing water. Rail firm GNER said it would be operating a "revised and reduced timetable" while repair work was carried out on overhead lines. MeteoGroup forecaster Brendan Jones said the weather was expected to remain windy today, with gusts likely to reach around 40 to 50 miles per hour. Leeds City Council has already decided to shut all its 270 outdoor sports pitches tomorrow and Sunday - the second weekend in a row that they have been out of action. *For local road and rail information, ring MetroLine on 0113 245 7676 or visit the www.wymetro.com website. For the latest on the roads, call 08457 504030.


Corrupt ambulance bosses ordered to pay back £242,000

TWO corrupt ambulance bosses have been ordered to hand back almost a quarter of a million pounds they stole from the NHS. Former West Yorkshire service chief executive Trevor Molton and ex-finance chief John Miners are serving three years in jail for conspiring to defraud the NHS through a venture to rent property to Filipino nurses. A judge at Manchester Crown Court yesterday ordered the confiscation of £242,717 - shared equally between the two - to be paid back to Yorkshire Ambulance Service. 
The pair will have to sell property to repay the cash by October - or face another three years in jail. The sum is the estimated cost of the fraud which was uncovered following a painstaking three-year investigation. NHS chiefs last night welcomed the return of stolen cash to patient services. Alan Stewart, who headed the investigation for the NHS Counter Fraud Service, said: "It's extremely pleasing that this large sum of money which has been drained from the NHS by the conduct of both Molton and Miners is being returned to the NHS where it can be used to benefit the public. "They were in senior positions in the NHS, positions requiring high levels of trust and responsibility. They flagrantly abused those positions to defraud the NHS. Their actions can only be described as disgraceful and have received the punishment they deserve." Molton, 51, of Pickering in North Yorkshire, and Miners, 55, now of Nailsea, near Bristol, were also ordered to pay towards prosecution costs - Miners £30,000 and Molton £20,500. Total prosecution costs are estimated at £185,000. Last night Jayne Barnes, chief executive of the Yorkshire Ambulance Service, said: "We welcome the verdict - especially as the money will be going directly back into YAS." Both Molton and Miners, who have been in Strangeways prison, Manchester since their conviction last May, were in court for the proceedings. They are expected to be moved to open prisons and could be released in the autumn.


Brewing award is firm's for the casking

Supply side the key to success By Howard Williamson CASK ale king Black Sheep is the cream of the brewing crop. It is the first brewery in the North of England to have won the industry's most sought after supply accolade. The Cask Marque Distribution Charter Award sets the highest standards for storing, transporting and delivering cask beer and is a crucial part of the system that helps pubs to serve the perfect pint. 
"We are extremely proud of this award," said the firm's founder, Paul Theakston. "We strongly believe cask beer should be nurtured and cared for every step of the way from the brewing process right through to the beer pumps on the bar of your local pub. "One of the key stages is distribution and we have invested a great deal in establishing rigorous procedures to ensure our beers are delivered to pubs and hotels in tip-top form." Black Sheep Brewery's distribution centre is based at Well, near Masham. "Cask ale is a live product which needs to be cared for from production to the pub and quality has to be the watch word," said Rob Theakston, assistant brewer and distribution manager. "At the production level, there are many quality control checks in place, but once the cask leaves the brewery it is in the hands of the distributor and the level of quality control can slip. Upheld "The award demonstrates the high quality standards set by the production team are being upheld right through to storage and distribution." Annabel Smith, Cask Marque national account manager said: "Congratulations to Black Sheep for being the first northern brewery to achieve our award. "The first assessment was carried out at a particularly tough time during the hot weather in summer - a time when you might expect standards, in particular temperature control, to slip."

Campaigners in bid to restore ex-school site

CAMPAIGNERS fighting to return a disused school to community use say the Victorian building is steadily deteriorating after being left boarded up for more than TWO YEARS. They fear the building may be sold off for private use - despite the fact that community groups are queuing up to secure it as a base for a wide range of activities. And they say if the building is sold they will mount a bid on behalf of the community. 
Leeds City Council says the building is to be sold - but with provision for community use. Royal Park Primary School at Hyde Park served local youngsters for more than a century before it was closed by Council-backed Education Leeds in 2004. The school was also a focal point for community activities, with parents' groups, a toy library, language classes, a breakfast club, self-defence classes, keep fit classes and more using its facilities. The school was closed in mid 2004 because of falling numbers of pupils in the Hyde Park, Woodhouse and Headingley areas. At the time Leeds City Council said the school would eventually re-open and that at least part of it would be reserved for community use. But two years later the school is still boarded up and its condition is worsening, according to local campaigners. In recent months packed meetings of residents have voiced their worries - and they are demanding a say in its future. One of the campaigners, Sue Buckle, a former governor at the school, said: "Since 2004 the building has been boarded up so that the cost of refurbishing it has increased hugely." She listed half a dozen local organisations who wanted facilities at the school. Campaigners on January 4 said they wanted to: l secure the building for community use - if necessary by bidding for its lease if the council decides to seek tenders for private use; l demand an immediate start on maintenance work; l express dissatisfaction over lack of progress to councillors and to local MP Hilary Benn; l call for consultations with the council over the building's future use. The campaigners plan to meet again at the Cardigan Centre on Monday, from 6pm to 8pm but this is not open to the public. A spokeswoman for Leeds City Council said: "We are currently marketing this property and have invited proposals which must include provision for a public library and community facilities. The deadline for proposals is January 31."

No money for food..'treated like prisoners'

Refugee joins protest against asylum centre By Tony Gardner A UGANDAN woman who found sanctuary in Leeds after being raped and tortured in her own country joined a protest at the city's asylum-seeker detention centre yesterday. Enid Ruhango stood alongside the Leeds No Borders group yesterday to stage a noisy demo outside the Waterside Court centre on Kirkstall Road against the "inhumane" treatment of refugees and asylum seekers. They were protesting in the wake of a report by Ann Owers, Chief Inspector of Prisons, saying the centre lacked "basic standards of decency and safety". No Borders member John Ward said: "It's about time the people at this centre are treated like human beings. 
Many arrive without any money - and have walked miles to get here. "They have escaped terrible atrocities in their country and are suffering from post traumatic stress. Yet we prolong suffering by treating them like prisoners. "They are handcuffed and held for weeks in terrible accommodation before being deported again and put back in terrible danger." The YEP reported in November how Enid, 31, is being given sanctuary in All Hallows Church in Hyde Park, Leeds, as she faces deportation after having her asylum claim rejected. Supporters are campaigning for her to be allowed to remain in Britain after hearing the harrowing account of her being tortured and raped in prison. She is reliant on the church for everything, as law prevents failed asylum seekers from working or receiving benefits. Enid fears for her life if she returns to Uganda after opposing the Ugandan government. After escaping to Britain she was detained at a centre in Bedfordshire, where she went on hunger strike in protest at her treatment. She said: "I did not believe that people could be treated like this in Britain." Immigration centres in Luton and Stansted airports, the Portsmouth ferry port and the centre at Waterside Court were critisized in the report. The centres, run by private contractor G4S, were deemed unfit for holding children or for overnight stays. In Leeds, detainees with special needs were routinely held in police cells.

On a high .... office take-up levels

TAKE-up levels of Grade A office space in Leeds city centre during 2006 were the highest in five years, according to results just published by property firm Sanderson Weatherall. According to the firm, 270,000 sq ft of space was taken during the year, up from 254,000 sq ft in 2005 and 217,000 sq ft in 2004. In total, take-up of office space reached 510,000 sq ft and included lettings to Provident Financial, taking 38,000 sq ft at 3 Leeds City Office Park; William Hill taking 27,000 sq ft at 2 City Walk; the Foundation for Credit Counselling moved into 38,600 sq ft of space at Wade House, and Leeds Met University also took 45,000 sq ft at the newly-developed Hepworth House. 
The annual average of city centre take-up in Leeds since 2000 is 550,000 sq ft, the firm said, leaving final take-up figures for 2006 slightly below average. According to Sanderson Weatherall, this is mostly due to the lack of any one large letting in the city which had occurred in previous years. In 2005, the Government Office took 95,000 sq ft at Lateral; in 2004 Centrica took 87,500 at 2 Leeds City Office Park and in 2003, Eversheds took 120,000 sq ft at Bridgewater Place. Glenn Levison, associate director of Sanderson Weatherall's office team, said: "Leeds has achieved its status as a hugely important provincial city as a result of its inherent wealth, with the financial services, legal services, Government and telecoms sectors all well represented."

