More staff rejected as institutions focus on quest for quality ratings. Zoe Corbyn reports.
Dramatic increases in the proportion of academics excluded from the research assessment exercise were confirmed by a number of universities this week.
Amid speculation that more academics than ever before could be branded "research inactive" and left out of the exercise, Derby University confirmed that some 91 per cent of its academic staff would be excluded from the 2008 RAE, compared with 69 per cent in 2001.
Although the picture varies across the sector, indicative figures provided to The Times Higher by Derby, Oxford Brookes, Birmingham City and Kingston universities confirm that each is opting for a far more selective strategy than in 2001.
There is also anecdotal evidence that at least one research-intensive university is planning to exclude more staff in a bid to increase its research quality ratings.
Oxford Brookes is planning to submit about 33 per cent of its staff (down from 41 per cent), Birmingham City expects to submit about 11 per cent (down from 20 per cent) and Kingston is planning to sumbit about 26 per cent (down from 29 per cent).
Derby intends to submit just 9 per cent of its full-time-equivalent academics compared with 31 per cent in 2001.
"We are under no illusion whatsoever that it will be an extraordinarily selective basis by which the Higher Education Funding Council for England will draw the final line on who gets funding and who does not," said Paul Bridges, Derby's head of research.
He said that Derby would be submitting staff in four units of assessment, but as the university currently receives no RAE funding there is no financial risk. "We've been more selective than hitherto because we decided it was important to gain peer recognition for quality."
Janet Beer, vice-chancellor of Oxford Brookes, said the university was being more selective and was intending to submit in 19 units of assessment. "We see the RAE as a snapshot of research activity and a means to an end - to consolidate our reputation as an institution that is serious and confident about research."
Warwick University, a member of the research-led Russell Group, is also understood to be taking a tougher line than in the previous exercise, when nearly 91 per cent of staff were submitted.
The local University and College Union said that in some Warwick departments up to 25 per cent of staff were being excluded. Universities must make their submissions to the RAE by the end of the month. Panels will begin poring over them in January, with the final outcomes not expected until December 2008.
Rob Copeland, national policy officer for the University and College Union, said that despite new rules designed to curb selectivity, significant numbers of people were being strategically excluded. He estimated that it would be "no better than in 2001", where 60 per cent of academic staff were selected.
"Some of the more 'aspirational' post-1992s do seem to be going for increased selectivity, pushing in certain subject areas where they may get a reasonably high rating," he added.
But some universities are submitting more staff than previously. Brunel indicated that it was entering 87 per cent (up from 61 per cent), Lincoln estimated submitting between 35 and 40 per cent (up from 21.5 per cent) and Plymouth between 40 and 50 per cent (up from 34 per cent).
Steve Smith, chairman of the 1994 Group of smaller research-intensive universities and vice-chancellor of Exeter, said it was difficult to know whether RAE 2008 would be more selective.
"No one yet knows what everyone's strategy is going to be. The 1994 Group submitted more staff as a percentage last time, and I suspect that it will roughly be a similar picture, but research heads are not revealing," he said.
Professor Smith added that "selectivity" was wider than just percentages of staff submitted. "In all our academic appointments for the past couple of years Exeter has only been appointing people who are RAE assessable," he said.
Malcolm Grant, University College London provost and chairman of the Russell Group, said the group would probably submit proportions of staff in the same range as last time, of between 75 to 90 per cent.
"The question is, how much money is in it? If there is a significant increase in quality and volume of research, which is my sense through the period, but if the amount of money remains the same it will mean everyone is worse off," he said.

Ucea issues guidance for v-cs seeking to quit national pay bargaining

The university employers' body is to issue formal guidance to support vice-chancellors if they decide to pull out of national pay bargaining, writes Melanie Newman.
The University and Colleges Employers Association has drafted advice, to be circulated to all universities later this month, to assist managers if current talks over the future of national pay negotiations collapse.
Ucea this week reiterated its threat that universities would walk away from national pay bargaining and set pay locally or in consortia if the University and College Union did not agree to a number of reforms to the system.
The UCU is holding a special conference next week to discuss the employers' demand that future national talks be held around a single negotiating table with non-academic unions and that a clear timetable be set for talks. The UCU has so far resisted both moves.
Jocelyn Prudence, Ucea's chief executive, said: "I hope the outstanding issues with the UCU can be resolved and that the majority of institutions will therefore decide to participate in national bargaining.
"However, if there is no resolution following the UCU's special conference, Ucea is fully prepared to support those institutions that opt for local bargaining as a result."
Ucea's guidance, which is still under consultation, will include a questionnaire to help senior managers weigh up their options - by considering issues such as the state of local industrial relations and the financial costs involved in ensuring they have the capacity for local pay talks.
Ucea intends to publish a list of those institutions continuing with national bargaining, and those that are not. Separate codes of practice will be available for both groups.
The Times Higher understands that for the first time Ucea has formally acknowledged that groups of institutions with similar profiles, such as the research-led Russell Group, may opt to negotiate pay in consortia.
The guidance also notes that institutions may support local pay talks in principle but may lack the capacity to conduct them.
These universities would be asked to commit to collective negotiations for a set period, while putting arrangements in place for a move to local negotiations in the future.
Bill Wakeham, Ucea chairman, said the guidelines would provide improved employer coherence and clarity about whom Ucea represents.
Malcolm Keight, head of the UCU's higher education committee, said: "It is our hope that the conference will enable us to agree arrangements that will retain national bargaining. If the employers are threatening to walk away from those, that is their decision, but it is not one that we would like to see."

'Sport focuses on achievement and develops people's team-based skills'

The head of the new UK Universities Sport plans to boost participation and encourage outreach work.
Ed Smith, head of the newly created UK Universities Sport, has a clear idea about how higher education's sports facilities can help to improve the nation's health.
"If the agenda is about a healthy nation and the role that sport can play in a healthy nation, then there is much more that universities can contribute as part of their community involvement," he says.
Mr Smith joins UK Universities Sport from accountancy firm Pricewaterhouse-Coopers. The new body was created from a merger of the British Universities Sports Association, which runs university sport, and University and College Sport, comprising facilities staff.
The self-confessed sports fanatic is a graduate of the former City of London Polytechnic, now part of London Metropolitan University, where he obtained a BA in accountancy. Mr Smith will take up his post in December.
"I genuinely see sport as a critical part of the fabric of a university. It develops young people in three ways - it focuses on personal achievement, it develops people's team-based skills and impacts on personal fitness, which helps one's day-to-day energy levels. I believe that it's very important in the development of people."
Though he feels there is more that can be done to foster potential Olympic talent, he took the job on to widen the impact universities can have on their communities.
"I said very clearly when I was prepared to take up this job that it should not just be about the elite.
"Universities are situated in wider communities and they should be leveraging their sports facilities into the wider community as part of their overall corporate social responsibility.
"I go to some institutions and I see how active some of them are at bringing young schoolchildren in. These kids have access to facilities that would simply not be available in their schools."

Tories: students need greater transparency

A Conservative government would hold universities to account by publishing student dropout rates, staff contact hours and class sizes instead of relying on "clumsy monitoring institutions" such as the Quality Assurance Agency, writes Melanie Newman.
The plan to "empower students" was due to be outlined by David Willetts, Conservative Shadow Secretary of State for Innovation, Universities and Skills, in his first major higher education policy speech at Sheffield University's public services academy, due to take place after The Times Higher went to press.
Mr Willetts was also set to call on the Government to start its review of top-up fees now, rather than waiting until 2009, although the Conservatives have not yet decided whether they want to see the current £ 3,000 a year cap on fees increased or decreased.
Since taking office Mr Willetts has frequently raised questions over the quality of higher education and the student experience.
"Rather than relying on clumsy monitoring institutions like the QAA, we can hold universities to account by empowering students with information about their courses," he was expected to say.
Students are demanding such information with increasingly strident voices on student websites such as RateMyProf.com, WillISeeMyTutor.com, through demonstrations in person and via complaints to the press.
"Whatever their content, these campaigns underline a demand for new information about universities beyond what is available in the standard glossy marketing prospectuses. We need more transparency about what is really on offer to students," Mr Willetts was to say. While acknowledging that the National Student Survey is "a step in the right direction", the Conservative spokesman was to complain of "strong signs that this is yet another Gordon Brown target that can be gamed".
One vice-chancellor had told Mr Willetts that in order to make sure students are satisfied lecturers were told not to be too hard on them close to survey time.
Mr Willetts was to call for an official website giving students detailed information about universities and courses.
"A national student experience website would pull together searchable information on research ratings, dropout rates, library facilities and university estates."
Universities will also be urged to provide data not yet in the public domain, such as "information on contact hours and class sizes".
On the subject of top-up fees, he told The Times Higher that the Conservatives would abide by the cross-party agreement that a decision on the cap would not be made before 2010, but "that doesn't mean there should be a silence on higher education", he said. "We would like a pre-review to ensure that decision is taken properly."

