Party on to rock bottom: Britain's boozing will get much worse with 24-hour drinking - and that's precisely why it is a good idea

Alcoholics have a saying which warns that those who spend too much time in the barber's shop may eventually emerge with a haircut. The government's heavily criticised current policy on alcohol management, however, seems to be that we ought to be allowed to visit the barber's whenever we choose. I'm an alcoholic and I think both are right. 
On Wednesday, Tony Blair defended round-the-clock drinking, telling MPs that the drunken behaviour of a tiny minority should not prevent the majority of law-abiding people enjoying European-style licensing hours. When I was drinking, I supported 24-hour opening as keenly as the prime minister does. I too peddled the line that liberalisation would encourage the emergence of a continental-style cafe society. In this more sophisticated world, customers would sip stylish drinks in tasteful surroundings. No pressure of last-order deadlines would force these drinkers into uncalled-for pint 'n' chaser swigging sessions.


Privately I didn't believe that cafe society would really happen and knew that if it were to come about, I would be swift to abuse it. I actually wanted 24-hour licensing because I felt it would lend a sort of phoney legitimacy to 24-hour drinking, which I was really interested in. The only reason I could imagine to have pubs open at breakfast would be for customers to drink at breakfast. 
These days, as an alcoholic in recovery nearly four years on from the last drink, I still think the cafe-society scenario is a fantasy. But at the same time I am even more in favour of derestricting drinking hours than when I drank. It is in all our interests to make alcohol as freely available as possible.
Although the administration and the media decry frequent heavy drinking, it is evident that the public warmly endorses it. Metaphorically, a hell of a lot of people are packing into the barber's at weekends, holidays, whenever there's a big match on, etc. Most of these customers are young, and as many of them are women as are men. It's likely we're going to see a hefty crop of unasked-for haircuts before long.
Many customers not only enjoy the alterations that alcohol makes to their state of mind, but are compelled to push those alterations to the limit most times they drink. Blackout will eventually call time, but on regaining consciousness the goal of these drinkers will be to get back to the blissfully altered state they enjoyed somewhere between the third or fourth drink and the last one. As time goes by and sobriety loses all attraction, so the condition of drunken perfection will become increasingly elusive. Eventually alcohol will pack up delivering at all - all it will do will be to very slightly ameliorate its own catastrophic side-effects. Now the drinker will feel appalling without alcohol flowing through the veins, but only slightly less awful when it's present. That slight degree of improvement will be sufficient, however, to compel the addict to take extreme steps to ensure continuity of supply.
When you get that far your life will be well and truly screwed. It took me about 35 years to reach this destination, but most alcoholics I've met since I stopped drinking got there in far less. Although not all the young binge-drinkers of 2005 will mature into addicts, it is 99% sure that we are already too late to avoid an epidemic of chronic alcoholism among the thirtysomethings of 2015.
To avoid things getting even worse, we should benefit from the knowledge of those who have painfully-won practical experience of dealing with alcohol addiction. The people who know the drinker's mindset best are the unfortunate partners and friends of alcoholics. What they have learned is that you can't actually do anything to stop an alcoholic drinking. Not a thing. The time-honoured ruses of marking or hiding bottles or stopping credit don't stand a prayer against the urgent needs of the drinker. And no matter what emotional cards you play - promises, threats, tears, love, violence, despair - your only reward will be damage to yourself.
Your best bet - your only bet - is to detach and let them get on with it. Cut loose. That way there's just the slight hope that the craving addict, finding the door pushed against for so long suddenly swinging open and the space behind it empty, might topple headlong into taking responsibility. I think that what enabled me to stop drinking was the realisation that my wife was finally at the point of giving up on me for real. Not a threat; a fact. No one else was going to try to make me stop anymore. Before this point, drinkers can always feel "someone else is doing the worrying for me, so I can get on with the drinking". And if removing any opposition doesn't put a stop to the booze, at least freeing the drinker to drink unchecked means that the final rock-bottom will be reached more speedily with less pain all round, whatever the final outcome.
Society needs to detach like an alcoholic's family and friends. In the short term we'll see a lot more boozing and a lot more damaged boozers, but in the longer term our current obsession with extreme drinking might run its course more swiftly. At that stage we could realistically think about taking steps to get alcohol under control. Until then, however, let's make it a double vodka and a short back and sides.
Andy Mayer is a writer and recovering alcoholic

First on our list, a good local school - for all our children: So, Ruth Kelly says she'll give parents what they want...

What do parents want? In her first speech as education secretary last week, Ruth Kelly vowed to put our voices at the heart of education policy. Given that we have little control over the curriculum, school hours, who our children are taught by, whether to opt them out of the key stage Sats - even the dates of the school term are changed without consulting us - it all boils down to the thorny issue of school choice. 
But what do most parents want when they choose a school? Do they really want a separate tier of quasi independent faith and selective schools as well as the fee-paying sector and the new city academies, often with diminished local control?
Or is there another way of looking at parental aspiration - middle class or otherwise - that acknowledges that a great number of families do not want to be offered escape routes out of the existing state system; they want to play their part in a high-quality locally based community of schools with balanced social intakes where their children will learn, be happy and feel safe?


Recent polling published in the Times Education Supplement suggests that parents value schools that give preference to local children. The majority are opposed to any form of selection. The government's own research suggests that most parents, especially in areas where there is little choice, get their children into the local school they want. Once they are there, most are happy. 
The take-up of private education is much lower outside London, falling to less than 3% in many areas, and although increasing urban prosperity has meant a significant minority opt for the private system in some cities, the number of children in private schools has remained fairly static nationwide, at about 7%, for the past decade.
So why the headlong rush into more market-style reforms? Should the government really be committing huge sums of public money to more privately sponsored, locally unaccountable city academies despite their mixed performance so far (as shown by league tables published this week), when all the evidence points to strong support for networks of good community schools? The architects of these policies could be making a profound political mistake.
Parents aren't stupid and many are starting to understand that market-style innovations simply don't work within a state system: hence the much lower parental satisfaction in London, where the market in state schools, with wildly different admissions criteria and a thriving independent sector, is most active.
One criteria set by the government for the success of these reforms is the degree to which they can lure the aspirant middle class back from the private sector. But parents know it is impossible for the state to match resources in the private sector.
City academies may be popular with parents in boroughs where, up to now, there have simply not been enough schools or they are demoralised and underfunded - although in some parts of the country parents are fighting to keep and improve their failing schools rather than have a city academy. But even the best of the academies will never come near to matching the funding and social privileges at the heart of a private school.
Parents are also realistic about the limits of so-called choice. With most schools driven by a prescriptive test-based system, most know that choice is between good and less good schools as defined by league tables.
School places aren't like tins of baked beans on a supermarket shelf: provision can't be expanded and contracted at will. As the website of the Department for Education and Skills says under its advice to parents section: "You should not risk wasting your first choice by choosing a school where you stand little chance of getting a place".
Adding an extra class or two on to popular schools isn't a long-term solution. With an overall limited budget, boosting the resources of one school harms another, just as permitting one local school to control its own admissions automatically skews the intake of neighbouring schools. As one parent sighed the other day: "Choice isn't really the point, is it? It's fairness, isn't it?"
Admissions, plus continued generous funding for all schools, are at the heart of a fair education system. A nationally determined admissions policy based on local communities and feeder primary schools could help increase parent choice, ensure balanced social intakes, and mitigate the injustices of selection by faith, ability or postcode that lead to some schools becoming unrepresentative of their communities and sinking under the weight of social problems.
In failing to act on these principles, New Labour has missed the chance to create and consolidate a powerful argument in favour of state education and its valued place at the heart of a modern democratic culture.
A good local comprehensive school is the most vibrant practical statement possible of the kind of society we want to live in. By educating children of every social class, faith and ethnic background together, giving each child a broadly equal chance until they reach early adulthood, society is clearly stating its belief in opportunity for all.
The lack of enthusiasm for these ideas at the heart of government is hard to understand. Of course some in New Labour still believe its prime mandate comes from a rejection of so-called old Labour values. The very term comprehensive, not used once by Ruth Kelly in her speech, has become something of a political dirty word, the equivalent of being caught wearing a donkey jacket in public.
But a polarised education system brings its own very real dangers. It undermines many other worthwhile policy ambitions such as the reduction of crime and antisocial behaviour, and increasing the nation's productivity.
And for many voters, the renewed thirst for global social justice is matched by a longing for greater equality in our domestic public services. Plenty of parents use the state system not because they reluctantly have to, but because they passionately want to. These are not lefty troublemakers but hard-working men and women with grit and ambition - aspirant professionals, families who fit the classic New Labour profile.
In the two inner London boroughs where we, as parents, are now going through the secondary transfer process, good comprehensives, by no means at the top of the league tables, are hugely oversubscribed by parents buying into the idea of an inclusive local school. Many want a government that celebrates that concept, rather than one that seems to believe deep down that all decent families are motivated by self-interest alone.
With its endless talk of choice and diversity, New Labour risks losing middle-class support for public-service reforms among families who use their local schools and want them supported and consolidated, not undermined and replaced.

