Should we allow universities to go bankrupt?

They do things differently in America. Two years ago, the 123-year- old Huron University in South Dakota lost the battle to stay afloat and was put up for sale. Almost everything went at auction - the gym mats and desks, the skeletons and the microscopes. The 5-acre football field went for the bargain price of £ 25,000.
Huron was a small private university, but credit agency Moody's warned last month that US public institutions are not immune from the vagaries of the market, with a small number teetering on the edge of a financial abyss. University bankruptcies, while rare in the US, are not unknown.
Could it happen here? It is not a scenario that David Eastwood, the chief executive of the Higher Education Funding Council for England, envisages (page 9). Allowing an institution to go under "would be a market discipline, but I think it would be the wrong one", he told the Association of University Administrators last week. Is Professor Eastwood right not to leave it to the market? If the Government and the funding councils have been reluctant to save imperilled science departments because they reason that to do so would be an infringement of university autonomy, why not let the axe fall on a whole institution?
Fortunately, few UK institutions - half a dozen at last count - seem to be in financial difficulties and none, as far as is known, is facing meltdown. But that does not mean that the higher education market will always be so benign, or that the sector hasn't started to contemplate what should happen when it turns. "The corollary of creating so many new universities is that you have to allow some to go to the wall. You can't save them all, and maybe some are not worth saving," was one vice- chancellor's bleak assessment of Whitehall thinking last year when the picture looked, temporarily, less rosy.
That sentiment is probably held only by a minority within the sector - and for good reason. The consequences of letting a university go to the wall would be catastrophic for many a local community and economy, as well as being politically disastrous for many a local - and national - politician. It would at least equal if not eclipse the outrage that usually accompanies the closure of a community hospital. The shock waves on the higher education scene nationally would be no less severe. The failure of a university would undoubtedly dent the confidence in the sector as a whole, as students, business and academics anxiously asked which institution could be next.
So Professor Eastwood's conclusions are probably correct, drawn as they are from the incontrovertible fact that, for all the market rigours that have been imposed or enlisted on and by universities, they exist to provide a public good. Questions of institutional survival should be addressed by answering that imperative, not the market's.
However, it would be equally foolish to think that this approach is cost- free. Is Hefce's brand of management oversight as stern and as effective as the market's would be, for instance? Does a more understanding regime encourage, however unwittingly, a more lax, less responsible management attitude simply because managers know there will always be a safety net? Moreover, how equitable is it to shell out public money on failing institutions when it could be given to those that do a better job?
As things stand, Hefce's careful and discreet monitoring of troubled universities has proved successful - and if it ain't broke, why ask the market to fix it? But should the alternatives one day prove unpalatable, should the cost of avoiding bankruptcy be drastic downsizing, ill-fitting mergers, or a takeover of choice faculties by private operators, then a South Dakota-style fire sale may not be so far-fetched a prospect.


Academe is guilty of institutional cowardice

Richard Reynolds is appalled at the failure to defend the right to debate academics' unpleasant viewpoints.
"I disapprove of what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it." The well-known paraphrase of Voltaire's sentiments has been forgotten in the past couple of weeks by those who should know better. When our great academic institutions are put to shame by a students' union, as they were last week, something is very wrong.
On one hand we have the University of East Anglia students' union voting through an unprecedented motion asserting "that in order to combat illiberal, extremist or racist ideologies it is necessary to openly confront these ideas and not merely pretend they do not exist".
On the other, we have the Science Museum pulling a lecture series by Nobel laureate James Watson on the basis that the remarks he had made in the press had "gone beyond the point of acceptable debate".
It's normally disappointing when you look at the world of student debate. If you have never had the (mis)fortune to attend the sort of debates that tend to go on in the student community, it's fair to say that cries of "fascist" or "Nazi" are used by all sides with about the same level of thought behind them as a five-year-old telling someone that they smell.
Students, through the National Union of Students, have long been fearfully making tokenistic gestures against fascism by "no platforming" (refusing to talk to/allow that at their conference) groups they - rightfully - do not like very much, for example, the British National Party and Hizb ut- Tahrir.
The students of UEA broke ranks recently by calling for an end to such policies. They did not do it through some sort of new Norfolk-based neo- Nazi campaign but rather by standing up for the very principles that the academy is supposed to be founded on - a rigorous academic community, based on dissent, discussion and, above all, a belief in the ability of good ideas to win over bad ones.
At the same time, what we have seen from the Science Museum et al is total moral cowardice. There must be an inherent contradiction in calling oneself an academic or academic institution and at the same time shying away from a contentious debate.
However, while James Watson has been all over the papers in the past couple of weeks, it's the self-imposed day-to-day restrictions lecturers are putting on themselves that are causing the most harm.
Some students are trying to stand up for a more progressive concept of debate. It is massively disappointing to see our academic betters failing to do the same. As students, we are always hearing our lecturers complain about us, describing us as uninterested, disengaged or just plain hung over. Perhaps our silver-haired guardians of knowledge have forgotten their student days and that engagement in ideas and ingesting a great deal of alcohol, while not all beneficial, are not mutually exclusive. More important, what they should not have forgotten - indeed, what they should be doing - is engaging in rigorous debate, not hiding from it.
Students are adults; we do not need protection from arguments that are unpleasant. On the other hand, we are also learning how to be future academics, or at the very least learning how to engage in academic discourse. A vapid, dry, disengaged academy, in which only certain ideas are licensed for discussion, will and does breed vapid, dry and disengaged students - not drinks deals in the students' union bar.
The failure of the academic community to stand up for unrestrained free debate seems to be less a matter of combating institutional racism and more a case of institutional cowardice.
Society relies on all of us, academics and students, on both an academic and a political level, to challenge orthodoxy to make progress. I have no doubt that racism, whether coming from Nazi ideology or perverted genetics, is wrong, but I for one would have enjoyed the opportunity to discuss this with a proponent, no matter how abhorrent his views.
Students, through the NUS's no-platform policy, still seem deeply politically regressive, but until those who set the tone of the world we live in awaken from their idle slumber to realise that their freedom is being threatened too, it is unlikely that much will change.
So for God's sake grow some "gender-neutral spherical objects" and get involved in arguing with people - students as well as academics - you disagree with. You never know, a little more controversy might inspire rather than scare us.
Richard Reynolds is an undergraduate at the University of East Anglia. He is the founder of Student Academics for Academic Freedom.


More debate needed on marking

The fact that the Burgess committee has had so much difficulty in achieving consensus regarding a different classification system and now wants to do away with it altogether makes one wonder why the academic "on the ground" finds it so difficult to relinquish this myth that marking and assessment is objective and scientific rather than a professional art. I agree with Sue Bloxham ("A system that is wide of the mark", October 26) when she says that subjectivity is unavoidable. We all know of colleagues who will defend to the death their decision to award a 56 rather than a 57, but to do this they are amalgamating many judgments about separate elements (such as creativity, criticality, evidence, structure and argument) in a single piece of assessed work. Quite simply, no matter how hard we try, and no matter how detailed our marking guidelines are, an objective measurement cannot be done - it is a human judgment and human judgments are fallible.
Why then are we so fiercely resistant to change in our marking practices, even when confronted with research evidence and common sense? It could be something to do with fear of student litigation, but I think it is deeper than that and something to do with our own academic zones of comfort, and a mental schema that is highly resistant to change. This schema may have developed from our own experiences of being assessed, but it is also likely to be strongly influenced by the discipline and the department we work in. There are no quick and easy solutions to this dilemma, but a little more honesty and less defensiveness would greatly help a constructive debate across the sector.


Peep's Diary

Wot u doing on Web 2.0?
An anonymous US academic, writing on a blog called Rate My Student, is disturbed by tutors who spend too much time on Facebook. "My colleague across the hall is always talking about events he reads about on Facebook, knows the nicknames of most of his students and posts a tonne of personal info about himself on his own page. On his Facebook 'wall' dozens of students had left him messages like: 'Prof, dude, how's it hanging?' and 'Yo, Proffy, wot that smile on u face?!!'"
The academic goes on to say that she has never heard "a single untoward thing" about the professor, but asks: "Is Facebook one of those lines that faculty shouldn't be crossing?" Steve Wheeler, a senior lecturer at Plymouth University, responds on his own site: "It could be worse - he could be on Bebo."
Possessive about its brand
Oxford University has posted an exhaustive "toolkit" on its website to help staff who might be confused following the university's review of its "visual identity" (that means brand to you and me).
The site's operators clearly do not think much of staff's standard of education: they include a helpful guide to punctuation, with advice, for example, on the apostrophe to show possession: "The teacher's book (one teacher)

