If murders like John's are so common they are not worthy of coverage,why is Sir Ian Blair still in his job?

ON THE same day last year Friday, July 29 two young men died after unprovoked and brutal assaults. One young victim you will certainly have heard of.
His name was Anthony Walker.
Anthony Walker was black.
He was the victim of a gang of four white youths, one of whom plunged an ice axe into his head.
The news coverage of this revolting crime was, rightly, intense and extensive. So extensive, indeed, that it crowded out reporting of the murder on that same midsummer evening of another young man, of whom you will probably not have heard. His name was Richard Whelan.
He was 28 years old and, for what it is worth, white. He was in a bus with his girlfriend when another man began throwing chips at her. Whelan asked him to stop. The man, described by other passengers on the bus as 'black and in his 20s', stood up and stabbed Richard Whelan repeatedly, pushing his girlfriend away as she tried to defend him. The man then got off the bus at the next stop and walked off down Holloway Road in North London.
If our Press is 'institutionally racist' in the way alleged by Sir Ian Blair, currently the Metropolitan Police Commissioner, then it is doing a very good job of disguising it. For the extensive coverage of the murder of Anthony Walker in contrast with that of Richard Whelan was due precisely to the fact that he was slaughtered entirely because of the colour of his skin.
Sir Ian, however, in his illjudged remarks to the Metropolitan Police Authority, chose to contrast a different set of murders which occurred on the same day this month. He criticised the Press for giving far more attention to the stabbing of 31-year-old lawyer Tom ap Rhys Pryce than it did to the murder of 54-year-old Balbir Matharu, dragged to his death by two car-stereo thieves.
In fact, the Press has given extensive coverage to Mr Matharu's murder: according to The Guardian, his death has generated 4,443 words in the national Press, compared with 5,525 on the murder of Mr Rhys Price.
That is hardly a big difference.
And when you consider the particular facts surrounding Mr Rhys Price's murder he was stabbed after handing over all his money to the muggers, there was CCTV footage available of his assailants and the Metropolitan Police itself chose to issue 16 Press releases about his murder in the next ten days, compared with only six about Mr Matharu then the difference is neither surprising nor sinister.
Sir Ian also chose to criticise the media for its allegedly disproportionate coverage of two other killings Holly Wells and Jessica Chapman in Soham, and banker John Monckton in Chelsea.
AS JOHN was my wife's cousin you will not expect me to be dispassionate in my response to Sir Ian's remark: 'Certain stories capture the national Press and there is a huge amount of interest in them. Sometimes it is difficult to understand why that is. It would be fair to say that it was the Monckton murder there are many murders of equal dreadfulness that captured it.' I spoke to a number of the detectives who actually worked on bringing John's killer to justice and they all told me they regarded it as one of the most distressing cases they had ever been involved in. Let us remember how one of John's assailants tricked him into taking the latch off the door of a heavily protected house by dressing up as a postman with a parcel seemingly addressed to him. Let us remember that the killer, Damien Hanson, brutally stabbed John's wife Homeyra in front of him. Let us remember the scene was witnessed by John and Homeyra's nine-year-old daughter, Isobel.
Above all, let us remember that Damien Hanson was a psychopath who had only weeks earlier been released after serving just six years of a 12-year sentence for attempted murder.
In the light of all that, can the media's great interest in the case really be attributed to ' institutional racism' as Sir Ian Blair insists? I would argue that the Commissioner's own comments show a startling lack of common human empathy.
Even more so do his dismissive comments about the national agonising over the murder, in August 2002, of Holly Wells and Jessica Chapman: 'Putting it bluntly, it's a quiet news day, it's August, these things can blow up.'
Putting it bluntly, Sir Ian, your lack of sensitivity makes you unfit to be a policeman, let alone Britain's top officer. And are you seriously suggesting that if John Monckton had been black and Damien Hanson white, or if Holly Wells and Jessica Chapman had been black, the media and public would have shown one whit less interest and concern? Do you really believe that?
I think that what London's Metropolitan Commissioner was struggling to say, in his characteristically clumsy fashion, was that there are many murders in the most dangerous parts of the capital, where the population is largely non-white, that receive little or no Press coverage.
Well, if some of these are gangster killings, in which one drug dealer murders one of his colleagues, then perhaps the Press and the public can be forgiven for not grieving quite as much over the loss of such lives.
BUT perhaps it ought also to occur to Sir Ian that if the public has become blase about such murders then it is a terrible comment on the state of affairs in the city he is supposed to be keeping safe. Sir Ian, however, is not of the old school that of his distinguished predecessor John, now Lord, Stevens who regard the catching of criminals as the be all and end all of the police force's job. He shares his namesake the Prime Minister's view that this is hopelessly out of date.
As Sir Ian pointed out in his Dimbleby Lecture last year, while in its 1993 White Paper on Police Reform the last Conservative Government stated unequivocally: 'The main job of the police is to catch criminals,' in 1997 the incoming Labour Government proclaimed the purpose of the police 'service' was 'to build a safe, just and tolerant society in which the rights and responsibilities of individual families and communities are properly balanced and protection and security of the public is maintained'.
Or, as Sir Ian, inimitably, put it in his lecture: 'We need one holistic service to cover the whole of the mission.' Does that make you feel safe?
Funnily enough, Ian Blair overlapped with me as an undergraduate at Christ Church, Oxford.
His great passion then was acting. But what I can't work out now is whether Sir Ian is a politician playing the part of a police chief or a police chief playing the role of a politician. Whichever it is, this show must not go on.


I'm sorry, but Sir Ian has got a point

I HAD better say sorry before I even start as it is now compulsory for anyone with an opinion to have to apologisefor it a day or so later.
Sir Ian Blair, the Metropolitan Police Commissioner, has had to apologise 'to anyone connected to the Soham murders' after telling a meeting of the Metropolitan Police Authority that 'almost nobody' could understand why the murders of Holly and Jessica became such a big story.
At this juncture we all have to emote about how awful those particular murders were. But that should go without saying.
His wider point was that some murders get a lot of attention and some don't.
He said he thought the media's institutional racism had something to do with it. This may be debatable but I do not see why Sir Ian cannot say it without being leapt on.
There are things he should undoubtedly apologise for and may lose his job over but this is not one of them.
There are many of us who find the way that certain crimes are reported nothing short of pornographic. At times the coverage of the Soham murders certainly was.
As I prefer not to live in a world of fear, I never watch Crimewatch or buy the local newspaper which is full of stabbings, 'black on black crime' and crackdowns on crack dens. Also I'd prefer my children not to think everyone out there is a murderer, paedophile or robber.
Does the media influence our perception of crime? Definitely.
What Blair was talking about, however, were the swathes of victims who are robbed and murdered and whose names never even register.
It is true they tend to be black or Asian and sometimes violence may be dismissed as to do with drugs or gangs, as though the grief of a mother whose boy is shot down at 18 is less than that of any other mothers. Inevitably, there have been exceptions, from Damilola Taylor to Anthony Walker, victims who came from good Christian families.
This is nothing new: there have always been acceptable and unacceptable victims.
The Yorkshire Ripper wasn't considered such an evil threat until he moved on from killing prostitutes to 'normal' women.
So it's not simply a black-andwhite issue. Class, age and gender are also involved.
But it is difficult to deny that, as Ken Livingstone said, ' murders and attacks on black and Asian people . . . simply do not dominate the news agenda in the same way as many of those affecting white people'.
Where Sir Ian made a mistake was to use the phrase ' institutional racism'.
All that ever produces is people standing up saying that they aren't individually racist.
The media is a business. The police perform a public service.
The media will produce what sells and often that will be what its audience identifies with.
The police, on the other hand, have to clear up crimes that involve every part of society. Ian Blair is allowed, surely, to think aloud about how best that might be done.
Why on earth should he have to apologise for that?
SUE AXON, thankfully, was defeated in the High Court.
She was trying to stop girls under 16 from having abortions without parental permission.
This is another part of an ongoing attack on a woman's right to choose which is coming from all quarters right now.
PRINCE CHARLES urges us to take up walking and cycling. Thanks for that! I was planning to follow his example and get a private jet myself.
And STILL he wants a wife . . .
SO Simon Hughes has finally come out. As what, though? 'I am confused and I am proud?' Perhaps he isn't sure he is gay some people never are. It was very weird last week when he remarked about how he had tried to get a wife, as though he had gone to Tesco and there were none left on the shelf.
Now I read he still wants to get married to a woman. Lucky gal!
Perhaps he has seen Brokeback Mountain, the most boring film in the world, in which two gay cowboys conduct a long affair while marrying and having children, thus ruining other people's lives.
Once again the person who emerges as a far bigger man than any of these revolving closet cases is Peter Tatchell. He once suffered a homophobic election campaign conducted by Hughes and his supporters. He was vilified for being openly gay. Now Tatchell graciously forgives Simon Hughes and offers his support.
Had Tatchell been elected, life would have been very different for him. Now he has gone from defending gay rights to standing up for human rights all over the world.
When it comes to integrity and humanity, few political leaders can touch Tatchell, who should be knighted. If only so he can refuse it.
Enjoy your 15 seconds of fame . . .

