Is justice served by these tales of beheading?: In an age of terror, we need to look again at our legal system and restraints on the press

The modern media shock anyone who worked in or reported on the criminal justice system of the late 20th century. Every month, another news bulletin breaks the rule banged into us from the first time we phoned a police officer or went to magistrates' court. Once detectives arrest a suspect, no one can say a word that might prejudice his or her trial. Freedom of speech stopped when the handcuffs went on. Legal sanctions must protect the minds of jurors from contamination by the outside world so they can assess the evidence in a state of virginal purity.
The old rules didn't flatter the public. They assumed that jurors were children who could not reach a true verdict if they read about a case before or during a trial. But insulting though they were, they were obeyed.
Not any more. Last week's papers were full of accounts of the supposed plot by nine men held in raids in Birmingham. Every type of paper, upmarket and down, ran headlines such as 'Terror gang planned to kidnap, torture and behead a soldier on our doorstep' or 'Terror hitlist named 25 Muslim soldiers' with barely an 'alleged' thrown in to hint that none of the claims had been proved in court.
I suppose that if you asked the police to justify the leaking, they would say that the people of south Birmingham had heard screaming sirens and seen armed officers on the streets and a helicopter and a military spy plane overhead. To stop them being terrified, they had to be told what was going on. Or rather, because I need a few 'allegeds' myself, what the police alleged was going on.
I used to think that the possibility of prejudiced trial overrode the right of people of Sparkbrook and Sparkhill for an explanation. Injustice would inevitably follow if the media were able to whip up a hate campaign. But maybe Britain's problem is not that there's too much prejudicial coverage but too little. Perhaps there would be fewer miscarriages of justice if we put a little more trust in freedom of speech. 
The one part of the court system where injustice flourishes is the wretched Family Division. Its blanket secrecy means that mothers who have had their children snatched from them cannot ask the media or elected politicians to investigate their grievances. In truth, the family courts are different because the secrecy continues after the courts' decisions. Meanwhile, the police and the media are chipping away at the lesser secrecy that once surrounded criminal cases but lifted as soon as a trial was over, leaving victim, witnesses, police, press and lawyers free to say what they please.
The standing rebuke to British censorship is America, where the First Amendment to the US constitution guarantees freedom of speech. No American I could find last week would repeal it if they could. A worker at the American Civil Liberties Union, which daily upholds the rights of defendants from attacks by government, sounded bemused when I asked if the press's freedom also threatened defendants' right to a fair trial. The ACLU defended the constitution, she said, end of story.
'It's deeply embedded in our culture,' added Lucy Dalglish from the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press. 'When the state takes someone into custody, the press must be able to ask questions.' When I said it wasn't deeply embedded in our culture and asked what practical benefits removing reporting restrictions brought, she cited the sensational Duke University case. You might remember that a district attorney accused three rich and white members of the university's lacrosse team of the bestial rape of a black stripper they had hired to perform for them. The DA said that he had 'no doubt' that the charge was true. If DNA evidence didn't confirm that the suspects were guilty, that didn't matter. They may have used condoms, he speculated, because 'probably an exotic dancer would not be your first choice for unprotected sex'.
The grubby god who watches over journalists couldn't have come up with a better story for the American hacks. It hit all the tensions in American society about class, race, a pornographic culture and violence and, best of all, a crusading DA was going to put them right. Except that the accused and their families stopped him by doing what they could never do in Britain. They went to the media and showed that the DA's case was tendentious and sloppy. It now looks like the one punishment that will result is the swift execution of his career.
This is the press at its best: exposing wrongdoing and providing a voice for its victims, but few American defenders are cheering the media on. Jack King, from the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, described courtrooms turning into madhouses.
When a Californian jury at the trial of an alleged child killer went home to consider their verdict, they turned on the news and heard the victim's father shouting at them to find the defendant guilty, King said. 'There's too much noise. Too many relatives standing on the steps of courts screaming. A judge can move the trial to another part of the state, but that doesn't work if it's on cable news. There's no place to hide from the television cameras.' Yet he added that the US had freedom of speech and: 'I wouldn't have it any other way.'
As I listened to him, I imagined what Channel 4 would do if the government lifted reporting restrictions, but I didn't feel a smug sense of Old World superiority. Busting open the Family Division remains the most pressing legal reform of our day and there are strong arguments for letting a little more light into the criminal courts.
If, in an age of terror, the police and security services have a duty to brief the public, then defence solicitors should surely be allowed to go to the media, brief back and appeal for witnesses. Terror may change the rules, but it shouldn't tilt the level playing field of the courtroom.

Let Tony Blair get on with his job

WHEN TONY Blair announced he would not seek a fourth term as Prime Minister, he made his authority hostage to those in his party who impatiently agitate for his departure. That was a tactical mistake. Like fidgety coach horses trotting through a tunnel, the restive faction bolted on seeing daylight in the distance without knowing, or caring, what lay beyond.
Since then, the Prime Minister has been harried into a more specific pledge. He will go this year. Predictably, this did not satisfy most of his enemies. Less foreseeable was Assistant Commissioner John Yates's inquiry into allegations that peerages were swapped for party loans, which has morphed, perhaps for want of evidence of corruption, into a probe of Downing Street's email management.
That puts the anti-Blair wing of the Labour party in the awkward position of watching a police investigation get close to achieving what systematic parliamentary rebellion failed to do.
Presumably, Yates does not see himself as heading a uniformed wing of political opposition to the head of government. If a crime is reported, the police must investigate and follow the trail wherever it leads. No one is above the law. But it is also good practice to recognise when an inquiry, if poorly run, could damage the standing of democratic institutions and undermine the Prime Minister who, like any citizen, has the right to be presumed innocent. Mr Yates last year promised MPs a focused and proportionate investigation. It has turned out otherwise.
One problem is that before solving any crime, police first had to establish that a crime was even committed. The 1925 act which prohibits the sale of titles was dormant, no higher a police priority than the law against eating the Queen's swans. Meanwhile, the correlation between munificence to a political party and receipt of honours was a fact of Westminster life. That does not make it noble or even acceptable. But ancient rot in a system, allowing a corruption of a forgotten law is, above all, a reason for reform. It is not grounds to unseat a Prime Minister.
If anyone in Mr Blair's entourage was foolish enough to draft a price list for honours, they would only have been codifying historic practice. The already established recipients of honours view that prospect as vulgar, but it is no different in principle to the nods and winks of a 'gentleman's agreement' that went unnoticed and immune to investigation by Scotland Yard for generations.
As it happens, there is still no evidence that a formalised system existed. So the police inquiry is focusing instead on the possibility that supposed evidence might have been concealed.
After more than 10 months of sniffing around Downing Street, John Yates's reputation is staked on this inquiry. He is in danger of looking like a political provocateur if, at the end of it all, there is no case to be brought. Meanwhile, the Prime Minister's political opponents just want someone in Downing Street to be charged with anything, as if, like Al Capone, Mr Blair is a known villain who must be trapped by whatever legal means necessary.
But Tony Blair is not Al Capone. Nor is he Richard Nixon, who was caught red-handed in a cover-up of a proven and much more serious crime. That has not stopped people making the absurd comparison.
The Liberal Democrat and Tory leaders have called on the Prime Minister to go, in Mr Cameron's case grandiosely invoking the 'national interest'.
Mr Blair's departure date is roughly known. It may not come soon enough for some, too soon for others. But that is a matter of partisan opinion, not moral imperative. John Yates has been given ample freedom to do his job as a policeman. As long as there is no evidence of wrongdoing, Mr Blair should be allowed the same freedom to get on with his job as elected Prime Minister.

The real bird flu threat lies elsewhere

FOR THE past four years, the prospect of a lethal strain of bird flu coming to Britain has hung over us. The latest outbreak on a farm in Suffolk naturally provokes anxiety about what might happen if the infection spreads to humans. This is not a certainty, but nor is it science fiction.
Most European countries have well-rehearsed emergency plans and have ordered plenty of the antiviral medication Tamiflu. They would cope well in all but the most apocalyptic scenarios. But a pandemic even of a mild form of the disease would be testing, not least because of the danger of panic. People would not go to work, because of sickness or for fear of it, and still need basic services to function. But most people would survive.
That is not true everywhere. While governments in rich countries have been worrying about whether or not their millions of doses of vaccine will suffice, virtually nothing has been said about the fate of poorer countries. In sub-Saharan Africa, for example, there are many states with no vaccine and no health- care system adequate even to begin to cope. Already blighted by Aids and malaria, many African societies may be devastated by a flu pandemic.
One problem is the lack of mechanisms to monitor thousands of smallholdings, where close human-to-bird contact is inevitable. Deaths from bird flu in the developing world are almost certainly going undiagnosed. This follows on from a failure by countries in some of the likely epicentres of an outbreak, not just in Africa but also in Asia, to recognise the danger. Indonesia suffers regular human deaths from bird flu, but has not implemented basic quarantine measures. China is stubbornly closed to international attempts to track the disease. This will only change when there is a clear message, not just from agencies such as the World Health Organisation, but from national governments, which carry more diplomatic clout, that countries at risk need to open themselves up to monitoring and intervention. The incentive would be access to the West's stockpiled vaccines.
Britain should not be complacent about bird flu, but we can be optimistic about our ability to cope. The same cannot be said for Africa and Asia. It is to this risk that diplomatic as well as scientific attention must now be turned.


