Blade culture has us all in its thrall

A spate of stabbings is intimidating many into not going to the aid of those in trouble. Giles Hattersley finds out why so many young people feel obliged to carry knives
The Packington estate, so decrepit that it is scheduled for demolition, lies between streets of neat Victorian and Georgian terraces in the otherwise leafy borough of Islington, north London. Last Thursday three boys, all aged 15, sat in the estate's ramshackle play park eating Skittles and shooting the breeze.
Even though two of them had their hoods up they were not especially intimidating.
None had been excluded from school and when asked who they wanted to win this year's Big Brother they cheerily replied, "that one who's got Tourette's". These were normal inner-city boys. Nice, even.
Yet when asked whether they ever carried knives around the neighbourhood or had tried to take one to school, all three responded with a dismaying "for sure".
To prove it one boy -who, incidentally, had an innocent smile and sunny disposition -reached into the folds of his tracksuit and pulled out a small kitchen knife, the sort you might use to chop mushrooms. This, he explained, was for "protection".
Perhaps it was to be expected. In recent weeks numerous reports of citizens attacked and slain have fostered the notion that every other hoodie in Britain is carrying a concealed blade. There were more than 50 knife attacks over the bank holiday weekend alone and horror stories involving good-hearted samaritans apparently breaking up public fights only to be knifed to death have multiplied.
Among them was Tom Grant, a 19-year-old student at St Andrews University, who was on the train travelling home to Gloucestershire last Saturday when he reportedly stepped in to help a woman having a savage row with a young man. He was stabbed fatally.
A few hours later in Nottingham, Ian Montgomery, 26, went to help a woman being beaten up outside a nightclub. He, too, was stabbed and is still recovering in hospital. Marlvin Jiro was not so lucky. The 26-year-old father was knifed at about the same time in Birmingham after a fight. He died at the scene.
Just three days later Barry Wilson, 29, was stabbed in Bristol. Following an argument he was killed on his doorstep in front of his two young daughters. Across town, less than 24 hours earlier, another man, an unnamed teen, had lain dying in a pool of blood, yet another victim of a knife. The following evening a 40-year-old woman was stabbed in Norwood, south London, her body left next to her VW Golf which still had its lights on and engine running.
These terrifying tales followed the recent public outcry over the death of Nisha Patel-Nasri, a special police constable whose funeral was held last Thursday.
Patel-Nasri had her own kitchen knife turned on her when, for the second time in a week, she had challenged intruders at her home in Wembley, north London. A single clumsy stab wound to the leg was enough to sever her femoral artery. Later that week, 15-year-old Kiyan Prince was stabbed to death outside his school in north London.
Is Britain in the grip of a knife epidemic? Is blade culture out of control? The statistics do not entirely support this conclusion. Although there has been a recent burst of violence -which has coincided (embarrassingly for law enforcers) with a nationwide five-week knife amnesty -the percentage of knife-related violent crime has remained steady at 6% for several years.
Home Office records show that the number of people killed with a sharp instrument in 1994 was 231. In 2005 that number was a near identical 236.
Anecdotal evidence from crime and social workers -not to mention the knife carriers themselves -suggests that more people are carrying knives. Last Monday in Luton more than 90 weapons (including scabrous blades, knuckle-dusters and a 10in carving knife) were confiscated from a crowd on its way to a carnival.
The exact percentage of blade carriers remains hard to calculate as it relies on the unscientific process of canvassing members of the public, who are prone to lie.
In 2004 the British Crime Survey estimated that 60,000 children aged 11 to 16 were carrying knives, but what of the over-18s? Perhaps the most damning evidence that knives have become a fixture of British life is the rise in the number of people found guilty of carrying blades in public places, up 63.5% in five years.
This certainly chimes with opinion on the ground. "It's been getting worse for a few years now," says Dawn Irwin, head of Offroad Productionz, a mentoring group that tackles gang and violent crime. "Blades are everywhere."
Furthermore, while a victim of knife crime is still most likely to be of similar socioeconomic standing to the knifer (that is, extremely underprivileged), the growing presence of knives in both urban and rural areas has left more than the residents of traditional crime hotspots feeling vulnerable.
"Now that some middle-class people have been killed, everyone is taking notice that knife crime has leaked out of the tougher areas and is polluting whole cities," says Irwin.
In October 2004, Linda Davies found her husband Robert Symons bleeding to death in the dining room of their smart home in Chiswick, west London. He had confronted an intruder in their kitchen who had then stabbed him through the heart. "Carrying a knife in some parts of this country seems to be almost as common as carrying a mobile phone," Davies despairs. "This has to stop. Knives kill just as effectively as guns."
In August 2005, on a bus in Highbury, north London, Richard Whelan, 28, was stabbed several times after he allegedly stood up to a man who was throwing chips and shouting at his girlfriend. "This is all part of a general increase in gratuitous violence over the past 10 years," says Charles Murray, the American academic who coined the phrase "the underclass".
"It's left Britain with an increasingly violent culture and, as knives are easier to get (in Britain) than guns, then not only will people carry them but they will now use them in response to all sorts of provocation."
Which means the once proud have-a-go hero -scourge of burglars, bag snatchers and abusive drunks everywhere -is in danger of being killed off. Literally.
"Fifty years ago," continues Murray, "on a public bus in London, anyone who wanted to remonstrate with a person who was being aggressive or vulgar could have counted on the other passengers to step forward and help. There was a sense that the good guys were in control of civil society. That is no longer the case. People are scared -and with good reason."
Which implies that nowadays the threatening man (or sometimes woman) on that train or in that supermarket car park, or the mouthy teenager smoking on the bus, is more likely to be carrying a knife than he was 10 years ago.
How did this happen? "It really started with the gangs," says Irwin. "For most of the past decade they were concentrating on trying to get guns, but after the crackdown they realised that knives were less trouble than guns and also that they could be given to younger gang members, who they groom to push drugs."
As gangs do not limit their activities to simple turf warfare and tend to steal mobile phones and MP3 players from the surrounding community, so non-gang members started to carry knives, too, as protection.
"I think the idea of a 'knife culture' is misleading, though," says Simon Hallworth, a criminologist of London Metropolitan University. "To find a real knife culture you have to go back to the time of the Kray brothers when people knew what they were doing with knives. Most of the kids who say they carry knives now mean that they've got a penknife for protection. They don't really know what they're doing with them, which can be very dangerous."
It is certainly a far cry from the years of Just William and the trusty Swiss army knife. "It's scary here now," says Ruth Miller, 15, from Sheffield. "I've got lots of friends who carry knives. Some say they're for protection but I reckon a lot do it to look cool. There's a lot of peer pressure with it and kids even bring them into school. The older ones are the worst, like the 17 to 19-year-olds. They're well scary."
"Yeah, I carry," says one such 17-year-old who declined to be named. "I started when I was in year seven at school when I was 11." Like most knife carriers he had been a previous victim of crime. "I didn't want to lose another Game Boy so I got a knife. No one gonna boy me now."
For a particular type of teen, knives retain the same fetish-like appeal that they always have. Recent films such as Kill Bill and Blade Trinity have done much to glamorise knife fighting, while specialist shops continue to do a brisk trade in all manner of gruesome weaponry. Take the Dinkymonsta (5.5in/jagged blade) or the Night Raven (6in/extra deep "blood groove") for example. Both are widely available for well under £ 20; last month an alarming study by the Liberal Democrats claimed that one in three shops would sell such knives to underage boys.
Boys are no longer the whole story, however. While victims and perpetrators of knife crime are still overwhelmingly male, Irwin has identified a nasty new breed of female knife carrier. "I'm shocked by the number of girls carrying them," she says. "We are seeing older girls bullying younger girls for their mobiles, pulling out knives and slashing their jackets and even holding blades up to their throats. They're every bit as vicious as the boys."
With knives rife and spreading countrywide, what can be done to stop the proliferation? Some industrious youngsters have taken to wearing bulletproof jackets (£ 120 from down the market) on their journeys to and from school, while parents at Kiyan Prince's comprehensive have given permission for hand held metal detectors to be used. These are poor stopgaps, according to Murray.
"That more people are carrying knives is utterly unsurprising, given the attendant social problems that surround them," he says. "Forty per cent of low-income families don't have a father, there is no respect -and certainly no trust -for the police and there's also a widespread belief that young men who respond with knives to remonstration are really standing up for their dignity.
"These aren't young men who have lost their moral compass. They were never given one in the first place."
So knife culture is yob culture with a dagger. "The amnesty isn't going to do anything," agrees Irwin. "The kids who carry knives just aren't going to go to the police. For one thing they're too scared of getting found out by their peers. What they really need is more support and a better life."
All of which is cold comfort for a victim's wife. "I do not believe that the government knife amnesty is an effective way to solve the problem," says Davies. "If someone wants to carry a knife they can just go and buy one." Nor is she won over by the plan of John Reid, the home secretary, to introduce tougher minimum sentencing for knife carriers: "A mandatory five-year sentence may have some effect, but with prisons already overfull what chance is there of that sentence being implemented?"
In the meantime, as knives seep from modern-day ghettos to middle-class pastures, the next time someone blows smoke in your face, chucks a stone at your car or swears at your loved one, perhaps you can forgive yourself the urge to choke down your anger and walk away. Better that than being stabbed.

