We deserve whatever Europe throws at us

Here's your starter for 10. Do you know when the European Union's national day falls? Can you identify its flag, remember its official motto, or hum its national anthem?
All right, it's a trick question. In theory, none of these things exists. They would have been recognised by the European Constitution, but, in pretty much the only concession to Euro-sceptic opinion, they have been removed from the new draft, to be signed in Lisbon tomorrow.
In practice, of course, this excision makes no difference. The EU will continue to mark its national day (May 9), fly its
12-star flag and perform Beethoven's Ninth Symphony. Indeed, the official anthem now opens every formal sitting of the European Parliament, bringing MEPs to their feet with their right hands clapped to their breasts. (Most MEPs, anyway. This one is left writhing about like Alex in A Clockwork Orange gasping: "It's a sin, using Ludwig Van like that! He only wrote music!'')
Sixteen of the 27 EU states will sign a declaration pledging their continued loyalty to the EU's symbols. But, given that no one is proposing to drop these symbols, it's hard to see what they're bothered about.
The continued use of the
Euro-emblems, albeit without any legal base, is typical of how the EU reacts to "No'' votes. In the two-and-a-half years since the French and Dutch referendums, most of the policies and institutions that the constitution would have set up have been established anyway: the European diplomatic corps ("European External Action Service''), the pan-European magistracy ("Eurojust''), the Human Rights Agency, the Defence Agency, the External Borders Agency, the European Space Programme.
Later this morning, MEPs will hold a special ceremony to mark the adoption of the Charter of Fundamental Rights. Never mind that the constitution is not yet in force. Never mind that Britain claims to have opted out of the whole business. In the eyes of the EU institutions, including the Court of Justice, the charter is now legally binding.
Perhaps this explains why a sense of anti-climax attends tomorrow's signing ceremony in the Portuguese capital. People understand that the project has a momentum of its own. The EU doesn't need new treaties to enlarge its jurisdiction. Its bureaucracy, like all bureaucracies, will carry on aggrandising its powers regardless of what elected politicians decree.
I'll offer a pound to a euro that not one of the 27 heads of government has read what he is signing. I say this with some certainty, because I have spent the better part of two months struggling through the text, chasing up all the references to previous treaties, and trying to stay on top of the regular article re-numberings.
The new draft has been rendered calculatedly impenetrable. Euro-lawyers were evidently instructed to keep the same 63,000 words that made up the constitution, but to jumble them around for maximum opacity. All the substantive points are still there - the President of Europe, the foreign office, the EU criminal code and the scary clause that allows Euro-leaders to extend majority voting without needing new treaties - but they are no longer contained in quotable passages.
This will be a sly summit, a surreptitious summit, an embarrassed summit. There will be none of the hubristic speeches that marked the signing of the constitution in 2004. Seven of the 27 leaders have promised referendums, and are now seeking to shuffle away from their commitments.
But the prize for sheer cowardice must go to our own Prime Minister, the Fifeshire feartie, Gordon Brown, who, in the manner of a small child who believes that covering his eyes makes him invisible, has arranged to stay out of the group photograph and sign the document in private. What a perfect metaphor for Britain's attitude to the EU: sulky, petulant, but ultimately submissive.
Europe's leaders no longer hope to convert their peoples. Just as the Prague Spring persuaded eastern Europe's Communists that they could never allow full democracy, so the French and Dutch "No'' votes have hardened the Euro-apparatchiks' attitude towards their voters. Eurocrats no longer tell themselves that, once people see the benefits, they will come round. Now, like the rulers of the Iron Curtain states, they demand acquiescence rather than approval, consent rather than consensus. They don't hope to convince us, simply to bore us into surrender.
And, by and large, they are succeeding. Whether through apathy, fatalism or sheer indifference, we are letting our leaders trample all over us. There are plenty of people we might try to blame: mendacious politicians, trivia-obsessed journalists, Eurocrats. But the truth is that responsibility lies closer to home. If we had properly wanted to prevent tomorrow's grisly necromancy, we would have roused ourselves. The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves, that we are underlings.
Daniel Hannan is a Conservative MEP for South-East England

Sarkozy realises his country is in trouble: would that Brown did

We accidental aficionados of the oratory of Gordon Brown know there are certain constants in his rhetorical range. One is his boasts, during most Budget and conference speeches, about how Britain's economic performance exceeds that of our European partners. There has, obviously, been less of that lately, not just because Mr Brown no longer makes Budget speeches - that is now the province of the riveting and charismatic Alistair Darling - but because, as our economy heads for the drain, comparisons are increasingly odorous.
With that in mind, I went to Paris last week to see how France is changing, seven months into the rule of Nicolas Sarkozy. There is good news and bad news. The good news is that the president has faced down some trade unions, and an outbreak of savagery in the gruesome northern suburbs of the capital has subsided. The bad news, according to close and seasoned observers of the French political scene, is that both respites may well be only temporary.
We might think this only affects us if we are planning a weekend in Paris, and have to wait two hours in the rain for a taxi at Gare du Nord. We would be wrong. President Sarkozy is trying to bring France face-to-face with some economic and social realities. He is doing this just as we seem to be running away from them. La méthode Sarko may have its dangers, but, if it works, it will put France on a footing that will make it one of the most formidable forces in Europe. By contrast, our own descent into cosy clientelism and social and cultural compromise can only store up grief for the future. For years we have looked down our noses at France. It will come as a shock if they start to look down theirs at us.
Since he moved into the Elysée in mid-May, President Sarkozy has proved a contrast with our new Prime Minister in more than just policy terms. While Gordon Brown has sat in a metaphorical bunker, racked with indecision on a scale that makes Hamlet look a model of clarity, Mr Sarkozy has been out there taking one bold, radical step after another. He had signalled the end of the pernicious 35-hour week before he even won. Now - and this prompted a transport strike - he has said the early retirement arrangements for rail workers, which saw them put on a generous pension at the age of 50, must end.
The French economy remains dirigiste, but these are the first signs of Mr Sarkozy seeking to make it susceptible to market forces. There have also been the first rumblings of privatisations to try to clear some of France's enormous and unsustainable deficit: at a time when, in this country, we are talking about nationalising a failing bank. Ominously, the number of beggars on the streets of Paris seems to have doubled in the past 18 months, before Mr Sarkozy gets to grips with his country's suffocating welfarism.
His project manifestly requires courage, and soon we shall see how much of it he has. The snake of industrial action is scotched, not killed. A truce has been called with the transport workers while more negotiations take place. It is being said these are negotiations about how the unions will be made to see reason rather than about how Mr Sarkozy will back down. Failing an agreement, the strikes will resume before Christmas. France's action-man President gives the impression of relishing such a confrontation. He is helped by the students of France cleaving to organised labour, to the embarrassment of the transport workers. They see the students as bandwagon-jumping little plonkers. The president finds this amusing. The contempt in which student militancy is held by the French public meant that the last strike was the first in living memory in which the public had been on the side of the government.
The sulphurous atmosphere on the banlieues will be harder for Mr Sarkozy to dispel. Two teenage tearaways were killed a fortnight ago when their stolen motorcycle crashed into a police van. The police were not in pursuit of them, and the accident was entirely the criminals' fault. Yet it occasioned the ugliest rioting seen in the banlieues so far, with shots being fired by rioters, serious injuries to the police, and some journalists venturing in to report it only if accompanied by bodyguards.
More disturbing, the dead boys were represented by their friends to the press as good Muslims, which betokened another sort of issue altogether. Mr Sarkozy, who described rioters in 2005 as "scum'', was almost as stern this time, although he did invite the bereaved parents into the Elysée for a chat. His line remains that France is a monocultural society and that immigrants (like his own family) are welcomed provided they see themselves as French first and an ethnic minority second. This line, while admirable, can lead only to further confrontation, and many observers in France expect it to do so. Cohesion of these communities with mainstream France is far off, but, for the moment, Mr Sarkozy is determined they will cohere.
I have no idea whether he will fulfil this promise of resolve. However, at least he makes it. On this side of the Channel, our head of government's response to a worsening economic situation - one partly of his own making, of course - is to pretend it isn't happening. All the money that could have been put aside in the good years has been frittered away. There is no attempt yet at deficit reduction, or ending the feather-bedding of so many on the public payroll. Mr Brown's leadership is not even a rhetorical exercise on the scale of President Sarkozy's. It is becoming one of timidity, obfuscation, and more and more retreat under the ideological comfort-blanket of the familiar, the discredited and the expensive.
What we might expect the two new leaders to have in common is a strong conception of the nations they lead. Mr Sarkozy, like Gen de Gaulle, has "une certaine idée de la France''. Mr Brown bangs on about "Britishness''. The difference is that Mr Sarkozy will enforce his idea of Frenchness even to the point of seeing riots against it on the streets of the banlieues. Mr Brown is pursuing something that will be a chimera until and unless, as a reader pointed out in an excellent letter to this paper yesterday, the devolution Acts are repealed. And the even more painful issue of multiculturalism remains unaddressed.
I take no pleasure in the present weakness of France, and hope it will recover its self-confidence and its fortunes. But neither will I take any pleasure in a Britain on the down escalator passing a France on the up. Our ambassador in Paris, Sir Peter Westmacott, is gifted and highly perceptive. Mr Brown should call him in for a chat about the decisive hard-headedness with which the Sarkozy project is conducted. I know it is not our Prime Minister's habit to listen to anyone but himself, but in this instance he should. We have more in common with France than we dare admit, but at least it is trying to treat the problem.

