A one-woman show times by four equals...

...a huge challenge for the actress Linda Marlowe, but she loves getting to do it all, writes Mark Fisher
Actors of a certain age always like to have a solo show in their repertoire, something they can wheel out in the gaps between movie shoots and West End runs, and a passport to travelling the world. Prunella Scales does one about Queen Victoria, Greg Hicks has one based on Greek myths, and Sir Ian McKellen does a mean one-man Shakespeare. But Linda Marlowe has taken the idea one step further.
The sometime RSC actor, star of many a Lynda La Plante series and former singer with punk rock band the Sadista Sisters has turned herself into a one-woman rep theatre, offering a programme of four shows, all different and all starring her.
Turn up on consecutive nights at Glasgow's Citizens' theatre this week and you'll enjoy plays by authors as varied as Steven Berkoff, Gabriel Garcia Marquez and Tennessee Williams. The common factor is the versatile Marlowe.
"Have shows, will travel," laughs Marlowe, 66, a three-times married grandmother who was among the original 1970 cast of the nude revue Oh! Calcutta. "I think I've been to practically every country in the world since 1999," she says.
That was the year she first ventured into the one-woman format
at the encouragement of Berkoff,
the playwright, director and Bond baddie, who was alarmed to discover that a performer of such
talent had been reduced to taking a job as a Selfridges sales assistant. She had given acclaimed performances in plays of his such as The Trial, Metamorphosis and Decadence, so she adapted readily to performing a compilation of his fieriest female moments.
"I wanted to say something about women, and also to show how strongly Steven Berkoff has written for women," Marlowe said when she premiered Berkoff's Women, directed by her old pal Josie Lawrence, in Edinburgh last summer.
Back then, she imagined Berkoff's Women would be all she needed to tide her over during leaner periods, but it didn't happen like that. "The business of touring doesn't work that way," she says. "Either you commit yourself to it or you don't, because the tours are booked six months ahead. I find I have to turn down other work now."
Her one-woman industry meant she couldn't even consider an inquiry about a role in The Philadelphia Story with Kevin Spacey at London's Old Vic last year. "People say, 'Isn't that a pity?' But why is it a pity that I'm not free to do a cameo role in one play when I'm doing all of these other plays? This is more important to me."
Berkoff's Women became the first in a family of four one-woman shows that have been Marlowe's meal ticket ever since.
The poetry of Marlowe's second show, Diatribe of Love, is of an altogether more haunting quality than Berkoff's tough urban patois. Written by Gabriel Garcia Marquez, it is a monologue about a woman trapped in a loveless marriage. In a performance described by one critic as "searing", Marlowe portrays the torment of a woman about to share her 25th wedding anniversary with her husband and his mistress.
Ploughing further into baroque territory, Mortal Ladies Possessed is an adaptation of some short stories by Tennessee Williams. The most recent of Marlowe's shows, it is a compendium of female character studies, full of rage, passion, farcical comedy and self-delusion. "Marlowe captures Williams's pathos and the women's fragility," said The New York Times when it opened in the Big Apple.
The quartet is completed by No Fear!, Marlowe's reflection on her own life and her decision never to retire gracefully. Featuring mime, magic, stand-up and trapeze, it is a trip through her experiences as an actor, woman, wife and mother.
"No Fear! is probably the easiest show to do, even though it's very physical, because it's autobiographical," she says. "Doing Berkoff is almost like doing Shakespeare, it's so musical, fast and rhythmical. Then Tennessee Williams is poetic and lyrical in a different way."
These days, her after-show parties are necessarily quiet affairs - she and the technical manager go for a meal - but the opportunities the one-woman shows have opened up for her are ample compensation. "I'm now starting to revisit countries, such as Colombia and Hong Kong, with new shows. The pressure of work is so big that I just think, why stop?"
She enjoys it too much to stop. Long ago she committed herself to work for love not money and she shows no sign of changing. "There were lots of turning points when I could have gone the other way as a young blonde with long hair. I did a lot of television and some not particularly good movies, and if I'd stayed on that path, I would probably have made more money - but, who knows, I might have been completely unheard of now. I don't see there's any point in doing it unless you love acting."
Berkoff's Women, March 1; Diatribe of Love, March 2; No Fear!, March 3; Mortal Ladies Possessed, March 4, Citizens' theatre, Glasgow, 0141 429 0022, www.citz.co.uk

He makes economics sexy, and that's novel

The Burning, Thomas Legendre's unusual and gripping tale about an economist's adventures in Las Vegas, is hot stuff, writes Anna Burnside
Thomas Legendre looks every inch a well-heeled son of Edinburgh. Cocooned in a warm sweater, his demeanour is as douce as the grey sandstone buildings. But when he opens his mouth he unleashes a New England accent with a startled undertone.
The accent is easy to explain:
Legendre was born in Maine,
37 years ago, although he has since spent a good chunk of the intervening time in Arizona. The constant astonishment is hardly surprising, given that since leaving America three years ago, he has produced both his first novel and his first baby.
The Burning - a quintessential American tale - was rejected by several US agents before finding a British champion, who promptly found a publisher. It is released next month and there is already a huge buzz of anticipation. One early reviewer praised its combination of "dazzling prose and real intellectual depth".
Legendre wrote all 400 pages of his novel without a clue who might publish it.
Halfway through, he packed up his manuscript and moved to Edinburgh, where his wife, Allyson Stack, also a writer, had signed up for a PhD.
When not writing hiking scenes, or describing the casino where his heroine plays the slots, he was writing text books, brochures - anything that turned a shilling.
Stack, "my first and best reader", kept him going with constructive criticism and moral support.
Legendre had never been to Scotland before. He was willing to give it a year; before six months were up they had made friends, refocused their eyes to the discreet charms of the New Town and had decided to stay. Meeting him in a club at the heart of the city, a copy of the Scotsman at his elbow, he seems to the manner born.
He was not always so comfortable in these surroundings. By the time The Burning was finished, the family's savings were running out and there was baby Nicole to consider. Legendre sent his work to an agent in America. She returned it, saying that, although she loved the book, she didn't think she could sell it.
"She said the plot and pacing were something you might see in genre fiction," he says. "It was too strongly plotted for literary fiction." This message was repeated by several American agents.
It was Stack who suggested her husband look closer to home. She was right. Within weeks, Little Brown had snapped up the world English-language rights, which means it can sell it on anywhere in the English-speaking world.
Despite Legendre's Edinburgh understatement, he can't quite hide the glee in his voice when he says that Little Brown America is publishing The Burning later in the summer.
Since he completed his debut Legendre has already found time to start both his second novel and baby number two, due in August.
"It is certainly," he says with some of his adopted city's famous understatement, "a lot more exciting than our life in Prescott, Arizona."
The Burning is a hefty read, a
campus novel with extra astrophysics, green polemics and knee-
grazing sex. If Iain Banks had swapped science fiction for hiking and sustainable development, he might have written something very similar.
It's the story of Logan, a frustrated economics lecturer who discovers that equations can't account for the environmental devastation he sees around him. The twin themes of power and money are explored via Logan's lectures and a trashy blackjack-dealing, compulsive-gambling foxtress named Dallas.
The ecopolitics are from the heart: Legendre started his own undergraduate studies in the economics department, although it took him longer to discover that there was a viable alternative.
"I became increasingly dissatisfied with what neoclassical economic theory was telling me," he says earnestly. (Or maybe his accent makes everything sound earnest.) "At the same time, I became interested in literature and English and reading."
For his master's he went to Arizona State University to study literature. After less than a year, he had defected to creative writing. His next move was to Prescott, where he continued to study and started to teach. English, not economics.
Finally, he met Bernardo, who identified himself as an ecological economist. His new friend gave Legendre a reading list that opened his eyes to a school of economists grappling with neoclassical no-nos such as resource capacity and population growth. "He ignited this interest that had lain dormant for years," says the writer.
When all that reading, teaching and mountain trails became too wholesome, Legendre escaped from Arizona to Las Vegas for a bit of cheesy debauchery. Somehow it turned into research: one voodoo night at the casino turned into the opening of The Burning.
"I was at the blackjack table with wonderful people and we had this incredible chemistry and then something happens with this ineffable thing called luck," he recalls. "We began to go against the rules - splitting face cards, hitting on five, all the things you're not supposed to
do - and we were winning. I won
a lot of money that night, everyone at the table did. While it was happening, I was struck with an idea: what if there was something else going
on, between one of the players and the dealer? A kind of sexual tension, a dynamic possibility that was also being played out through this power and money matrix.
"At the time, I thought it was just
a short story. Only later did I
realise that there was a connection. There I was, living in Arizona, a place where unrestrained development was encroaching, where economics was having a profound and drastic effect. I was sickened by watching development eat up the land at an alarming rate. I knew I would have a character who was
an economist, whose notion of his subject would be radically changed by ecological economics. But I'm not sure it would have happened quite so effectively if I hadn't had that night in Vegas."
It is only now, with an agent, an editor and a pile of finished copies of The Burning sitting in the hall, that Legendre is admitting to himself that he is a proper author.
"For years, writing fiction seemed something larger than a hobby and less than a career. To suddenly identify myself as a writer is to put everything in the centre. It's like coming out of the closet." He shivers in his sensible sweater.
"I'm just starting to get comfortable with saying I'm a writer."
The Burning is published by Little Brown on March 6

