TO Wii OR NOT TO Wii? GADGETS AND GAMES: THE QUESTIONS TO ASK BEFORE BUYING

iPHONE
Q: Is it all style and no substance?
A: Possibly; but it's high on both functional and tactile desirability. The way the touchscreen opens folders and applications by virtue of 'intuitive' finger movements is cute.
Q: Isn't it expensive?
A: Yes. You need to have a real gadget lust to part with pounds 269, plus at least pounds 35 a month for an
18-month O2 contract. If you took out a similar-value contract with Vodafone for a BlackBerry, the device would be free.
Q: Is the price likely to come down?
A: This is Apple, so yes. The US price of the 8GB model fell from $599 to $399. Those who'd paid $599 received $100 of Apple store credit.
Q: Does it make any difference that it's not 3G?
A: No. The iPhone's Edge system is about two-thirds the speed of 3G, so it's not slow, and most people who have 3G phones don't use them to surf the net - it's just too fiddly and time-consuming.
Q: What about the iPod and phone/PDA (personal digital assistant) I already own?
A: Love is blind. If you fall for the iPhone they will all be dumped.
HDTV
Q: Virtually all TVs now seem to be flat-panel LCD or plasma and 'HD Ready'. I'm ready and so is my TV, so where's the HD?
A: There are three principal routes: 1. Sky HD - about pounds 53 a month, plus the set-top box ( pounds 199- pounds 299). 2. HD-DVD or Blu-ray - competing high-def formats with dedicated discs and players. The Toshiba HD EP-30 player costs under pounds 200 and will also 'upscale' your standard DVDs. 3. Humax decoder ( pounds 250 or less) - a non-subscription set-top box which will pick up such free-to-air high-def channels (eg BBC HD) as exist at the moment.
Q: What about HD on Freeview?
A: The Government needs to be persuaded that there's a demand. HD transmissions take up a massive tranche of bandwidth that other users (eg phone companies) are keen to get their mitts on.
Q: What's the difference between 720p, 1080i and 1080p?
A: The figures refer to the number of horizontal lines on the screen. More is better. The letter suffix refers to how the images are scanned by the TV: i = interlaced; p = progressive. Sky broadcasts at 720p, HD-DVD and Blu-ray stream at 1080p.
Q: In terms of screen size, how big should I go?
A: If you're investing in HD-DVD or Blu-ray, anything under 42in is pointless. If you don't want a huge panel on the wall, there are always HD projectors (see Christmas Gizmos, p60).
DAB RADIO
Q: Should I buy a DAB (digital audio broadcasting) radio because FM/AM transmissions will be switched off soon?
A: No, because they won't. There are no plans to terminate
FM/AM transmissions.
Q: Does DAB sound better than FM?
A: Generally speaking, no. If you have a good FM signal, the fidelity of the sound will be superior to digital.
Q: Can I get DAB anywhere in the UK?
A: Coverage is measured in terms of population, rather than geography. In a city you'll get good reception and lots of stations; in the sticks, you'll get neither.
Q: Aren't DAB radios more expensive than FM/AM?
A: Mostly, yes. What you pay for with the higher-end sets is the ability to pause, 'rewind' and record.
Q: What about internet radio?
A: If you have a wireless router, a stand-alone internet radio is another option. It looks like a standard DAB radio but, as long as it's within range of your router, it will communicate wirelessly with the internet to play radio stations from anywhere in the world.
GAMES CONSOLES
Q. Which one should I buy?
A. Nintendo's Wii ( pounds 179.99) is the most-wanted machine, and the most difficult to find. It's aimed at occasional gamers and families rather than square-eyed teens, and its games are controlled by intuitive movements rather than traditional button presses. Using far less power than the competition, it's also the greenest console there is.
Sony's PlayStation 3 - theoretically the most powerful and future-proofed machine but still lacking the games to prove it - is available at pounds 299.99. Or, if you want more memory, bells, whistles and free games, pounds 349.99 for the 60GB model. Microsoft's Xbox 360, with its broad library of decent software and an extra year on the market, is probably the best choice for accomplished older gamers, and is available in three versions, between pounds 199.99 and pounds 299.99. If you go for the most basic, you miss costly features (such as memory) that are standard with the PS3.
Q. Will a new system render our old one obsolete?
A. Mostly, yes. If the intended recipient already has an old Xbox,
he or she will be able to play its games on the 360. Similarly, Gamecube games will run on the Wii. PlayStation 2 games
will not run on the standard (40GB) PS3, but will on the premium (60GB) model.
Q. So which are the best games?
A. Super Mario Galaxy - a brilliant, all-ages adventure - is the best thing to play on the Wii solo, while another recent release, Mario &amp; Sonic at the Olympics, is stuffed with frivolous sporty games for multiple players; Endless Ocean is a budget-priced title in which players dive the deep seas.
For PS3, Ratchet and Clank: Tools of Destruction is a cartoon romp of a game, while Uncharted: Drake's Fortune opts for a more Indiana Jones-y, but equally satisfying, approach to adventuring. The new version of the karaoke game SingStar, and creative camera package EyeCreate (out next week), are not so much conventional 'games' as experiences with bespoke controllers, and they allow you to upload your own content.
The 360's library is the most comprehensive. It's hard to go wrong with the spectacular shooter Halo 3 or the comprehensive driving game Project Gotham Racing 4.
Q. Are there any hidden costs or catches?
A. Bear in mind that 1) Games machines come with only one controller and extra ones will cost you, as will leads for optimum
high-definition DVD and game viewing; 2) Wii games are about pounds 10 cheaper than those for PS3 and Xbox 360; 3) Over-excited Wii players have been known to ruin pricey flat-screen TVs by slinging their controllers around, and 360s are notorious for packing up - but Microsoft's extended guarantee and free repair service help make up for it; 4) Playing 360 or PS3 games online will cost you more in subscription charges; 5) Look closely at in-store 'bundles' - packages of console, games and accessories at 'value' prices. Often, they're shameless ruses to get rid of unsold, unloveable titles.
Stephen Ferns (gadgets) and Peter Lyle (games)

Cinema OTHER RELEASES

You Kill Me
A Very British Gangster
He Was a Quiet Man
Southland Tales
Silent Night
KM 31
You Kill Me (15)
Hollywood is regularly accused of rose-tinting the world. In fact it's the other way round - alcoholics and hitmen get some of the most benevolent treatment. See a character slugging from a Scotch bottle and you know that they may be doing A Bad Thing but they're also charmingly devil-may-care. Likewise if they're bumping off crooks for cash: technically a no-no, but you've got to admire their pluck.
John Dahl's muted comedy noir You Kill Me has both, in the shape of Ben Kingsley. Shiny head snug in a beanie hat, jet black goatee never less than beautifully coiffured, he's an ace assassin for his extended Polish family in New York, ordered by uncle Philip Baker Hall to go to San Francisco and dry out after he botches an assassination. At an AA meeting he chums up with gay traffic inspector Luke Wilson; likewise Bill Pullman's sleazy estate agent becomes a pal, as does a sardonic undertaker and, least probably, media sales exec Téa Leoni, who's keen to be his girlfriend. There are some cute moments and surprisingly sharp lines; but there's no getting round the feeling that a lot of this sticks in your throat.
A Very British Gangster (15)
One might imagine that a documentary about hitmen would drive home the rather grim reality of gangland slaughter. But no; if anything, this feature-length version of Donal MacIntyre's TV investigation glamorises the world still further. To a clodding Mancs soundtrack, we're introduced to one Dominic Noonan - big, bald and one of the north-west's most violent. Though he claims not to have actually done the deeds himself, Noonan is said to have given the nod to scores of murders, beatings and knee-cappings. In typical mobster style he's also gay and mum-friendly - acting as a sort of community social worker, in between various bits of 'security consulting'. MacIntyre is lucky to have caught his subject between jail stints, and in such an open, egocentric mood - he's blabby and braggy and annoyingly likable. But for his victims, this must be difficult to watch.
He Was a Quiet Man (15)
And here, an aspirant hitman: Christian Slater's office creep, complete with geek specs and a killer moustache, who fantasises about blowing away his colleagues when he's gazumped by a similarly disillusioned chap on the adjoining desk. So Slater turns from potential maniac to total hero: gunning down the madman and saving the life of a badly wounded colleague (Elisha Cuthbert). He's rewarded with universal respect and a huge promotion, plus company car, from head honcho William H. Macy. The one person who doesn't like him is Cuthbert: alive, but paralysed from the waist down. Will Slater agree to help finish her off? By the time you'd got through all that plot, you're vaguely curious to know what comes next. So it's a shame this isn't a touch less crass and overacted.
Southland Tales (15)
Second films are notoriously a struggle to make. But rarely are they such a struggle to sit through as Richard Donnie Darko Kelly's witless apocalyptic epic. It's 2008 - three years after Texas was hit by nuclear attack. Drafting is back, war rages throughout the Middle East, oil has all but run out. But a mad German scientist (Wallace Shawn) has invented an alternative energy source (and a psychedelic drug) from the ocean. Corporate bitch Miranda Richardson controls the internet, and it's an election year. That's just for preliminaries. The plot involves Dwayne Johnson (aka The Rock, not improving with age) as an amnesiac action hero who shacks up with porn star Sarah Michelle Geller, to the horror of his Republican wife Mandy Moore. Justin Timberlake's cracked gunman narrates, and sometimes, sings, and Seann William Scott plays a beach cop and, possibly, his own twin, who spends a lot of the time in some sort of coma (definitely the man the audience will sympathise with most). It's a pretentious orgy of sub-sub-Lynch posturing, ugly on the eye, insulting to the brain, the product of knee-jerk liberal paranoia and studio over-investment in a relatively untried talent.
Silent Night (15)
The torture of infidelity is unsparingly laid bare in this third movie by Mexico's Carlos Reygadas. 'Just thinking about it is like lead being poured into my guts,' comments farmer Cornelio Wall Fehr, cheating on his wife, Miriam Toews (and the mother of his huge brood of children), with Maria Pankratz. The feeling only gets worse. A far more focused and gripping picture than Japón (2002) or Battle in Heaven (2005), this is both beautifully shot (Reygadas is a pro with crunchy gorse and squeaky snow) and psychologically devastating, recalling the best of Bergman with its bleak landscape, taciturn leads and merciless spiritual tests.
KM 31 (no certificate)
Hokey horror about an especially lethal bit of highway - not because of a tricky bend but a little naked boy who giggles out of the woods and forces you to crash. Twins, spectral psychics, sewer graveyards and a long-haired ghostly girl hell bent on baby-related revenge all figure. The biggest shock is that it's Mexican, rather than Japanese. But you barely notice.

