Smart talkers who left US white elite lost for words: New film tells the story of an all-black debating team that overcame 1935's best and brightest

ONE OF Melvin Tolson's earliest memories is of falling asleep in the sitting room of his family home in Marshall, Texas, to the sound of a raging argument. 'My father would play devil's advocate and switch sides halfway through,' says Tolson, now 84. 'I was fascinated. I wanted to be just like him.'
But this was no skirmish between bickering parents. It was the practice session of the Wiley College debating team that was about to change the course of American history. In 1935 the Wiley College debaters, coached by Professor Melvin Tolson Snr, became the first all-black team to win the national university championships. The team, made up of two men and one woman, triumphed over white Ivy League institutions with unprecedented success, blazing a trail for equal rights in a time of extreme racial segregation.
Now the little-known story of how three African-American undergraduates took on the system and won has been made into a Hollywood film, directed by Denzel Washington and produced by Oprah Winfrey. The Great Debaters , which is due for American release on Christmas Day, will also star Washington as the professor who inspires his young charges to challenge the endemic racism of the times through the power of words and a lethally accurate eloquence. In the movie the Wiley team is shown beating Harvard University - a victory believed to have taken place in one of the opening rounds of the championship.
The story has been adapted for the big screen by scriptwriters Robert Eisele and Pulitzer prizewinner Suzan- Lori Parks. Forest Whitaker will co-star as the disillusioned father of one of the students who finds himself competing with Tolson for his son's affections. Despite receiving almost no pre-publicity - Washington prefers to research his films out of the limelight - the movie has already generated substantial pre-Oscars buzz on the internet.
The Wiley team, referred to as the Alpha Phi Omega Forensic Society, lost only one debate out of 75 in the run-up to the national 1935 championship, talking on topics such as civil rights and freedom of speech. The three debaters - Henry Heights, Hobart Jarrett and Henrietta Bell Wells - were said to be especially successful in the art of presentation and rebuttal. On 1 April, the team overpowered the national champions, the University of Southern California, in front of a 1,100-strong audience. It was a David and Goliath victory in an era when lynching was frequent in the Deep South.
The debaters' unexpected success in a time of racial disharmony caught the national imagination. When the actress Mae West heard of the team's story she asked to meet them in person and her autographed photo was displayed on the wall of Tolson's campus office for years.
Thirty years before the civil rights movement made an impact, the debaters became heroes of the oppressed minority. Wiley College had been founded in 1873 by the United Methodist Church to educate freed slaves. Tolson, a professor of English who became one of America's foremost Modernist poets before his death in 1966, was the son of a Methodist preacher and believed in challenging his students by taking the opposing view in discussions, forcing them to clarify their own opinions and express them more cogently. He was renowned as a brilliant speaker, and his insistence on precision in use of language left his students in fear mingled with awe.
'He was very energetic,' Melvin Tolson Jnr, a retired French professor who lives in Oklahoma, told The Observer . 'He loved to talk and he loved to have regular family meals with me and my four siblings where we would sit around the table and discuss whatever came up. He would encourage us to defend our position, so we did and we ended up having quite a lively discussion. I remember friends being surprised when they came over to my house at the level of noise. Mr Washington interviewed me for his research, and I'm sure he will do a good job of playing my father. I'm not sure it will be particularly surreal seeing my father at the movies. I'm of an age when many things seem not entirely real.'
A controversial figure, constantly under fire for his unconventional teaching methods and radical political views, Professor Tolson made a lasting impression on his students, inspiring many to pursue lives of academic achievement and social action. One of his pupils, the civil rights activist James L Farmer, founded the Congress of Racial Equality. Farmer, who was just 14 when he enrolled at Wiley College, recalls in his autobiography that his debating sessions with Tolson gave him a passion for tackling injustice. Another debating protege, Heman Sweatt, pursued a pioneering lawsuit against the University of Texas School of Law in 1946 after it refused him entry on grounds of race. The school was forced to desegregate.
Of the original 1935 team, Hobart Jarrett followed his mentor into academia, becoming an eminent English professor at the City University of New York. The only surviving member of the Wiley College championship team, Henrietta Bell Wells, is now 95 and still lives in Houston. Although she spoke to Washington last year as part of his research, she is in failing health and can't give interviews.
In her 1931 yearbook entry, however, she remembers Tolson as her 'crabbiest teacher'. 'You didn't dare turn in an essay with a spelling mistake,' she said. 'He would walk in the door [and say] "Bell! What is a verb?" And you'd better know. He was hard on his students. They were scared, but when they got out they knew English.'

Today's girls prefer to look sexy rather than be clever: This generation is being sexualised before they reach their teens, a trend which threatens their self worth, warns a top US female academic

WOMEN HAVE fought for decades to be treated as men's equals. Yet today's girls are being told that female empowerment simply comes from being 'sexy', according to a new book by the managing editor of the Harvard Law Review.
In Prude: How The Sex-Obsessed Culture Damages Girls , Carol Platt Liebau says popular culture is undermining girls' sense of worth in their most vulnerable, formative years and glorifying destructive behaviour .
'The overwhelming lesson teenagers are now learning from the world around them is that being "sexy" is the ultimate accolade, trumping intelligence, character and all other accomplishments at every stage of a woman's life,' said Liebau, a political analyst and the review's first female managing editor. 'The new female imperative is that it is only through promiscuity and sexual aggression that girls can achieve admiration and recognition.' She cites films such as Cruel Intentions and Mean Girls , the music and videos of Britney Spears, Christina Aguilera and Lil' Kim, and advertisements such as the dominatrix-themed campaign for the teenage fashion house bebe, featuring Mischa Barton. 'In a culture that celebrates Paris Hilton, thong underwear and songs like "My Humps" - where the female singer expounds the sexual magnetism of her breasts and buttocks - there's scant recognition or respect for female modesty or achievement that isn't coupled with sex appeal,' she adds.
'Girls are being led to believe they're in control when it comes to sexual relationships,' she continues. 'But they're actually living in a profoundly anti-feminist landscape where girls compete for attention on the basis of how much they are sexually willing to do for the boys.' Liebau's book has won support from feminists, including Ariel Levy, whose book Female Chauvinist Pigs denounced what Levy termed a 'raunch culture' that, she said, compels young women to 'compete to look like slags and sluts'. Although Levy was writing about women older than those concerning Liebau, she agrees that the age at which girls are being influenced by the raunch culture is falling. 'Even young girls are the willing, active and conscious participants in a tawdry, tarty, cartoon-like version of female sexuality,' she says.
In Prude , to be published in Britain by Centre Street Books this month, Liebau questions how society has created a climate in which being raunchy is believed to make girls look cool and in which being called a 'slut' is considered preferable to being labelled a 'prude'. 'By most measures, young women have never had it better. Given the breathtaking opportunities before them and the magnificent advantages they enjoy, it seems Western society has treated young girls with enormous generosity. And in many ways, it has. But not all the changes have been to the good,' she adds. 'Today girls are forced to navigate a minefield more challenging, difficult and pressure-filled than ever before when it comes to sex. Somehow, as society has been revelling the ubiquity of sex, the very real psychological, emotional and physical impact on young girls of giving too much, too soon, has been discounted,' she said. 
Michele Elliott, director of the children's charity Kidscape, agrees. She has launched a campaign against the toy makers responsible for items including a junior pole-dancing kit, thongs for young girls emblazoned with the phrase 'Eye candy' and stationery sets stamped with the bunny logo of Hugh Hefner's Playboy empire.
In her book, Liebau charts how the same 'creeping sexualising' of young girls is endemic across a mass media which, she says, constitutes the main source of information about sex for 13 to 15-year-olds. 'Over the last few decades, the West has experienced an incremental but aggressive sexualising of its culture,' she says. 'Today there exists a status quo in which almost everything seems focused on what's going on "below the waist".'
Although her book has yet to be published in Britain, Liebau is keen to deflect any accusations of prudishness. 'This is about far more than short-term sexual mores,' she says. 'Living in an overly sexualised culture takes a toll on girls. The emphasis on sexiness, revealing fashions and the overvaluing of physical appeal creates pressure to measure up to bone-slim models or celebrities and leads to unrealistic expectations among young women about how their own bodies should actually look.'

OMM: 2007 Review of the year: Your definitive guide to the best (and worst)...: Live act of the year: ole! ole! we're the monkeys: Followng their summer triumphs, Arctic Monkeys toured South America. The crew and our live act of 2007 themselves took these exclusive photos (with their own words): 2007: the 10 best gigs

1 ARCTIC MONKEYS Lancashire Country Cricket Club and Glastonbury Festival
The Sheffield lads joined the stadium band elite.
2 RUFUS WAINWRIGHT
The London Palladium
That recreation of Judy
Garland's New York Carnegie Hall gig of 1961. 3 ARCADE FIRE
Porchester Hall, London
Took to the star-lit streets at the end to rock Westminster.
4 KINGS OF LEON The Astoria, London 
A relatively intimate venue for the tight-trousered Southerners who went on to rock the summer.
5 PRINCE O2, London
A record breaking 21 nights, and a different set every time.
6 PAUL MCCARTNEY The Electric Ballroom, London
When had a Beatle ever played a venue this small?
7 GUSTAV DUDAMEL The Royal Albert Hall , London
The young Venezuelan wowed the Proms with the Simon Bolivar Youth Orchestra.
8 DAFT PUNK Wireless Festival, London The French dance dons dazzled.
9 THE VERVE The Roundhouse, London
Glastonbury '08 beckons.
10 MUSE Wembley Stadium, London
The revamped stadium rocked .
have your say
This list was picked by OMM's editors and writers. Disagree all you like at the address below.

