part i
introduction to the question
'Religion' and 'theology' are not terms with fixed meanings and invariant
applications. They are rather topics or commonplaces – not in the
sense of the familiar and the trite, but in the classical sense of linguistic
variables, terms ambiguous and capacious enough to house a vast diversity
of meanings, arguments, and referents.1 The interconnection of such
topics constitutes neither a determined problem nor an exact proposition.
It constitutes what John Dewey called 'a problematic situation', an indeterminate
area out of which problems and their resolutions can emerge
only if these ambiguous terms are given specific meanings and definite
applications within particular inquiries.2 Recognising the ambiguity of both
'religion' and 'theology', this paper proposes to obtain a greater purchase
on the problematic situation they together delimit, first, by offering a few
precisions on 'religion' as its meaning developed through history to reach its
generic consensus in late modernity; and then, by exploring how the scientific
study of religion, so understood, came to engage one of the arguments
of modern theology: the existence or non-existence of God.
In a remarkable review of the scientific study of religion over a fifty-year
period, Mircea Eliade provides a benchmarkfor this project by selecting
1912 as a date of particular consequence.3 That year, five stars rose in the
firmament. ´Emile Durkheim published his Formes ´el´ementaires de la vie
religieuse. Sigmund Freud 'was correcting the proofs of Totem und Tabu, to
be issued in bookform the following year', and Carl Jung was publishing his
Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido. Raffaele Pettazoni's first monograph,
La religione primitiva in Sardegna, appeared that same year, and Wilhelm
Schmidt completed the first of the twelve volumes in his monumental study
Der Ursprung der Gottesidee.
In these five works, four very different methodologies advanced towards
greater academic acceptance and influential presence in the scientific study
of religion: the sociological, the psychological, the ethnological and the historical.
Eliade paints all this in broad brush strokes, depicting the intrinsic
value and perduring authority of each of his chosen authors. What he does
not examine or evaluate, however, forms the interest of this essay. For these
seminal and even paradigmatic studies from the early twentieth century
bore witness, in all of their diversity of methods, to an agreement and a
controversy about religion: an agreement about the genus that 'religion'
had become over the centuries, and a controversy over the collateral that
religion so understood would offer to belief and unbelief.
religion: from virtue to category
of 'things'4
To chart something of the lengthy journey by which 'religion' reached its
generic and accepted understanding by 1912, this essay proposes – as they
do on the Mississippi – to take three soundings. It will drop a plumb
line into the medieval controversies of Thomas Aquinas; then, gauge the
modification of that tradition in the heady days of Baroque scholasticism;
and finally allow Eliade's Five to exemplify the 'religion' secured by late
modernity. Such discrete measurements might supplement, rather than
repeat, the magisterial studies of such scholars as Wilfred Cantwell Smith
and Peter Harrison.
For Thomas Aquinas, 'religio' – irrespective of how one comes down on
its etymology – 'properly denotes or implies a relationship to God (proprie
importat ordinem ad Deum)'.5 More specifically, it designates a habit or a
virtue by which one gives God what is due to God, and in this way lives 'in
an appropriate relationship with God'.6 But since it is impossible to render
to God all that is owed to the divine goodness, religion always limps.
Religion is like justice in that it renders to another what is his or her due.
Because of its inherent inadequacy, however, it does not simply identify
with justice, but is a virtue joined to justice, i.e., a potential part of justice.7
God enters into the constitution of religion not as its direct object, not that
to which it immediately attends, but as the end or purpose of what religio
does properly attend to, i.e., any human action or thing that embodies the
worship and service of God. Such practices could be external activities like
public adoration or sacrifice or vowing or, more importantly and primarily,
internal actions such as devotion and prayer.8 These individual or social
actions and cultic units are not religion; they are the acts and objects of
religion. They lookto God; religion looks to them. Thus religio is a moral
rather than a theological virtue, taking such human acts and practices as
its direct object.9
For this reason, unlike the use of this term in the English Enlightenment,
religion could never substitute in Aquinas for faith, though to be
'true religion' it had to be grounded on true faith.10 But religion was comprehensive;
it could command the acts of all the virtues and human activities
insofar as they were directed to the service and honour of God.11William T.
Cavanaugh narrows the range and acts of religion considerably by maintaining
that religio for St Thomas 'presupposes a context of ecclesial practices
which are both communal and particular to the Christian Church'.
It certainly includes these practices, but there is no justification for limiting
religio in this fashion. Religio can command a single and private act
of worship or service as well as a communal one. Cavanaugh further and
needlessly insists that 'religion refers specifically to the liturgical practices
of the Church'.12 Again these are certainly included in Aquinas's religio,
but by no means exhaustive of it. Aquinas, relying explicitly upon Cicero,
is far more generous in the inclusion he gives to religio. It can be pagan
or Christian, private or social, as long as it directs one to the service and
reverence of God.
By the same act, a human being both serves and worships God. For worship looks
to the excellence of God, to which reverence is due. Service, however, looks to
the subjection of the human person, who by reason of his condition is obliged to
give reverence to God. To these two acts belong all the acts that are attributed
to religion, because through all of them the human being acknowledges the divine
excellence and his subjection to God, either by offering something to God or also
by accepting something divine'.13
This is far more sweeping than Christian liturgical practices and specific
symbols and beliefs and is not constrained into the public/private distinction.
Religio looks to all of the acts by which God is served and worshipped
as 'principium creationis et gubernationis rerum', whether Christian or not.14
For Aquinas, pace Wilfred Cantwell Smith, this virtue constituted the
fundamental meaning of religio – a good habit, not 'an activity of the soul'
and not just a 'prompting', but a developed capacity and inclination.15
What is astonishing to record is the close conjunction that Aquinas draws
between religio and sanctitas – in light of the role that 'the sacred' will play
later in the works of Durkheim and Eliade. Sanctitas and religio differ not
in essence but only in their grammar, as one might here translate ratione.
Religio (dicitur) is said to lookto all of the acts by which God is served
and worshipped as 'principium creationis et gubernationis rerum' whether
Christian or not, while sanctity (dicitur) bespeaks not only divine worship
but 'the workof all of the virtues or all good works by which the human
person disposes herself for divine worship.'16
It is here that institution entered into the ambit of Thomistic 'religio.'
Those who dedicate their entire lives to this divine service are called religiosi,
and their groupings and communities became 'religious orders' or
 'religions'.17 'Religion' not only denoted a virtue, but also the 'status' of
those whose vows were specified by that virtue.
In the thirteenth century, religio combined into a phrase that bespoke an
Augustinian rather than a Ciceronian heritage. At least sixty-eight times,
Aquinas, following a lead taken from Augustine, joined christiana with
religio. Indeed, he made the avowed purpose of the Summa theologiae 'to
treat those things that pertain to Christian religio in the manner that would
be appropriate to the instruction of beginners'.18But what was meant by this
christiana religio was not the institution and the set of characteristic beliefs,
symbols, or ceremonial practices of the Church, as it is so often interpreted,
but rather something much closer to what one would today call Christian
piety or devotion. Aquinas, of course, specified 'piety' quite differently, but
religio remained a virtue that would govern and be expressed in practices
and devotions. For Aquinas, these latter were not religion, either severally or
collectively; they were the objects of religion.With such an understanding,
it could make perfect sense to assert that 'the highest reaches of Christian
religion consist in mercy in so far as one is speaking of exterior works;
but the interior affection of charity, whereby we are united with God,
takes precedence over love and mercy towards our neighbor'.19 Aquinas
never gives any indication that Christianity is one institutional religion out
of many, that religion was a genus specified into various communities of
different beliefs, practices and traditions. In fact he never groups religio
with other traditions such as the Jewish, Muslim or pagan.
In this understanding of 'religion', John Calvin and Huldreich Zwingli
seem much closer to Aquinas. When Zwingli titled his book,De vera et falsa
religione commentarius, he was not distinguishing between two communities
with their characteristic and divergent beliefs, symbols and practices.
He differentiated, as had Lactantius before him, between two different
attitudes towards worship.20 True religion is that piety or reverence that
emerges from the comprehensive entrustment of oneself to the true God
in faith; false religion occurs when this reverence is given to anything other
than God.21 When John Calvin published Christianae religionis institutio in
1536, he was writing not about 'the' Christian religion – one denomination
among many other religious bodies – but about Christian piety. It was
not until the nineteenth century that translations placed a definite article
before the adjective 'Christian' and brought John Calvin into the more
contemporary understanding of 'religion', one that he had never actually
shared.22
This basic understanding of 'religion' allowed Schleiermacher to move
consistently from a defence of religion as the intuition and feeling of the
infinite in his youthful U¨ber der Religion to the Glaubenslehre in which
the foundational concept is piety (Fr¨ommigkeit) or the feeling of absolute
dependence. The intuition and feeling of the first identified with the piety
of the second, and he was at pains to advance this understanding against the
false attribution of religion to external forms, symbols and propositional
beliefs. Kant equated his Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone with a
fundamental and habitual ethical orientation towards duty.
One can register the beginnings of a radical change in religio, however, by
taking a second sounding, this time among theologians of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries and specifically as it was bodied forth in the massively
influential textbooks of Francisco Suarez.De virtute et statu religionis (1608–
9) continued much of the Thomistic tradition, with religio a moral virtue,
realised in the vowed 'religious' state and sometimes modified by christiana
to indicate the fundamental habit of Christian worship and service of God
founded upon Christian faith.23 But here one can discover also the subtle
beginnings of what will become a sea change. For Suarez contended that
the term religio – like 'fides' and 'votum' – was legitimately and 'customarily
applied (tribui solere) not only to internal affect, but also to the external
actions and, indeed, to the things (rebus) by which God was worshipped
as also to the doctrina that teaches such worship or ceremony'.24 Religion
in this sense is no longer simply a virtue; it is also both things such as
external ritual and ceremonial objects and the teachings and the beliefs that
instruct about their appropriate use.

