Red-breasted goose arrives in UK

A lone individual of the endangered red-breasted goose has been sighted among thousands of barnacle geese at Caerlaverock Wetland Centre in southern Scotland. These birds usually winter in Eastern Europe, having migrated from the Russian Arctic where they breed during the summer.

Up to the end of 2004, there had been just 70 accepted records of wild red-breasted geese visiting the UK. Brian Morrell, of the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust in Caerlaverock, said recent northerly gales may have blown the bird off its migratory course, suggesting it could remain here until April before returning to its native breeding grounds.

Experts say sightings of the red-breasted goose may become more frequent in Britain due to the threats they face at their favoured wintering grounds, including loss of habitat because of oil exploration, agricultural changes and hunting on the Black Sea coast of north-east Bulgaria.

These factors may prevent the geese from settling and feeding over the winter months – the species has declined by 56 per cent in the past 10 years – and conservation initiatives are now underway across Eastern Europe to increase the bird's numbers.

More sea turtles in UK waters

US and Mexican conservation efforts may have boosted the number of sea turtles visiting UK waters, according to University of Exeter biologists.

More than 100 years worth of data was analysed by researchers, who concluded that the number of loggerhead and Kemp's ridley turtles coming to Britain has increased.

These turtles are strictly protected in the US and Mexico, where turtle excluder devices were introduced into fishing nets in the 1990s. Absent in UK waters since 1974, the Kemp's ridley turtle is now the third most common turtle to visit the British Isles – a boom that coincided with changes in US conservation efforts.

“Following a severe decline as a result of human activity in the first-half of the last century, we can now see the positive effect that recent conservation efforts have had on these turtle species,” said Matthew Witt, a biologist at Exeter University. “We need more research to verify this, but the results from this study are very encouraging.”

A large number of turtles – leatherback, loggerhead and Kemp's ridley – spend up to four years traveling thousands of miles from their nesting sites in North America to British waters. This annual migration is thought to be associated with variations in ocean currents.

Rare Chinese tiger seen in the wild

Researchers have confirmed that a wild tiger, photographed by a farmer in the Qinba Mountains of Shaanxi Province, Central China, is indeed that of the critically endangered South China tiger.

The South China tiger – classified as one of only five subspecies of tiger still alive today – is extremely rare, with only an estimated 20 to 30 still remaining in the wild.

The wildlife and conservation group WWF says the South China tiger is actually native to the Hainan most forests of south-east China, and because there are so few individuals left, it is regarded by many scientists as being “functionally extinct” in the wild. 

But a group called Save China's Tigers has been working on a captive-breeding programme and hopes to reach an agreement with China's State Forestry Administration to reintroduce captive-bred animals into the wild. If all goes well, the first individuals could be reintroduced to coincide with the Beijing Olympic Games in 2008.


Rare insect hit by housing scheme

Britain's rarest beetle, the streaked bombardier, could soon become extinct in the UK when a new housing development is built over the single site at which it can be found, a brownfield site on the Thames Estuary in East London.

“It is very sad that a deliberate choice has been made to plough on with the development, regardless of the consequences to wildlife,” said Jamie Roberts of the invertebrate conservation group Buglife.

A last ditch attempt is being made to move the beetles to a specially designed pile of rubble that replicates their existing habitat and which has been constructed adjacent to the new development. But experts stress that there is only a slim chance that the translocation will succeed.

One of the difficulties is the beetle's life cycle – the larvae of bombardiers prey on beetles in the Amara genus, but it is not known precisely which ones. “This is the last chance saloon for the beetle – if nothing is done, the species will be lost anyway,” Roberts said. 

Only a handful of streaked bombardier beetles have been found and moved so far, and with time running out before the building work begins, extinction is imminent for a species that was only recently added to the UK's red list of endangered species.

Think your story about a wildlife encounter is good enough to read? Win our annual travel-writing competition and you'll have it published in BBC Wildlife Magazine and enjoy a safari to Botswana and Zambia.
The Way to Win 

- Your story must be no longer than 800 words and must describe an encounter with a wild animal. 
- Your story can take place anywhere, either at home or abroad. You could describe an experience in a far-flung wilderness, a nature reserve on your doorstep or even an urban environment. 
- Whatever subject matter you choose, it is essential that your writing conveys a sense of travel, discovery and something of the essence of the natural world. 
- One of our judges, Brian Jackman, suggests the key to a successful travel article is to bear in mind the call of the reader: "Take me there."
- The judges will look for the writer's individual voice to shine through.
- Do your research, check your facts and read the work of previous winners – found in any June issue of BBC Wildlife.
- Don't forget to follow the rules. 
- You'll find an entry form in the January issue of BBC Wildlife Magazine – good luck! 

First Prize
- Your wildlife safari for two with Expert Africa begins with an overnight flight from London Heathrow to Maun via Johannesburg. Botswana is one of Africa's top safari destinations, and a stronghold for a wide variety of wildlife, including huge herds of elephants and the endangered African wild dog. 
- You'll then fly by light aircraft to Chitabe Camp for two nights. In the heart of the Okavango Delta, Chitabe has luxurious en-suite tents and its activities concentrate on 4WD game drives (day and night) and short walking safaris.

- Next fly north to a different part of the Okavango: large floodplains dotted with forested islands fringed by palms. Stay for two nights at Little Vumbura, a stunning camp on its own island. Enjoy motor-boat trips in the deeper channels, excursions by mekoro (dug-out canoes) across shallow floodplains, and 4WD game drives. 
- From the Okavango, fly to another contrasting environment: the Linyanti Reserve. Spend two nights at Savuti Camp, where the beautiful en-suite tents each have a veranda facing a waterhole, and game drives concentrate on the wildlife found in the Savute Channel.
- Leaving Botswana, fly to Livingstone in Zambia, beside the magnificent Victoria Falls. End with two nights at the brand new Toka Leya Lodge, beside the Zambezi River, your base for a range of activities from river cruises and game drives to museum visits and tours of the Falls.
- Sadly leaving Livingstone, you fly back to the UK. This 9-day safari using camps run by Wilderness Safaris, would normally cost from £4,135 per person sharing.
- For more information, contact Expert Africa on 020 8232 9777, email info@expertafrica.com or visit www.expertafrica.com


Runners up prizes
Four runners-up will receive three Bradt Travel Guides of their choice. Contact Bradt Travel Guides on 01753 893444 or visit www.bradtguides.com
Rules
1. The competition is open to all writers aged 18 and over, previously published or not, other than employees or the immediate family of BBC Worldwide, Origin Publishing or the Expert Africa/ Sunvil group.
2. One entry per person.
3. The story should be no longer than 800 words and must be typed with double-line spacing on A4 paper and on one side only.
4. You must not write your name on the story. Instead, your story must have one anonymous tag word written in the top right-hand corner of each page. You must then write the same tag word on an envelope containing the completed entry form, and this envelope should be attached to the back of the story. Stories will not be returned.
5. The story must not have been entered in or won a prize in any other competition anywhere in the world or have been previously published.
6. The story must be the original work of the entrant, who must be the sole owner of the copyright.
7. The entry of a story to the competition constitutes a grant to BBC Worldwide of the right to publish it in any media.
8. The stories will be judged by an independent panel. BBC Wildlife reserves the right to withhold prizes if, in the opinion of the judges, the standard of entries so warrants.
9. The judges' decision is final. No correspondence will be entered into concerning the final choice of winners.
10. The prize must be taken between 15 November 2008 and 31 May 2009 (excluding periods around Christmas, New Year and Easter). Three dates will be offered; there are no cash alternatives and the prize cannot be transferred.
11. Expert Africa reserves the right to use similar camps, run by Wilderness Safaris, in Botswana and Livingstone as alternatives. 
12. All entries must be received by the closing date of 29 February 2008. Proof of posting is not proof of receipt.
13. Winners will be notified by email in April. The winning essay will be published in the June 2008 issue of BBC Wildlife.
14. Email addresses may be used by Expert Africa for marketing purposes.
Get the Inside Track at The Times presents Destinations: The Holiday &amp; Travel Show

The essential event for holiday-makers and intrepid explorers alike, Destinations Show brings you the latest travel ideas from the latest UK hotspots to experiencing the thrill of an African Safari at the worlds most renowned national parks such as Serengeti, Tarangire and the Ngorongoro Crater. 

There are also beach holidays, culture breaks, cruises and adventure and activity for all tastes and budgets. Guest appearances sure to inspire you include wildlife presenter Jonathan Scott of the BBC's Big Cat and Big Bear Diary in Meet the Expert Theatre.

WIN To celebrate we are offering you the chance to win one of 3 pairs of tickets to Destinations Show in London AND a pair of Magnaloux Optics Binoculars. Magnaloux stock a range of 'focus free' binoculars great whether you are bird watching in Cumbria or on safari in Zambia. 

The Times presents Destinations: The Holiday &amp; Travel Show takes place 31 Jan – 3 Feb at Earl's Court, London and 29 Feb – 2 March 2008 at Birmingham's NEC. Opening Times: 10am - 5pm Tickets cost: £8 when booked in advance Call: 08701 66 04 34* or visit www.DestinationsShow.com calls charged at national rate. Booking fee applies. 

Terms and conditions: Tickets to Destinations Show are valid on any day 31 Jan-3 Feb for one day only. Children 15 and under go free. Photocopies not included.

Pictures: 
Hallo Bay Wilderness Image by Chris Anderson Waco,Texas; Elephants, Kenya, Gap Adventures; Hurtigruten, visitnorthernlights.co.uk;

Click here to enter...

Closing date: 14 January 2008
