
Londoners' memories immortalised on web

On 16 November, the Museum of London is to launch a new website entitled Map My London, which will offer people the chance to upload their own personal impressions and memories of the city. 

This website is part of a drive to make the history of the capital more inspiring to Londoners and to create stronger ties between the city's communities. 

Director of the Museum of London, Professor Jack Lohman, believes that “far from charting its physical layout, this innovative website will map London's soul". 

Texts, digital photographs, video and sound recordings can all be submitted to the website, where they will be arranged under headings such as "Love and Loss", "Beauty and horror” and "Fate and Coincidence". According to Lohman, this thematic approach aims to "transcend geographic or time-line based representation".

The impetus for this online project is the £18 million re-development of the Museum's lower ground galleries. The website will be permanently accessible to the public in an Information zone in the new 20th Century gallery.

To accompany the launch, events will be held across the capital to return some items from the museum to their original find spots, the idea being that physical objects are less relevant to the story of London than are the words of Londoners. 

The Royal Opera House is to receive Anna Pavlova's ballet shoes, while Henry Cooper's boxing gloves will be returned to Wembley Stadium. 

EBay is also auctioning the opportunity for a member of the public to have their own personal mementos displayed forevermore in a cabinet in the museum's foyer. 

To add your own memories of London, or to find out more click here or telephone 0870 444 3851.

Free tickets for Fab Four screening

BBC Timewatch is offering Beatles fans the chance to watch an early preview of a new documentary about the band's last tour.

The show uses previously unheard interviews and eye-witness testimonies to give a special insight into the group's final concerts in 1966.

It also looks back at 10 years of their live performances and reveals how the tours were put together and how the band coped with the pressures of being on the road.

The preview screening takes place at 7.30pm on Tuesday 14 November at The Beatles Story in Liverpool's Albert Docks. After the show you'll be able to give your opinions to the programme makers.

Tickets are free but numbers are limited. If you'd like to attend please call Lisa McBain on 020 8752 7079 or email lisamcbain@bbc.co.uk.


Kenyans want damages from Britain

A group of former Mau Mau fighters, involved in fighting against the British half a century ago, are seeking damages from the British government.

The men claim that during the war they were brutally treated while being detained by the British, who, among other punishments, registered beatings, denied them food, and suspended them by the feet. 

The war in Kenya, which began in 1952, was characterised by escalating violence between white European settlers, and the Kenyan Mau Mau. 

The fighting was eventually stopped by the British in 1960, and the country gained independence in 1963. 

The Kenya Human Rights Commission says that 160,000 Kenyans were detained over the course of the violence. 

Leigh and Day, a British firm representing the veterans, intend to wait until January for a response from Whitehall, consisting of a formal apology and an out-of-court settlement for compensation. 

If an agreement is not reached by that time, the case will be taken to the High Court in London.

Help needed for new BBC history show

Is there an object in your home that you think might have an interesting story? 

Do you know of a building or place that might have a hidden past? 

Have you got an historical mystery that needs to be solved? 

An innovative new programme History Detectives is looking for members of the public to participate in its first series. 

Every week, in an hour-long broadcast, the show will unlock the secret histories of peoples' unusual objects and perplexing possessions. 

Through the use of up-to-the minute research techniques from forensic science to archival exploration, and by consulting specialists from archaeologists to ballistics experts, the team intends to get to the bottom of every challenge you set them.

The programme in the UK follows three successful series in America, where tales of slavery, segregation, the Cold war and organised crime have been unearthed. 

In Britain, explorations could lead to stories of the Romans, the British Empire, witchcraft or the Black Death. 

If you have, or know of an object, place or heirloom that might have an interesting historical past, which could be featured on the programme, contact Rowan on 0141 331 5424 or email history.detectives@liontv.co.uk

New masters course in Nottingham

One of Britain's favourite legendary characters, is to become the subject of a university course starting in 2007. 

Nottingham University is set to offer a one-year Masters in Robin Hood studies, in which students will study the man himself, along with his faithful band of Merry Men.

In addition to exploring 15th century manuscripts, students will get to scrutinize songs, plays and stories in order to investigate the city's famous medieval hero.

Dr Rob Lutton, who lectures in Medieval History at the university says that the course "provides an exciting opportunity for anyone with an interest in the origins and development of England's most enduring legendary figure".

African heritage celebrated in London

Visitors to the Dominion Arts Centre in Ealing will be able to see a special exhibition for Black History Month beginning on 29 September.

Entitled Home Is Where the Heart Is the exhibition comprises photographs taken by Jacob Crawfurd that show African cultural practices taking place both in Africa and Europe.

The centre will also be staging a special family event for Black History Month on 6 October with music, dance and poetry.

To find out more about these events please call the Centre on 020 8843 1227.

Writer's home may be available for rent

The National Trust is contemplating renting out the former home of Thomas Hardy to holiday-makers over the winter months in order to raise funds for the cottage and better conserve the building.

It is one of a number of options currently being considered by the organisation in order to ensure the Dorset cottage remains “financially sustainable”.

The money will be used to improve the visitor experience at Hardy's Cottage but some fans of the writer are unhappy with the idea. 

Rosemary Morgan, president of the Thomas Hardy Association was quoted on the BBC website, saying: “It's a shocking thing to think that tenants can leave their marks in a place that figures so highly in his novels and his life”.

Hardy was born at the property in 1840 and went on write some of his early works there, including Under the Greenwood Tree. However there is no Hardy collection in the cottage.

The National Trust acquired the house in 1947 and currently open it to visitors throughout the summer months.

History Matters photo competition

Young, budding historians and aspiring photographers now have an opportunity to display their skills by entering the History Matters photo contest.

Those under the age of 16 are encouraged to capture their favourite historic sites on camera and upload them onto the History Matters website. 

Winning entrants will receive a free visit to a nearby historic property for themselves and their families.

History Matters - pass it on, is a campaign committed to spreading awareness of history to the general public. 

Despite the business of everyday life History Matters believe that it is absolutely imperative that people remember and engage with the past, thereby creating a brighter and more prosperous future.

Thatcher and Attlee receive top marks

Margaret Thatcher was one of the most effective Prime Ministers of the 20th century, according to an article due to be published in the September issue of BBC History Magazine, on sale 29 August. 

Margaret Thatcher, who held office as a Conservative Prime Minister between 1979 and 1990, received a 5/5 rating from author and historian Francis Beckett. Beckett commented: “Margaret Thatcher took one sort of society, and turned it into another sort of society. She broke the Attlee settlement, which had lasted more than 30 years, largely by force of will. Today few people under 40 remember a time when trade unions were a real force in the land; when the public sector controlled large swathes of the economy; when local councils controlled education and other local services; when benefits were considered rights of citizenship. The defeat and destruction of the once-powerful National Union of Mineworkers was a key moment in the history of the last half decade.”

Margaret Thatcher shares the top spot alongside Clement Richard Atlee who led a Labour government between 1945 and 1951. 

At the other end of the scale, Neville Chamberlain, who was the Conservative Prime Minister from 1937-40, came in as the worst Prime Minister of the 20th Century alongside Robert Anthony Eden, Conservative Prime Minister 1955-7.

Beckett commented: “He [Chamberlain] utterly failed in his principal objective of averting war. The moment which appeared at the time to be his biggest triumph – the Munich agreement with Hitler of 1938 – is seen in retrospect as a disaster. He said at the time that it was ‘the prelude to a larger settlement in which all Europe may find peace'. He never had the chance as prime minister to do much about his domestic agenda.”

Our current longstanding leader, Tony Blair, came in midway. Although he has had the biggest ever Labour majority, and has been re-elected twice, the unpopularity of his actions in the Iraq war might have affected his ability to fulfil his aims. 

Beckett commented: “Blair made a lot of progress in his chosen direction right up to the time of the Iraq War. The private sector has now been brought even into the running of schools and hospitals, and since the Conservatives agree with it, this will probably be a relatively permanent change. The unpopularity of the Iraq War, and the fact that the reasons given afterwards for going to war were not those given at the time, have undermined Blair's ability to implement his vision, probably permanently.”

The 20th century prime ministers were judged by Francis Beckett on their effectiveness as change managers based on two criteria. Firstly, if they had a clear idea of how they wanted to change Britain and how far the succeeded in doing so. And secondly, how effective they were at simply managing, rather than creating, change.

Dave Musgrove, Editor of BBC History Magazine, says: “The important point here is that we're not judging these leaders on their policies, but rather on how well they implemented them – did they do what they said they would? Mrs Thatcher undoubtedly scores highly on that front. I know many people take issue with what happened to the nation when the Iron Lady was in power, but no one can deny that she did what she set out to.”

The article “Who was the best 20th Century PM?” is published in the September issue of BBC History Magazine, on sale now.

Do you agree with Beckett's view? Have your own say in our poll. Click here to vote.


20th Century Prime Ministers
[Rated 0 (worst) – 5 (best)]

5 Margaret Thatcher
5 Clement Richard Attlee
4 Edward Heath
4 Winston Churchill
4 Harold Macmillan
4 Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman
3 Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne-Cecil [later Lord Salisbury]
3 Herbert Henry Asquith
3 David Lloyd George
3 Stanley Baldwin
3 James Harold Wilson
3 Tony Blair
2 James Callaghan
2 Arthur James Balfour
1 Andrew Bonar Law
1 James Ramsay MacDonald
1 Sir Alec Douglas-Home
1 John Major
0 Robert Anthony Eden
0 Neville Chamberlain

For further information, please contact
Tabitha Morton
BBC Magazines Bristol Press Office
0117 3148300 | 07977 362817
tabithamorton@bbcmagazinesbristol.com

Francis Beckett is a journalist and historian. He is general editor of a series of 20 biographies of 20th-century prime ministers, and author of the volume on Harold Macmillan [Haus Publishing, Autumn 2006].
