Iman All Woman
With a top modelling career, a rock star husband, and a recently published book, Iman chats to Sylvia Smith about her new cosmetics range 
 

We all remember Iman when she burst on to the fashion scene in 1975 as a stunning model, sparking a small but significant shift in the way Black women viewed ourselves. Some industry pundits claimed that she broadened the definition of beauty because she was an African, not an African-American, who rose to the top. Others say her ‘European' features made her acceptable to mainstream America. The editor of Essence magazine, for example, described her as ‘a white woman dipped in chocolate'. 
However we rate her Somalian looks, it's hard to ignore Iman. She has just launched an exclusive make-up range called I-Iman, published a book called I Am Iman and filled enough newspaper and magazine columns with celebrity-type interviews to keep her fans happy for ages.
The book is part biography and part collection of short stories — many of which were contributions by her famous friends. It's also brimming with fantastic pictures of Iman throughout her life including images of her by famous photographers such as Helmut Newton, Irving Penn, Norman Parkinson and Steven Meisel. The book's blurb says the images explore the cultural and political power of good looks.
Iman claims that the fashion industry only ever anoints one Black girl each generation to rise to the top of the modelling profession and become queen of the fashion scene. Iman was one such Black girl, who became the only non-white top model adored and sought after by the fashion industry, with Naomi Campbell and Alek Wek following. Now that she's no longer modelling, Iman found that while becoming a model may be every girl's dream, the reality is different – especially if you are Black. She says, ‘Modelling is a business that eats its young. Spoiling them, flattering them, and then being nasty behind their backs.'
How did Iman survive? She says, ‘I was privileged because nobody ever told me that I was beautiful while I was growing up. I'm a typical Somalian-looking girl and I come from a nation of beauties and my skinny frame wasn't the ideal.' The lure of parties and drugs was tempered by her Muslim upbringing and respect for her much-loved father. ‘It was my strict family background that stopped me. It was hard enough for my parents to know that I was modelling.
Her success can be measured by the lucrative advertising campaigns she has won as one of the first Black solo models: Calvin Klein, Valentino, Versace and Revlon's first ethnic line. But now Iman is a different person – even slightly camera-shy.
(Find out what makes Iman tick nowadays with our exclusive interview). 

How difficult was it to lose weight after the birth of your last baby? 
‘Not very difficult. But I did diet and exercise to help me lose the extra weight.'
Did you have any specific diet or exercise work-out while you were pregnant? 
‘No, nothing special. I ate whatever I craved, walked a lot and did some light yoga exercises to stretch my muscles.'
Has your body changed as a result of being pregnant quite late in life?
‘I did gain some weight, which I am quite happy with. Before I became pregnant I weighed about 125 pounds and I now weigh 132 pounds.'



Are you happy with your body shape?
‘You learn to love your body as you grow older. I don't even mind my big butt and I like to wear clothes that enhance it!'
What exercise keeps you fit? 
‘Boxing, Tae-Bo and some weightlifting!'
What is your daily skincare routine?
‘Cleanse, moisturise and hydrate. I keep it simple.'
Which skincare products do you use regularly?
‘My all-time favourite is Origins Ginger Body Scrub (£25), which leaves your skin glowing and feeling silky. And I find a massage can be very relaxing.'


Do you follow any particular eating plan?
‘You shouldn't starve yourself. I eat four light meals per day, so I am never hungry and that eliminates any food bingeing! But I also don't believe that I need to be a size 6.' 
Why did you bring out a new make-up range?
‘My first make-up range for women of colour was created in 1994. It was called IMAN cosmetics and skincare collection, and is available at Selfridges. With the approach of the new millennium, I decided to create my second line for all women called I-Iman. It's for the high octane, opulent diva in us all and available exclusively at Harrods. It already has a fan base of celebrities such as rapper Eve and Beverley Knight.'
Tell us about your hair
‘I've been known to have anything from an Afro to a short blonde highlighted bob – thanks to a great salon that does weaves. I take care of my own hair with Kiehl's products including Herbal Treatment Shampoo (£10), Formula 133 conditioner (£10), and High Gloss Conditioning and Styling Oil (£20.50).'
What make-up do you wear?
‘A bare minimum when I'm not being photographed, and a little foundation. I never wear lipstick, but prefer lip gloss with a hint of colour.'

Were you adding choice when you launched your new line of cosmetics? 
‘Absolutely. The spice of life is choice. But the major difference between IMAN cosmetics and previous make-up lines is that we cater for women of all colours – Black, Hispanic, Asian and those of Middle Eastern origins. Our foundations and powders cover a wide range of skin tones.'
And finally your new book?
‘If it hadn't been for my husband, (rock star David Bowie), I would never have found the courage to write it. One of the most exciting areas was working with Annie Leibovitz to bring together every black model from 1975 to the present day. It includes Beverley Johnson, Pat Cleveland, Naomi Campbell, Adia, Tyra Banks and Michelle de Swarte. Alek Wek was the only model who was unable to be present. Still, it's a great picture!'


Colour Me Happy
Prisca McGuire checks out the do's and don't of changing your hair colour
 

There's nothing like a splash of colour to brighten up your life. And if you feel like making a real statement, then changing your hair colour to something more dynamic, might be what you need to kick start the new year!

Preparation
Before colouring your hair, make sure that both your hair and scalp are in good condition. If you've already put your hair through the paces by relaxing it or using other chemical treatments, you need to be sure that your hair is strong enough to take the stress of another chemical process, especially if you are going for a permanent change of hair colour.
It's also worth taking a little time to consider, whether or not, a dramatic hair colour change will suit your skin tone. For example, Destiny's Child's Beyoncé, looks fantastic with her blonde tresses, but the colour suits her skin tone well. But bare in mind that it might not suit you! 
A good idea is to experiment with wigs, or have a computer profile done, to see what you'll look like with different coloured hair.
What colours can I use?
Well, you can use any colour you like in theory, but if you're taking your hair from black to something really daring like blonde, your hair has to be stripped of its natural colour first, before being coloured. This means it has to be bleached or pre-lightened, to ensure that you end up with a lighter colour, and the process could damage your hair.
Remember, it's easier and less damaging to take your hair from its natural colour to another dark shade, or to a slightly lighter shade.
You also have to remember that the colour you choose as a sample, or on a box, isn't going to be the exact colour you'll end up with. Your base, or natural hair colour, mixed with the colour will be your new colour.
Erica Johnson of Dominoes in Huddersfield says that she always advises clients that the final hair will end up a slightly darker shade than the sample they see. ‘In some cases, if a client really wants to get the colour as close to the sample as possible, they may have to go through the process of having their hair pre-lightened before the new colour is applied,' says Erica.
The range of colours available today gives you the option of colouring your hair to cover both grey hair and uneven colouring, or even going for something really dramatic such as pink.
Goldwell offer a choice from 75 permanent hair colours in their Tophic range. The colours contain reduced ammonia, making them much less damaging to the hair. However, if you want a completely ammonia-free product, Goldwell also have the Colorance Sort Colour range, which comes in 23 shades. Redken also offers ammonia-free colouring with their New Shades EQ, which comes in 25 different shades. While Clairol offers the Herbal Essences range of ammonia-free colourants, which offers 30 shades.




What is the difference between permanent and semi-permanent colours?
Permanent hair colours usually contain both a tint and peroxide, which penetrates the cortex of your hair, while the tint combines with your natural hair colour to produce the final colour.
You can use a permanent colour to lighten or darken your hair. However, you need to be sure that a permanent colour is what you really want, and that you're prepared to live with your new hair colour until it grows out or you cut it out.
If you choose a semi-permanent colour or a rinse, you are only colouring the surface of the hair. Most semi-permanent colours and rinses survive about six to eight washes. Because, rinses and semi-permanent colours don't involve the colour penetrating the hair cortex, they are less likely to damage or weaken your hair. You will however, find that if you opt for a semi-permanent colour or a rinse, your choice of colour is limited to browns, burgundies and blacks.
Highlighting and streaking your hair is another option, which is ideal if you're looking for a more subtle colour change. You could also opt for a 'colour enhancer', which is basically a coloured weave or extension, which creates the same effect as highlighting and streaking, but without the chemical processing.
Can I colour my own hair?
You can, but you really need to know what you're doing, and you have to be prepared to follow instructions to the letter. It is also important that you do an allergy and sensitivity test, to make sure you aren't allergic to hair colouring. Typical allergic reactions include itchy skin and swollen eyes, or in more serious cases, difficulty breathing. Most products recommend doing both a sensitivity and a strand test approximately two days before you colour your hair.
If you want to check out home colouring treatments, take a look at Dark &amp; Lovely's Generation 2000 Permanent Hair Colour, which comes in 16 vibrant colours; Clairol's Nice 'n Easy range in 32 shades; Goldwell's Colorance pH6.8 (£5.50) in 20 shades, or Garnier's Natea Nourishing Colour Masque (£5.69) in 21 shades. Garnier also offer the Movida Créme-Colourant range (£5.39), which is designed to enhance your existing colour. 





Can I use colour on chemically treated hair?
Yes, but according to Phebean Nylander from the Errol Douglas salon, if you've recently had your hair relaxed, you should wait at least two weeks before applying a permanent colour. ‘Both relaxer and hair colouring treatments contain strong chemicals, so it's not advisable for you to have both treatments done at the same time,' Phebean suggests. ‘However, if you only want a colour rinse, then you can do that at the same time as having a treatment such as relaxing.'
Luster Products offer a professional relaxer and colourant in one, called Strait Shades, available in three colours, these products are already available in the US, they are just launching in the UK.



