BHS condemns horror at Buckinghamshire horse yard
The British Horse Society (BHS) today (Wednesday, 9 January) condemned a Buckinghamshire horse establishment where more than 30 horses have been found dead. 
The BHS - Britain's largest horse charity with a membership of more than 106,000 - voiced its support for the work of the horse rescue charities that resulted in the raiding of the yard in Amersham, from which around 80 surviving horses are currently being rescued. 
Thirty-one horses were found dead at the site and three more have been subsequently humanely destroyed. It is likely to be some time before the full extent of the loss of horse life is known. 
BHS Welfare Senior Executive Lee Hackett said: “The horse welfare community is deeply shocked by the extent of what has happened in Buckinghamshire. We wholeheartedly condemn any mistreatment of horses and ponies. Mistreatment on this scale is unprecedented in Britain - the true horror of the situation is only now becoming clear. 
“The collaboration between welfare charities to rescue these horses has been fantastic. Clearly there needs to be a full inquiry into the circumstances behind this case. We must use these terrible events to make sure this kind of carnage never happens again.” 
The British Horse Society condemns all mistreatment or neglect of horses and works tirelessly through a network of welfare officers to respond to reports of welfare concerns and provide education to horse-owners and the general public. 
For more information, please contact: Lee Hackett, Welfare Senior Executive, on 07808 141007 (mobile) or 01926 707804 
BHS 2007 Diamond Jubilee Raffle 
Thank you to everyone who participated in our Diamond Jubilee Raffle. You helped us raise £55,000 for our work improving welfare, access and safety. 
Watch out for new chances to win more wonderful prizes in our 2008 raffle. 
We are pleased to announce our winners are :- 
Ticket Winner Prize 
1094201  Mr A Moore, Wellingborough Ifor Williams Trailer 
0317278  Mr and Mrs Bradley, Warrington Castle Leslie Estate Holiday 
0334725  Miss JA Beck, Wirral £100 Joules Vouchers 
0154839  Mrs P James, Pembrokeshire £100 Joules Vouchers 
0641389  Mrs JH Spence-Wilson, Ceredigion £100 Joules Vouchers 
0371012  Mr G Taylor, Tyne And Wear £100 Joules Vouchers 
0041256  Ms F Smith, Suffolk £100 Joules Vouchers 

Cream of Scots young show jumping talent to join Jessica Kurten masterclass 
World class show jumper Jessica Kurten and eight of Scotland's top young riders are to come together on the evening of Thursday January 10 to give what promises to be a memorable and inspiring BHS Scotland masterclass. 
Currently ranked among the top four show jumpers in the world, 2007 British Open winner Jessica will school four male and four female riders currently among the top of Scotland's junior ranks. 
For the boys, Scott Brash, Alex Barr and James Scullion will be joined by leading under-18 rider Adam Valks. 
Scott, who won the six-year-old championships at HOYS in 2005, is a former young rider team member along with Alec Barr. James Scullion is a former under-21 team member who contested the seven-year-old class at HOYS this year with 17-year-old Adam Valks. 
The four ladies are Jemma Kirk, Stacey Babes, Laura Hut and Kelly Conner. Laura were in the under-18 nations cup team in Weirden in 2006 and has won both the south-west and north-west Scottish Branch championships previously. 
Jemma was in the junior nations cup team in France in 2006 and is currently part of the world-class start and potential squad. Stacey has also represented at nations cup level and took part on the newcomers at HOYS this year with Kelly who produced a memorable double clear for the Scottish team in the British Open 2005 and won the Scottish under 21 championships in 2006. 
BHS Scotland Chairman Loraine Young said: "With such a talented line-up of young riders to demonstrate just how to 'Enjoy Winning' with Jessica, this masterclass is going to be both educational and thrilling." 
The masterclass takes place at Gleneagles Equestrian Centre from 7.30pm on the evening of January 10 2008. 
All details of how to purchase tickets are on www.bhsscotland.org.uk 
For further information, please contact: Helene Mauchlen, The British Horse Society, 01764 656334 or H.Mauchlen@bhs.org.uk 
NOTES TO EDITORS: 

1. Jessica Kurten is currently ranked fourth top show jumper in the World. Jessica is an Irish professional showjumper who lives in Hunxe in Germany with her husband, Echard. Jessica has represented Ireland twice in the Olympics and was the master judge on “Only fools On Horses” BBC 2006. 
2. Jessica's 2007 achievements include:Rolex Top Ten Final, Geneva, (Castle Forbes Libertina) British Open Champion, NEC, Birmingham (Galopin de Bioley) Monaco Grand Prix (Castle Forbes Libertina) Longines Grand Prix, La Baule (Castle Forbes Maike) OBO Bettermann Prize, Balve, Germany (Castle Forbes Libertina) Preis der AachenMunchener, Aachen (Quibell)Coruna Grand Prix, La Coruna, Spain (Quibell). 
3. The British Horse Society is a charity and membership organisation. It has a membership of more than 106,000 (including British Riding Clubs). Membership information can be obtained on 0844 848 1666. 
4. Support the BHS Access Fighting Fund! We are aiming to raise £100,000 to enable us to continue to fight for the preservation of our public rights of way network. Horse riders only have access to 22 percent of the public rights of way network and carriage drivers only have access to five percent. It is vital that we fight future cases to preserve these. 
Donate now at: http://www.justgiving.com/accessfightingfund, or by sending a cheque, made payable to The British Horse Society, to: Access and Rights of Way Department, The British Horse Society, Stoneleigh Deer Park, Kenilworth, Warwickshire CV8 2XZ. Please indicate that you'd like the money to go to the Access Fighting Fund. 
5. The BHS is calling on all equestrians to sign a petition asking the Government to give them a say in all new access and rights of way legislation. 
The BHS Access Department and its regional access and bridleway officers ask all riders and other horse lovers to sign the petition at http://petitions.pm.gov.uk/Equestrianaccess/ 
Equestrians are the most vulnerable of road users and need increased off-road access for their safety and the welfare of their horses. Horse riding and driving provides healthy outdoor exercise which the Government is keen to encourage. 
It is enjoyed by more than four million people in the UK and is the second biggest land-based industry but equestrians have not been included in recent access-creating legislation which would help make them safer and encourage healthy outdoor recreation. 
Four-month amnesty declared on Transport Competence Certificates 
Defra has declared a four-month amnesty for people transporting horses or livestock who miss the 5 January 2008 deadline for gaining a certificate of competence. 

The Government department has agreed with the UK enforcement authorities that no action will be taken before the end of April 2008 against transporters who do not have competence certificates. 

The British Horse Society urges people who require certification to get it as soon as they can. 

The certificate of competence is needed for those transporting horses by road on journeys of more than 65km in connection with an economic activity. The amnesty applies only to journeys within the UK. 

Under the EU Welfare in Transport Regulation, those transporting cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, horses and poultry by road, on journeys of more than 65km in connection with an economic activity must be assessed in their competence. The training depends on the the role of the transporter or attendant and the length of journeys undertaken. 

For those transporting horses on journeys of more than 65km and up to eight hours this may be done as a theory test. For those involved in journeys of more than eight hours, practical assessment of their competence may also be required. 

A list of independent bodies designated to undertake assessment and training can be found on the Defra website as well as full details of the regulations www.defra.gov.uk. 

For further information please contact: Rachel Molloy, Welfare Executive, The British Horse Society, 01926 707807 or r.molloy@bhs.org.uk 

NOTES TO EDITORS: 
1. The British Horse Society is a charity and membership organisation. It has a membership of more than 106,000 (including British Riding Clubs). Membership information can be obtained on 0844 848 1666. 

2. Support the BHS Access Fighting Fund! We are aiming to raise £100,000 to enable us to continue to fight for the preservation of our public rights of way network. Horse riders only have access to 22 percent of the public rights of way network and carriage drivers only have access to five percent. It is vital that we fight future cases to preserve these. 

Donate now at: http://www.justgiving.com/accessfightingfund, or by sending a cheque, made payable to The British Horse Society, to: Access and Rights of Way Department, The British Horse Society, Stoneleigh Deer Park, Kenilworth, Warwickshire CV8 2XZ. Please indicate that you'd like the money to go to the Access Fighting Fund. 

The BHS is also calling on all equestrians to sign a petition asking the Government to give them a say in all new access and rights of way legislation. 

The BHS Access Department and its regional access and bridleway officers ask all riders and other horse lovers to sign the petition at http://petitions.pm.gov.uk/Equestrianaccess/ 

Equestrians are the most vulnerable of road users and need increased off-road access for their safety and the welfare of their horses. Horse riding and driving provides healthy outdoor exercise which the Government is keen to encourage. 

It is enjoyed by more than four million people in the UK and is the second biggest land-based industry but equestrians have not been included in recent access-creating legislation which would help make them safer and encourage healthy outdoor recreation. 
The Emergency Services Protocol
The Protocol sets out a national standard with procedural guidelines for police and fire services with large animal rescue. Its creation was triggered by the rising number of horses dying slow, painful deaths in widely reported accidents on the roads and elsewhere. 
The aim of the new code is to minimise delays in injured animals receiving veterinary care, to maximise the chances of a positive outcome for the animal and to ensure the safety of all those involved. 
An Emergency Services Protocol Fund has also been established which will guarantee that there is no delay in injured horses receiving veterinary care when their owners cannot be traced. The fund will also pay for rescue training and specialist lifting and rescue equipment for the emergency services. 
Emagin is The British Horse Society's Geographical Information System. 
It offers the Society, its volunteers and members a vast range of benefits, the most important of which is to supply crucial and comprehensive data, statistics and imagery through the use of mapping to further support and strengthen the Society's work for every horse and rider. 
Among the umbrella of benefits to the BHS itself, there are some excellent ways in which Emagin can be of direct use to the public. One of these is the Where to Ride service (see details below). As Emagin grows the range of benefits available will increase dramatically and this page will keep you informed of these. 
The BHS hopes to launch Emagin online next year, and when this point is reached, members of the public will be able to view a wealth of BHS information, and specific comprehensive data on equestrian access throughout the UK and Ireland and their local areas. 
The BHS welcomes the following new trade members: 24-7 Equine Transport, Alpha to Omega Motoring Ltd, Anniversary Diamonds, E.Cell Ltd, Equestrian Surveillance and Pigsty Studio.

