Building a boat interactively
To complement the launch of the Trader 42 Sport Deck, the Tarquin Boat Company has developed a new interactive tool enabling customers to design their own virtual Trader 42 and allowing them to see what their chosen layout will look like in a matter of minutes.
With over 75 configuration possibilities, the Trader 42 offers a huge range of design layouts and engineering options thanks to the sophisticated composite construction techniques and moulding technologies used by Trader's factory facility. The new configurator feature guides the user through each model variation, allowing them to choose from a series of options such as hull colour, cabin-layout, interior helm, extended transom and engine size.
Once the design has been chosen, the customer can print out their final layout which includes a full specification and a boat visual, something that they would normally receive following a consultation with the boat builder.
advertisement
Tarquin Managing Director, Tony Chappell said: "We have been able to develop the 42 with a wide range of personalised options which allow each owner to specify the craft to suit their particular needs. These options include three exterior body styles, a choice of two or three cabins and alternatives for tender stowage. Our new interactive configurator demonstrates how versatile the 42 is and allows the customer to play around with the layout until they are happy with it. We hope to introduce this clever tool to our other models in the near future."
Massive ships to visit Falmouth
Plans to bring the biggest cruise ships in the world to Falmouth have moved a step nearer now that first reports of an environmental impact study have been carried out.
The channel to the proposed berths alongside Falmouth Docks could eventually take the massive 1,112ft (339m) Freedom of the Seas type vessels which are longer than 37 double-decker buses and can accommodate more than 4,300 passengers on 15 decks.
The full environmental and economic impact assessments are still beiong compiled, but dredging of the channel to allow the ships to berth rather than anchor in the bay and ferry passengers ashore, could start next year.
advertisement
Marine consultants Royal Haskoning say the channel design would be suitable for the world's biggest cruise ships.
They have also taken samples from the seabed and are looking at beneficial use of the dredged material to reduce the amount that would be dumped at sea.
Mark Sansom, chief executive of Falmouth Harbour Commissioners, said everyone with any concerns about the dredging had been encouraged make their views known.
Andrew Bell, chairman of the commissioners said samples of the seabed had been taken and examined for their type, flora and fauna content.
"Whilst much of the work has been done, there is still more to do and we are not expecting the final report until May next year," he said.
More than 40 cruise ships are booked into Falmouth this year and they mean huge business for the port and the rest of Cornwall.
Shipyard apprentices honoured
By Emma Goodfellow

The apprentices at the award ceremony.
As an apprenticeship scheme at a Falmouth ship company enters its tenth anniversary year, students from last year's programme have been honoured for their had work.
Pendennis Shipyard hosted its annual awards afternoon, giving the company's 45 apprentices the chance to showcase their achievements of the previous year in front of 80 guests, including their supervisors, senior company staff, college lecturers, friends and family.
Apprentices from both the general and the surface finishing schemes received a combination of awards, including NVQ2, Duke of Edinburgh, foundation apprenticeship and Royal Yachting Association level one certificates. Additional awards were allocated to the Apprentice of the Year within each scheme/ year intake.
Winners were: year one apprentice of the year James Brett, year two apprentice of the year Tom Casson, surface finishers group one apprentice of the year Tim Mason, surface finishers group two apprentice of the year Robin Thorpe and surface finishers group three apprentice of the year Josh Thompson.
This year will see a further intake of general apprentices in late August. The successful 12 apprentices will be given the opportunity to work at the shipyard, as well as studying at Cornwall College over a four-year period.
The company offers five areas of specialisation, including joinery, engineering, fabrication, electrical and exterior outfit. Any one interested in applying for the scheme should contact Jill Carr, Pendennis Shipyard, The Docks, Falmouth, TR11 4NR.
Mission to seafarers volunteers have busy time
The Falmouth Mission to Seafarers has had a busy festive period in the Port. The week saw the Mission delivering two large Christmas Hampers to the Stropus and Swan Diana, both casualty vessels. The food for the Hampers came courtesy of the Falmouth Lions Club of Falmouth &amp; Penryn who delivered nine carrier bags of food, which were then packed into wicker hampers by The Falmouth Mission to Seafarers, and delivered by the A&amp;P Falmouth Dockmaster, Captain Paul Edwards.
Penny Phillips, chairman, of The Falmouth Mission to Seafarers, who operate from inside Falmouth Docks, said "We were advised that these two vessels might be short of festive food, and a timely call from the Falmouth Lions Club soon ensured that the crew of these vessels had plenty of treats in time for Christmas."
This was followed by the Annual Wrapping-Up Night in the A&amp;P Falmouth Boardroom, when seven Mission to Seafarers and Apostleship of the Sea volunteers wrapped up gifts, these were in addition to the gifts already delivered by Jon Robertshaw, Ship Liaison Officer, to the Anglian Princess, the Falmouth Mission's adopted ship.
"We always have a lot of fun during our Wrapping up Night, and we all thoroughly enjoy the experience," said Penny.
On Christmas Eve, 55 hand-made christmas cards were delivered to the crews of the P&amp;O Ferries' European Seaway and European Endeavour; these were cards made by children visiting the National Maritime Museum Cornwall in an activity arranged by the Museum and the Falmouth Mission to Seafarers.
Penny Phillips, Graham Hall and Jon Robertshaw, all volunteers, visited the vessels Taktow, Akai, Ocean Alert, Odyssey Explorer and Celtic Explorer to deliver a gift to each of the crew of those vessels.
advertisement
Also being looked after in the port was a Chinese seafarer, Mr JI LI ANG JIANG who was badly injured in an accident onboard his ship M.V. SWAKOP and was airlifted to Treliske Hospital in November.
Jiang is now recuperating in the Falmouth Hotel and has been befriended by the Falmouth Mission. "He visits the Flying Angel Cabin for company, and the Mission to Seafarers have been happy to provide him with phone cards to enable him to keep in touch with his family", said Penny. He is due to fly home in three weeks.
Submarine surfaces in Falmouth
By Stephen Ivall

Week by week the National Maritime Museum Cornwall is receiving unusual object after unusual object for its forthcoming Under the Sea exhibition and last week was the arrival of a replica of the very first fully-functional submarine.
The original submarine was invented in the 1620s by Dutchman Cornelius Drebbel who expanded on an idea already designed and published by Englishman William Bourne in 1578. The replica Drebbel submarine, built in 2001 for a BBC documentary, was delivered to the Maritime Museum's boat store at Ponsharden last week.
Richard Carless, who delivered the submarine to the Museum and took part in the 2001 project, said: "Rowing the submarine was a fantastic and slightly apprehensive experience but a great insight into what the original submariners must have had to cope with given the technology (or lack of it) at the time.
"I am delighted that the Drebbel will be displayed at Falmouth as it represents real innovation, design and adaptation of boat building technology in the 17th Century and the museum is the perfect venue to show this."
It seems unbelievable by comparison with today's technology, but the craft would have originally been rowed, using oars with folding leather blades. The oars were fitted with greased leather seals which were clamped to the hull to keep water out.
The replica Drebbel submarine, which will be on show at the Maritime Museum from the end of January, was built by Thames boatbuilder Mark Edwards for the 2001 BBC programme Building the Impossible.
advertisement
Mark's challenge was to closely follow the techniques, materials and methods used by Cornelius Drebbel: a difficult task as no plans and only a few artists' impressions of the original craft remained.
Visitors will have a whole year to catch sight of and learn more about this quirky craft and the history of other submarines in the Museum's new Under the Sea exhibition which will be on display until January 2009.
The exhibition opening on January 28 will also be diving deep into a world of shipwrecks, free diving, sport and commercial diving, physiology, underwater warfare and photography.
Superyacht regatta for Falmouth Week
By Stephen Ivall

Pendennis Shipyard and the Port of Falmouth Sailing Association (POFSA) are to hold an inaugural classic superyacht regatta as part of Henri Lloyd Falmouth Week in 2008.
A number of classic yachts have already expressed an interest in the event, including Lulworth, Cambria and Mariquita. The organising committee is aiming to attract up to 20 classic superyachts to race out in the bay between the Monday and Friday of Henri Lloyd Falmouth Week.
The ability to put on such an event has been made possible with the support of Pendennis' neighbours A&amp;P Falmouth and their new Port Falmouth Marina project.
advertisement
The Pendennis Cup will be the first big sailing event to benefit from the facilities offered at the new marina and will be the forunner to the Funchal 500 Tall Ships Regatta in September.
Toby Allies, head of sales and marketing at Pendennis said: "It's great that helping to host this cup has allowed us to become more involved in Henri Lloyd Falmouth Week. We hope that the cup will be a chance for the superyacht community to fully appreciate what Falmouth and the surrounding area can offer them."
Mark Osborn, chairman of POFSA said: "Falmouth has a rich history of holding regattas for these classic yachts in the past and it would be great to revive this tradition and put the port back on the superyacht map.'' The organising committee for the Pendennis Cup is made up of representatives from Pendennis and POFSA. Henri-Lloyd Falmouth Week 2008 takes place from August 9 to 16. Henri Lloyd Falmouth Week is the second largest sailing regatta in the UK - rivalled only by Skandia Cowes Week.
Pendennis are re-fitters of superyachts. Building on hundreds of years of local maritime heritage, Pendennis has become one of Cornwall's most important employers - with just over 280 highly skilled craftsmen based at their 6.5 acre prime water front location in Falmouth.
PoFSA was set up to promote sailing in Falmouth. Helford River Sailing Club, Flushing Sailing Club, Mylor Yacht Club, Restronguet Sailing Club, Royal Cornwall Yacht Club and St Mawes Sailing Club are all members of Port of Falmouth Sailing Association. PoFSA co-ordinates over 300 sailing events in the Fal/ Helford estuaries annually. From Village Regatta, to Club Racing, to National Class Championship, to Henri-Lloyd Falmouth Week there is something on offer for all sailors. www.pofsa.co.uk The planned new Port of Falmouth marina will 300 fully-serviced deep water berths for boats of all sizes, the marina will offer dedicated Superyacht pontoons with 1m high freeboard, 6m water depth, large power outlets and access for provisioning vehicles.
It will offer direct access to the sheltered waters of the Falmouth Estuary and the coastline of West Cornwall.

