Three free HD channels to launch
They're due by the end of next year
 

Three free high-definition (HD) TV channels are to be launched by the end of next year, it's been announced.
The channels - to be joined by a fourth by 2012 - will air on the digital terrestrial (Freeview) service which is in 15 million homes and expected to grow.
The BBC will get one of the channels and the other three will be awarded to commercial public service broadcasters such as ITV, Channel 4, Five and S4C following a bidding process.
HD channels
Currently, high-definition channels are available only on Sky and cable.
Digital terrestrial users will have access to the channels region by region, simultaneously with the process of digital switchover.
Homes in the Granada region will be the first to benefit in 2009, while viewers in London will have to wait until 2012.
Upgrade
Ofcom chief executive Ed Richards said: 'This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to upgrade digital terrestrial television.
'It offers benefits for broadcasters - who will be able to launch new services without using any new spectrum - and viewers - who will have access to new channels and services on free to air.'
The launch of the service will make Freeview, now included in many TVs, a tougher competitor against Sky.
HD-ready set
To take advantage of the HD services, television viewers will need to buy an HD-ready set and HD-ready set-top box but the channels will be free-to-air.
Space for the new channels will be created by reorganising one of the three multiplexes used for public service broadcasting, which is currently licensed to the BBC.
Sir Michael Lyons, Chairman of the BBC Trust, said: 'We know from previous consultations that there is much support amongst the public for high definition services.
'The BBC Trust therefore welcomes the revised proposition announced by Ofcom today for multiplex capacity to commercial public service broadcasters.
'The Trust has agreed to work with Ofcom to allow HD on Freeview, reflecting our respective responsibilities for the services and licences which facilitate operation of the DTT platform. The BBC can now move forward with its HD service on Freeview.'

Wrong airport bag scales led to overcharging
Probe found over 60 at Gatwick were inaccurate
 

Airline passengers have been left out of pocket by dodgy airport weighing scales.
A Trading Standards Institute (TSI) probe found that 62 of the 321 scales used at Gatwick Airport were inaccurate.
The scales in question showed a weight reading before any bags were put on them, which led to customers being overcharged for 'excess' weight.
At one airline, ten out of the 18 scales tested gave the wrong reading.
Excess charges
The TSI said the problem could easily have been avoided as all check-in staff at every airport in the UK can correct the indication on the scales by pushing a button.
Lacors is the organisation which co-ordinates trading standards officers (TSOs).  Its chairman, Councillor Geoffrey Theobald, said: 'As more airlines start charging to check in luggage, it's important travellers know that their bags are being weighed accurately.
‘Council trading standards officers regularly check airport weighing equipment to make sure it's accurate.
Customers should always check the scales read zero first
‘Whilst the vast majority of weighing scales are accurate, customers should always check that scales read zero before checking in their bags and report any suspicious practices to their local council's trading standards service.'
Priority boarding
The TSI probe found that baggage fees were not being made clear by some online operators.
It also highlighted ‘a host of other practices in which airlines were making money without being upfront with their customers about their charges'.
These included ‘priority boarding' charges which did not give passengers a choice of seat on the plane, and an extra fee just to check in at the airport.
The TSI says airlines should be clearer about baggage limits and the excess charges payable, while check-in staff should be trained to make sure their scales are weighing accurately.

Sweet pea has sweet smell of success
Gardening Which? rates the best scented annuals
 
The sweet pea has been rated the best scented summer annual in a new study by Gardening Which?.
Fragrantissma, a popular variety of sweet pea, was praised for its ability to fill the garden with sweet fragrance and stay in bloom throughout the summer. 
The sweet pea is a regular feature in many gardens across the UK over the summer months, due to its distinct scent and because it is easy to grow.
Floral fragrances
Last summer, Gardening Which? compared 40 different scented annuals, and rated them according to strength of scent, sweetness of fragrance, and display.
Angel's Trumpet, which releases its scent when the sun goes down, was ranked in second place by the Gardening Which? experts, while Bird's Eye was placed third, with its small flowers and fragrant punch.
The remainder of the top ten was made up of popular plants such as lupins, evening primroses and petunias, as well as lesser known plants such as Cherry Pie and Migonette.
Evening primrose
Gardening Which? Editor Ceri Thomas said: ‘Just because a plant is scented, it doesn't mean it actually smells pleasant, or that you can detect it without having to bury your face in the flower.
‘The sweet pea, however, stands out as a great example of a British favourite that can fill the garden with fragrance over the summer months, as well as being extremely easy to grow and maintain.
‘By choosing the right plants, and sowing them in a sunny spot, you can look forward to sweet, floral fragrances every time you step outside this summer.'

New cars and hot deals, 4 April 2008
Seat's new Ibiza; half-price Renault Megane CC!
 
For your weekly fix of car news and reviews, sign up to our NEW Which? Car email. We'll drop you a line every Friday with what's hot in the world of motoring - and some very tempting deals, too…
Market watch – new and used deals
Motorpoint is celebrating its 10th birthday this weekend, with big discounts on the Renault Megane Coupé Cabriolet and Sport Tourer estate.
Ten cars are available – one of each at each of Motorpoint's five locations – on a ‘first come first served' basis on Saturday, 5th April.
The Megane CC 1.9 diesel is on sale at almost half price: £10,999 (£3,000 less than Motorpoint's usual price, and £10,188 less than list).
The Megane Sport Tourer is available from £9,999 representing a £6,953 saving, and £1,000 less than the Motorpoint norm.
However, these are likely to go very quickly, so if you're heading to Motorpoint you might also look out for these deals: try a delivery mileage 08-registration 3.0-litre diesel BMW X3 SE from £29,599.
Alternatively there are 2007 Vauxhall Vectra SRi 1.9 diesels from £10,699, and 2007 Ford Galaxy Zetec 1.8 diesels from £15,299.
Meanwhile All Approved Cars is listing a used Lexus RX 400h SR hybrid SUV for £35,950.
First registered in September 2007, it has 2,900 miles on the clock, and spec-for-spec it will save you around £6,000 compared to a brand-new one.
Finally, returning to Renault Meganes, the Renaultsport dCi 175 is one of the best diesel hot hatches you can buy.
And Buy My New Car can save you £4,631 on one. Available brand new for £14,299, that's a hefty saving on the £18,930 list price.
 
New Seat Ibiza
This is the all-new Seat Ibiza, described by the Spanish brand as its most important new model in recent history.
Styled by ex-Lamborghini man Luc Donckerwolke, it certainly looks striking – and promises to deliver a sporty driving experience, too. But beyond that there is more passenger room and a much bigger boot: at 292 litres it's currently the largest in the supermini class.
High-tech options include Volkswagen's new seven-speed Direct Shift Gearbox (automatic), Hill Hold Assist, and front cornering lights. Interestingly, the all the engines available at launch are petrols, with a choice of 1.2, 1.4, and 1.6. All three emit less than 160g/km CO2.
No word on pricing or availability yet, but we should learn more at the May 2008 launch.
 
In other Seat news, the Spanish company is celebrating its diesel-powered cars racing in the 2008 British Touring Car Championship. Reflecting this, there's now a limited edition Leon FR.
Labelled the FR550 – signifying that only 550 are available – it's based on the existing 168bhp turbodiesel FR, adding a host of extras and some unique badging for the £400 premium over the standard model.
The special add-ons consist of racing-style bucket seats, 18-inch alloy wheels, and a USB socket for MP3 players. There is a choice of paint finishes, including this interesting ‘Citrus' lime green.
Performance and economy figures remain unchanged over the standard Leon FR diesel. 0-62mph takes 8.2 seconds and the Leon FR550 can achieve a 135mph top speed. Fuel consumption is an impressive 47.1mpg, and CO2 emissions 161g/km.
The Leon FR550 costs £18,405, and is available to order now.
 
The arrival of Spring brings new special edition versions of Citroen's C2, C3 and C4 – all badged Cachet.
Equipment includes alloy wheels, front fog lights, air conditioning, CD stereo with MP3 compatibility, remote locking, electric front windows, and four airbags – although the C2 versions do miss out on some of these items. All come in a range of bright colours, depending on model.
The C2 Cachet comes as 1.1- or 1.4-litre petrol, priced from £9,095. The C3 is available in two 1.4-petrol variants (8v and 16v), and as a 1.4 diesel, from £10,695. And the C4 hatchback as 1.6 petrol, or in two 1.6 diesel version (8v and 16v again), from £14,395.
Citroen dealers are usually good for a discount; so if a bit of Cachet sounds tempting, don't be afraid to haggle.
 
Toyota is updating its Auris hatchback range, improving the existing TR specification, and adding new SR models below the SR180 sporting flagship.
The new SR variants use either a 1.6-litre petrol or 2.0-litre diesel engine, offering high levels of kit, and sporty looks.
Toyota Motorsport lowered sports suspension, 17-inch alloys, a rear spoiler, and tinted windows complete the exterior makeover, while on the inside there are nine airbags and climate control amongst other items.
Biggest change for the Auris TR, available as 1.4 petrol, 1.6 petrol and 2.0 diesel, is the introduction of standard-fit dual zone air conditioning. Other revisions include unique blue interior trim, a new alloy wheel design, and some chrome detailing on the rear. The TR also has nine airbags, and a six-speaker stereo.
The SR is priced from £14,495 – £690 more than the existing Auris T3, but with £1,495 in extra equipment. The TR is priced from £12,995, working out £390 less than the equivalent T3, which with the added equipment means extra value of over £655.
 
‘Urban-friendly' Hummer
The 2008 versions of Hummer's smallest variant, the H3, is now on sale in right-hand drive.
‘Smallest' is a relative term of course – including tyres, the wheels are a gargantuan 32 inches in diameter – but the H3 is about the length of a large family saloon. It's available in three trims, SE, Luxury and Adventure, all with properly capable four-wheel drive hardware.
With a 3.7-litre five-cylinder petrol engine, producing 242bhp and 242lb ft of torque, it isn't exactly green. Official fuel consumption is 20.9mpg combined, while the CO2 emissions figure of 327g/km puts it firmly in the ‘gas guzzler' taxation band. Prices start at £26,495.

Dangerous driver left baby brain damaged
Evidence of high speed gathered from airbag
 
A motorist could face up to two years in jail after being convicted of causing a crash which left a baby brain damaged and in need of 24-hour care.
A jury at Birmingham Crown Court found Antonio Singh Boparan, 21, guilty of dangerous driving after he ploughed into a jeep carrying 11-month old Cerys Edwards in Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands, in November 2006.
Cerys, now aged two, suffered brain damage and remains unable to breath without a ventilator, the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) said.

