For generations of women those three little words, 'It's a boy', heard at the end of their confinement brought a sense of enormous relief and pride in a job well done. If a woman managed to repeat the process, her status as a fecund mother of sons was assured. An heir and a spare - strong, healthy men who would fight for and protect her. They would carry on the dynasty, uphold the family name and feed and provide for her in old age. If, on the other hand, she brought forth only girls, she might at best be set aside or at worst despatched in favour of another brood mare with whom the lord and master might make further attempts to fulfil his paternal duty.

Henry VIII provides us with the best example of this quest for healthy male offspring. Divorced, beheaded, died, divorced, beheaded, survived! The fate of six women who succeeded between them in producing only two girls and one sickly boy. And, dammit, it was a girl who finally took up the royal reins and ruled for forty years of relative peace and prosperity. Elizabeth I did a jolly good job as queen with her declared 'heart and stomach of a man', but refused to marry or breed, more concerned with securing her own position than looking to the future. As a consequence she ended the Tudor line and opened the door for the only male heir around. James I of England and VI of Scotland was the son of the hated Scot, Mary, and ushered in a new royal dynasty, the Stuarts. Henry must have roared with fury in his grave. All his efforts to keep a Tudor on the throne had come to naught.

For those of us reproducing in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, in Western society at least, the gender landscape into which our children are born is infinitely more complex.

The first hints that things had begun to change profoundly came in the late '90s when the journalist Alison Pearson wrote in the magazine Having a Baby in 1999: 'The sun is setting on sons these days. Girls are hot, girls are desirable, girls are the future. Holy mother, girls are the new boys.' She told how, in antenatal classes and maternity wards across the land, the days of parents taking pride in a son and heir were over, and claimed to detect 'an almost panicky craving for girls'. It led to a rash of articles in which parents, psychologists and experts in genetic manipulation were trotted out to extol the virtues of girls and the difficulties of raising boys - writer upon writer fell upon the old stereotypes.

In the Sunday Times in July 1999 Judith O'Reilly and Lois Jones quoted Linda Davies, a public relations consultant in London who was delighted when the midwives popped her baby onto her and said 'It's a girl'. Davies commented, 'You always have a daughter, but you can lose a son . . . Boys get married and leave their mothers, whilst daughters grow closer to their mothers as they grow up.' I really don't know what fantasy world she lives in. It seems rare now for a child of either gender to remain close to their parents as adults.

My anecdotal evidence suggests that women are often only too glad to break away from their mother's apron strings as they grow into adulthood, and are now deeply resentful of the assumption that it's a daughter's job to provide comfort and care for ageing parents, whilst sons can evade the responsibility. In the case of my own elder son, verging on adulthood at twenty, he feels a great desire to stay in touch with us now he's left home, with frequent phone calls and meetings, generally to ask for advice, share his enthusiasms or to be taken out for a decent meal. All of which seem perfectly proper reasons for a child of either sex to keep in touch with parents, but feeling duty bound to be on hand as best mate is nothing but a burdensome guilt trip.

It seems to me profoundly selfish, if not arrogant, to expect your children to become your friends. The generation gap seems too wide, and a parent's years-long role as provider and police officer is too often fraught with the conflicting messages of nurture and control ever to slide into the easy, undemanding atmosphere of friendship. We have to reconcile ourselves to the fact that it's our job to launch our children, boys and girls, into the world as rounded, confident human beings and not overwhelm them with a sense of their duty to become our best friends. They'll find those outside the family, as we did.

Linda Davies' husband, Grant Clark, a sports editor with the publisher Bloomberg, was quoted in the same article. 'I grew up with two brothers, so I know how nasty little boys can be. I haven't got a sister, so I think little girls are wonderful.' If only he'd had a little sister, then he'd have known, as all women do, that little girls are not necessarily so wonderful. It took feminism a long time to grow out of its insistence that women were, as the Canadian author Margaret Atwood put it, 'somehow gooder'. Or as the Express columnist Carol Sarler wrote early in 2003, 'Ten eleven-year-old boys were let loose in an old house for a Home Alone television experiment - and they trashed the place. Now, a year later, the project has been repeated with girls and the producers express astonishment that they destroyed nothing. Well, of course they didn't: girls would have been far too busy destroying each other!'

In the '60s and '70s, when the politics of sisterhood was at its height, it was a feminist heresy to claim that women were capable of violence or wickedness. The reaction to the Moors murderers, lan Brady and Myra Hindley was typical. Although there was ample evidence that the crimes they committed against children were a joint enterprise, it was a commonly held belief that Brady was the bad lot and Hindley was simply a woman who had come under his spell and followed his instructions out of love and devotion.

It was not until Hindley died in 2002 that the full extent of her involvement was voiced and widely accepted. The feminist journalist Yvonne Roberts told the revealing story of a meeting she'd had with Hindley a decade earlier. Chris Tchaikovsky, another feminist who ran an organisation called Women in Prison, had taken Roberts to visit Hindley. Both fully expected to find that Hindley had been unfairly demonised as the embodiment of evil, but Roberts came away with the opposite impression. At one point in their interview Roberts asked Hindley how she could have picked up a child from the street in the evening and taken her to Brady, knowing what torture would ensue.

Hindley had replied with chilling lack of regret, 'She shouldn't have been out so late.' Roberts concluded that the woman, like Brady, was a psychopathic killer, clever enough to have read the feminist literature, which suggested women's crimes were generally due to abuse by or the malign influence of a man. It was her knowledge of these arguments and ability to articulate them, Roberts believed, that had led so many of Hindley's apologists, such as Lord Longford, to seek her release.

Atwood's novel Cat's Eye, published in the late '80s, was the first literary acknowledgement of just how nasty little girls can be. Her characters didn't josh and push as little boys are expected to do (more on this in Chapters Two and Five; I use the word 'expected' advisedly), but her characters typified the power struggles that can exist among girls and the underhand ways in which they demonstrate their cruelty. There are four friends: Grace, Elaine, Carol and Cordelia. Elaine is the victim, Cordelia the bully. Here Elaine describes their meeting at the bus stop on their way to school.

'Grace is waiting there and Carol and, especially, Cordelia. Once I'm outside the house there is no getting away from them. They are on the school bus, where Cordelia stands close beside me and whispers in my ear: "Stand up straight! People are looking!"

Carol is in my classroom and it's her job to report to Cordelia what I do and say all day . . . they comment on the kind of lunch I have, how I hold my sandwich, how I chew. On the way home from school I have to walk in front of them or behind. In front is worse because they talk about how I'm walking, how I look from behind . . 

But Cordelia doesn't do these things or have this power over me because she's my enemy. Far from it. I know about enemies. There are enemies in the schoolyard, they yell things at each other and if they are boys they fight. With enemies you feel hatred, and anger. But Cordelia is my friend. She likes me. She wants to help me, they all do. They are my friends, my girlfriends. My best friends. I have never had any before and I'm terrified of losing them. I want to please.'

Cordelia's torture goes on for many months and culminates in Elaine's life being put at risk by her so-called friends. Cordelia doesn't like the hat Elaine's wearing, takes it from her head and throws it over a bridge onto frozen water (the novel is set in Canada). Elaine is forced to go and fetch it, gets into trouble on the ice and expects the girls will be waiting to rescue her. They haven't. They've simply walked away. Not necessarily such sugar and spice, then.

Nevertheless, the fiction that girls are good and boys are bad persists. In the same Sunday Times article in which Davies and Clark appeared (see page 9) the respected psychologist at University College London, Dorothy Einon, seemed to perpetuate the myth.

'Many of the reasons why girls used to be unacceptable in society no longer exist. In addition they are not usually going to be involved in crime or violence, they are much less likely to die from an accident or illness and the potential for heartbreak is much less these days. Economic and social attitudes have been transformed. Girls no longer have to be married off at great expense. Parents are no longer worried about their reputations being besmirched by unmarried daughters becoming pregnant.'

No acknowledgement that girls are capable of violence, and do, increasingly, as their movements become less restricted than in the past, get involved in crime, and that class and poverty are as likely to influence behaviour patterns and aspirations as is gender.

Then the Dads began to pitch in. Martin Amis, Nicholas Coleridge and Peter Kingston all wrote about how fathers were going 'Girl Crazy' and valuing their daughters where in other times they might have cheered only the arrival of a son. Girls, they claimed, ARE sugar and spice and all things nice. Cleaner, cleverer, less likely to knock over the Ming vases and faithfully Daddy's girl to the end. At the time I wrote a newspaper article, which, yet again, was my infuriated response to such gender stereotyping.

'How useful it will be, now it's no longer quite the done thing to replace the older model in middle age with a younger spouse or girlfriend, to have a daughter to trot out ˆ la Chirac, Clinton, John Major or Martin Bell. A son, says the adage is yours till he takes a wife, a girl is yours for life.

So, what shall we do with the slugs, snails and puppy dog's tails? The juvenile action men, exam failures, university dropouts, car jackers and grunts? The guided missiles set to destroy sitting rooms and the social order? Suffocation is said to be effective. Starvation works well, preferably on a hillside or in an abandoned house, so you don't hear the pitiful cries. 

