What is IBS?

So. You've been diagnosed with IBS. You've been told it's due to stress - it's all in the mind - and been given tablets to reduce the pain. You've tried all sorts of remedies: herbal treatments, alternative medicine, tranquillizers, advice from friends, but nothing has worked.

And now, although you can see why the doctor says it's due to stress (because the more IBS you have, the more stressed you get), you begin to think, 'But lots of people have stress. Some lead far more stressful lives than I do. If it's due to stress, why doesn't everyone have it?'

There may be a number of types of IBS caused by different conditions. Doctors have various opinions and try various treatments. But there is one type of IBS which can be controlled by the New IBS Low-Starch Diet. It has nothing to do with stressful living. It is physiological (caused by your body) and not psychological ('all in the mind').

What are the symptoms?

The symptoms begin with a feeling of fullness or bloating in the gut (you may think of it as your stomach) usually quite soon after a meal. This can happen after any meal, but in my experience it is more usual after the evening meal.

The bloating may begin during the meal (depends how long you linger at the table) and will increase until you feel the need to loosen your belt. It will then become a disquieting ache, turning into small, nagging jabs of pain, and within several hours it will become waves of agony surging through your distended stomach - sometimes worse than labour pains.

At this stage you will long to lie down. Sometimes you'll be at a dinner party and will have to keep smiling and enduring the pain. But if you're at home, you will, no doubt, go to bed. I've been in such pain at this stage that I couldn't walk up the stairs - I've had to crawl.

Throughout the night the pain will continue in waves, moving from the right side of your abdomen to the left, and then lower down. Some people may also vomit at this stage. When the pain gets lower you will perhaps be able to pass a bowel motion. Some people will have diarrhoea; some (like me) will be constipated. Both conditions are associated with IBS.

Usually by morning the pain has receded, although you may still have a feeling of bloatedness, which will be with you during the day and will slowly increase until your evening meal, at which stage the whole cycle will begin again. In my experience, this cycle sometimes goes on for about three days before subsiding.

Sometimes, however, the pain can be so severe that you may be admitted to hospital with volvulus. This is a twisting of part of the bowel caused by the build-up of gas in your intestine. It may untwist spontaneously or by manipulation, but surgical exploration is often performed.

When you are younger you may experience IBS less severely and only occasionally - but enough to recognise the signs and learn to dread them. As you get older, it will usually become more frequent. In my case I can remember experiencing the pain and bloating as a child. But it wasn't until my teenage years that it began to affect me badly. By middle age it was a permanent and desperate part of my life, occurring almost every night.

By this time I had been diagnosed as having IBS, but no doctor could give me a satisfactory explanation of what caused it. I was always told only that it was due to stress. This, of course, made me feel that it was all my fault.

What does IBS actually mean?

The term 'IBS' has become so well known that we tend to gloss over what it actually is. It is in fact a vague description for what may be a range of symptoms. The words 'irritable bowel syndrome' have no specific medical meaning. They mean just what they say: your bowel becomes (for some unknown reason) irritable - or upset. Why this irritation comes about, or what causes it, is not understood.

But one thing doctors do know, and despair of, is that IBS is increasing in both Western and Oriental populations. Indeed, it has become so common that it could be called an epidemic. It is estimated that between 14 and 22 per cent of the general population suffer the symptoms at some time in their life. Two-thirds of IBS sufferers are women. The onset of symptoms occurs before the age of thirty-five years in 50 per cent of patients. For men it is often younger, at around the age of twenty. Constipation is more common in women and diarrhoea more common in men.

If doctors don't know what causes IBS, how do they diagnose it?

In 1992, a group of bowel experts met in Rome and described the main symptoms of IBS. They agreed that if a patient had some or all of these symptoms for at least three months, and if they recurred, the patient could be said to be suffering from IBS. The symptoms include abdominal discomfort or pain which is: 

• relieved by defecation (a bowel motion);
• and/or associated with a change in how often you have a bowel motion;
• and/or associated with a change in the consistency of your stool (faeces becoming harder or softer).

In addition, if there are two or more of the following symptoms at least 25 per cent of the time, the diagnosis will be confirmed as IBS:

• abdominal bloating and distension;
• more than three stools a day or less than three a week;
• erratic and/or unsatisfactory bowel motions (straining, urgency or a feeling of incomplete evacuation);
• mucus or slime in the stool;
• nausea or loss of appetite.

Some IBS-like symptoms are signs of other bowel diseases

There are other, more serious bowel conditions, such as Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis, which may also include symptoms similar to IBS. You should be sure to tell your doctor if you have experienced very dramatic abdominal pain coupled with loss of weight, pain or difficulty in swallowing food, any blood in your stools or if they are very dark in colour, or if you have had any fever.

If you have recently had an abdominal operation, if a near relative, such as mother, father, sister or brother has developed bowel cancer under the age of fifty years, or if, as a woman, you have any vaginal discharge, period problems or pain on intercourse, you should also be sure to inform your doctor. He may need to arrange for you to see a hospital specialist.

Diverticulosis is another bowel condition which will give similar symptoms. This is when weaknesses develop in the wall of the bowel, forming small pouches or diverticulae. Partly digested food can become trapped in these pouches, causing putrefaction and a build-up of gas. Diverticulosis usually develops as one gets older and it is perfectly possible to have this condition as well as, or as a result of, IBS, because it is usually caused by years of constipation.

My search for the cause of my IBS

Diagnosis of my IBS was made long before the experts in Rome had drawn up that list of symptoms. On the basis of that list I might not have been diagnosed as having IBS.

My abdominal discomfort or pain could not usually be relieved by defecation - because I was always constipated and had particular trouble defecating when I was having an IBS attack.

I could not say that the IBS pain was associated with a change in how often I had a bowel motion - because for as long as I could remember my bowel motions had been few and far between. Sometimes I would go as long as four weeks without a bowel motion.

Also, the IBS pain was not due to a change in the consistency of my stool - it had always been as hard as a rock.

Although my constipation was miserable and uncomfortable, it didn't necessarily mean I had pain and bloating. I could never work out why or when I would get IBS symptoms, or what had caused them.

I tried anything and everything

When I first began going to doctors to find out why I had pain and bloating, I was told I had spastic bowel, which was caused by stress. I went through a series of barium X-rays and was told that I had a megacolon (long, narrow colon) with weak muscle tone. The only advice I was given was to 'keep regular', so I began taking laxatives.

The laxatives made me feel sick, but did increase my number of bowel motions. However, they made no difference at all to the pain and bloating.

Then the new phrase, irritable bowel syndrome, began to be used and I was diagnosed with IBS. This made no difference to the advice I was given about my condition, which was still thought to be due to stress, but I was told that eating more roughage would help.

My mother had always believed in healthy eating and I'd been eating brown bread and bran muffins from childhood, but now I began to redouble my efforts. Muesli, bran and wholemeal bread were part of almost every meal. Not only did it make no difference to the pain and bloating, but I began to get more constipated, so I increased my intake of laxatives.

I then heard that yoghurt was good for the bowel, so I began each day with a carton of yoghurt mixed with bran. It made no difference to the IBS and I continued to get more constipated. So once again I increased my intake of laxatives.

Finally I began taking various herbal pills and remedies, trying all sorts of alternative medicine, but the relentless increase in both my constipation and my IBS never stopped.

I was told I had an IBS personality. Of course I did! I was often depressed, anxious, hostile, miserable and fatigued. Anyone suffering constant mysterious, undiagnosed pain goes through these moods. Sometimes I used to think I was a hypochondriac, neurotically producing symptoms of all sorts of illnesses, even convinced I had undiagnosed gall bladder and bowel cancer. I can remember going to bed and crying with weakness and pain, feeling black moods of despair and anger.

IBS is a complex problem. There may be a number of causes. But it's all too easy to convince sufferers that it's all in the mind. Almost everyone experiences stress or emotional problems of some kind, so it's very convenient for doctors to be able to diagnose 'stress' as the cause of a patient's symptoms - no one can argue with it. It's also guaranteed to increase stress by making many patients - particularly women - feel guilty about their inability to manage their relationships/job/children. The vicious cycle can escalate as some patients attempt to blame their family or employers for their stress. Some of us slink away timidly, ashamed of bothering the doctor, vowing to try harder to overcome our stress. Others opt for tranquillizers or a course of counselling. But none of these options will help the patient to overcome IBS. Stress is the worst and most unhelpful diagnosis a doctor can give.

I began to get lucky

In 1986, when I was at my wits' end, I was lucky enough to tune into a TV documentary about Dr John Hunter's work on food allergies, which claimed that eliminating wheat from the diet could successfully eliminate IBS symptoms. I immediately gave up everything made from wheat flour, wholegrains or wheat bran, and experienced a dramatic decrease in pain and bloating. However, about eighteen months later the symptoms began to return sporadically.

In 1987 I was admitted to St Mark's Hospital in London for gastrointestinal tests to see whether perhaps I had a condition called Hirschprung's disease, which is paralysis of part of the bowel. I was sure the surgeons would operate to remove the offending part and that I would live happily ever after.

