JUST. . .THINK! 

The single greatest tool you have for changing your life, creating personal success, being happy, and living the life you wish, is within you. This tool is the power of active thought. 

Your ability to think is the key to changing your life. Your mind is the most advanced organic matter in the known universe, more powerful that any computer in existence. It never stops working, it has spent 240 million years in nature's research and development laboratory. It is the source of all your emotions, beliefs and abilities. It is at your disposal – how you use it is up to you. 

And yet it seems not only that most people fail to utilise this phenomenal resource, but that they do not know how to use it because they never realised they could. 

Your mind is capable of solving every challenge you encounter; it is at your command. However, it is exactly like a computer in that it needs instruction before it can take action – albeit a phenomenally sophisticated and priceless computer that is capable of achieving more than you could ever believe possible. 

Your ability to change your life will be found in your ability to harness and master the power of thought – the power that is in your brain. Just as a computer needs software to operate far beyond its basic internal operating system, so we too need software to operate at our highest level far beyond our basic internal responses such as breathing, blinking and so on. The big difference is that unlike computers, which rely on someone else creating the software for them, we can create the personal software for ourselves. That is the power of conscious thought. 

A man who does not think for himself, does not think at all.
Oscar Wilde (1854–1900) 

WHAT IS THOUGHT? 

That is a tough one. From the mystics to the neuro-physiologists there are many ideas about what exactly a thought is. So let me be clear about something: I do not know. I have read many books and essays on the subject, and if I had a definitive answer I would be delighted to share it with you. Sadly, I do not, so I cannot. In reality it is not important. It is far more important that you understand that your thoughts will have a massive impact on your life and that you really do have the power to create your personal success. 

Many writers on success and personal development talk about the power of the mind. They range from esoteric mystics to those proponents of self-hypnosis. Their language and perspective vary greatly. But they are all talking about the same thing – harnessing the power of the mind to transform our lives. 

Our personal power is found in the force of our thoughts – it is our real strength

When we are exposed to the same thing again and again, when all the books we read repeat the same concepts, it is all too easy to get a feeling of ‘I've heard this stuff before.' That is one of the major challenges we face, because as we hear the same thing over and over, it becomes tired and clichéd in our minds, and we stop hearing the truth contained within. But the truth is: change the way you think and you can change the way you live. 

It doesn't matter that you've read it before. It is better to have one book whose knowledge you understand and apply, than a thousand books whose knowledge you only know and recite. 

Do you want the next ten years of your life to be exactly the same as the last ten years? Or do you want them to be better, more fulfilling, with more professional success, more love, travel, moments of joy, simple happiness, feelings of fulfilment, money, laughter, well-being and fun. Take note that if you do nothing then the next ten years will be exactly the same as the last ten, because nothing changes until you change, and you cannot change until you change the way you think. 

All that a man achieves and all that he fails to achieve is the direct result of his own thoughts.
James Allen (1864–1912) 

We take our minds for granted. We accept the opinions and the beliefs that lie at the root of how we think. We assume little control over who and how we are. We imagine that is just the way it is. It isn't. Your current pattern of thought is responsible for how you feel about yourself and where you are in your life – the good news is you can change it if you want to. 

YOU ARE IN CONTROL

Your thoughts and your will-power reside in your mind and, if you are an average person with average brain function, that means you have 100% control over both of them. 

I imagine you are asking exactly what is this mysterious invisible force I have never seen that people call will-power? Does it really exist? Do I have any? 

OK: let's deal with this conclusively, so as you read other sections of this book you will not have to question whether they are applicable to you. I want you to realise they are – and to do so I have a little exercise for you. 

Lift your right hand and touch the top of your head with it very, very gently. Now that you have done this, I want you to answer one very important and life-changing question. 

How did you make your right hand touch the top of your head? 

Think about it for a moment: how did you make your arm and hand do exactly what you wanted it to do? 

How? 

You will probably think, ‘Well I just did! I thought it and the arm followed the instruction'. 

The movement can rightly be seen as the consequence of an act of thought or personal will-power . If you are a neurophysiologist you might think in terms of synaptic pathways and biochemical neurotransmitters. But what triggered them – what started the process? Whatever you believe is not as important as realising and remembering that you made it happen. It wasn't a reflex like a foot rising when the knee is knocked. By thinking, and unconsciously sending an instruction to the part of your brain that looks after the motor functions related to movement, you made it happen. 

Is it really such a leap of faith to imagine that the same thought, the same will-power that enabled you to raise your arm could also enable you to change your life? 

It is wrong to believe that you do not have will-power – we all have will-power. However your ability positively to engage it is what will accelerate your progress

We are the sum total of our thoughts, yet many of them are so ingrained that we follow them without any awareness. 

When you drive to work, get dressed in the morning or pick your nose in the car at the traffic lights, you are not doing it consciously although you are doing it automatically. You do not know you are doing it. How often have you driven to work without having any clear idea or memory of the journey? The same can be said of getting dressed in the morning or, I am sorry to say, picking your nose. If you don't believe me just watch drivers in cars stopped at traffic lights, and note how many have a finger hovering in the region of their nose completely unaware that others can see. 

The revelation of thought takes men out of servitude into freedom
Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882) 

There are some people who are always late. When you ask them why, they say, ‘I can't help it' or ‘It's not my fault', or – my favourite – ‘I come from a family of bad timekeepers'. They tell you as though it is an ancient family tradition that they are keen to uphold. In reality they are late because they ‘think late'. I don't mean they are thinking about punctuality at a conscious level. Rather they have come to accept that they are late so often that they no longer challenge themselves about it, and just assume it's part of who they are. 

Either you shape your thoughts or your thoughts shape you

You can choose to take control of your life, and in the process create the right kind of thinking and apply will-power; or you can do nothing. If you choose to do nothing then nothing will change. The next phase of your life will be exactly the same as the last. You will carry on comfortably making claims of being unlucky, of being destined to be poor, late, unhappy – or whatever else you choose to believe you are. 

All actions find their origins in thought

The more powerfully held and committed the thought, the more powerful the action that follows it. Do not underestimate the power of thought. It is essential that your thoughts are positive and focused on success, and that you become the master of your will. Do not for a moment believe that the changes you seek to make cannot be realised because some things are ‘just the way they are'. They aren't. Change your thoughts and apply the power of your will. 

You can change your life any moment you want to, but there is a condition – success in life is not found in how we work, but in the way that we think

Today's action becomes tomorrow's habit.
Anon

‘Why do winners win?' It's an age-old question. I have read about, spoken to and learnt from anyone I felt could help me find the answer to this question. When I put my findings to the test I see that in the lives of many historical characters, inventors, explorers, breakthrough academics and record-breaking athletes, some common timeless features emerge. Whatever they achieved had existed in their mind long before they accomplished and experienced it for real. They had thought consciously about the goal they were seeking to realise; it took shape in their imaginations, they pursued that image with an unbending will to succeed, and they took action steps to make it happen. 

This whole process might be summed up, as ‘We become what we think about'. Or we become what we consciously dream about when we have willed our thoughts to convert dreams into action. 

Happiness is a state of mind

JUST DO IT

Whenever I used to buy any electronic device I would rush home and switch it on as soon as possible. Perhaps, if it looked a bit complicated, I might skim through the manual – and try my best to figure out how to operate it. Then when I had a technical problem I would call a friend of mine who was always able to tell me what to do. It was after my fourth call one day that he told me in exasperation and very firmly ‘To R T D M'. When I asked him what he meant he was kind enough to translate the acronym for me: read the damn manual. 

No matter how well intentioned our actions they will be wasted if we don't do the right things at the right time. To get the most out of this book I would encourage you to do the exercises. Don't think that they do not apply to you because you get it intellectually. Think again, and remember that knowledge alone is not power. Applied knowledge is power. 

So break the habit of a lifetime and take positive action. 

Our self-image and our habits tend to go together. Change one and you will automatically change the other. 
Maxwell Maltz (1899–1974) 

I would like you to do the following exercise (unless you're driving a car or operating heavy machinery in which case you shouldn't be reading this book either). 

Exercise

10 Years From Today

SIT DOWN RELAX GET COMFORTABLE, AND DON'T FALL ASLEEP! 





