The expensive public schools, often costing parents over £100 a
year, gave boys the classical education which conferred gentlemanly
status. But even here the quality of instruction doled out by ill-paid
schoolmasters was often low and the curriculum was unappealing to
all but the most assiduous scholars. One of the Revd Sydney Smith's
witty letters poured scorn on these schools' obsession with the classics,
which involved pursuing ‘needless [linguistic] perfection' and becoming
‘perfectly acquainted with the intrigues of Heathen gods'.79 It could
be a debilitating regime, as George Barlow junior found to his cost at
Eton, and it would not bear decent fruit, in his opinion, unless the
boy was ‘thoroughly grounded' in the classics beforehand. This may
explain why many Raj parents (like Francis Pemberton) were disappointed
with their sons' progress at these famous schools. George
Barlow's final verdict on Eton was pious and perceptive: ‘No where
does Idleness, Luxury, and Vice of every description meet with more
frequent or better opportunities for exercise, greater success and
encouragement and less restraint. . . . It is the best, or the worst of
places.'80 His clever brother Henry was clearly more susceptible to
Etonian vices, as his uncle reports:
The bustle or rather the dissipation of Eton seems to have totally
changed his disposition. Before he went to Eton he was never
without a book in his hand, now he seldom looks at one, he is idle,
negligent in every way, and is so often flog'd that Mr Goodall says
he fears he has lost all sense of shame.81
Public schoolboys often rebelled against such cruel and authoritarian
regimes – and in doing so they had the sympathy of Sir John
Shore, who thought flagellation of youths ‘intolerably blackguard'.82
In 1770 boys used pistols at Winchester. At Westminster in 1793
they imitated French revolutionaries by tearing up paving stones and
planting the red cap of liberty on the Founders' Tower. In 1797 Rugby
boys rose against a headmaster known as the ‘black tiger'.83 Eton,
Harrow, Charterhouse and Shrewsbury had similar troubles. So did
Haileybury, where both William and Henry Barlow took part in
‘unhappy disturbances' involving drunkenness and firearms. George
Udny Yule, the son of an Indian Army officer, found that, as well as
‘long lessons in languages we know scarcely anything of', there were
drunken rows, with ‘plenty of windows broken and more doors kicked
through'.84 Nevertheless, most Haileybury pupils acquired sufficient
administrative and linguistic knowledge to be able to serve in India.
Parents often preferred to send their children to one of the many
small private academies that proliferated at this time. These also had
the advantage of being cheaper. Most catered for a dozen or so pupils,
who paid £30 or £40 a year. It was hard for Anglo-Indian parents to
judge their quality, which was variable and depended on the ability
and disposition of the proprietor. Thackeray's ‘deluded parents had
heard a favourable report' of a school at Southampton but, the writer
recalled, it was ‘governed by a horrible little tyrant who made our
lives a misery' with ‘cold, chilblains, bad dinners, not enough victuals
and caning awful!'85 Henry Pemberton, Francis's brother, wanted his
nephews removed from their Suffolk boarding school: ‘I am attacked
. . . by all my brother's Suffolk acquaintance for continuing them there.
Harry . . . is irrevocably ruined in speech.'86 But their father wished
them to stay until they were fifteen, persevering with the classical
education required for a career in the Indian Civil Service.
William Dick sent his two oldest sons to Doctor Bisset's academy so
that they would ‘have an opportunity of forming a friendship with
young gentlemen'. But two years later he found, presumably on the
evidence of their letters, that the boys were ‘very backward indeed'
and wished that he had had them educated near his relations and
their younger brother in Perth.87 Sir George Barlow initially chose Mr
Roberts's school because the proprietor had a ‘pleasing and sensible
wife' who, having no children of her own, could ‘devote her whole
time to the care of the boys‘. Later on, though, William Barlow lost
confidence in Mr Roberts. As the fourteen-year-old George testified,
the schoolmaster had a ‘deficiency of patience', relied too heavily on
‘a stick or a rod to inculcate knowledge' and could only ‘instil the first
rudiments of the dead languages'.88 So the younger boys were sent to
Mr Oakes's school at Linton – with varying degrees of success. Richard,
aged seven, was grateful at least that he had not been severely punished
‘and I hope to be such a good boy as not to deserve it'.89
By this time there were also some girls' private schools, which
concentrated heavily on ‘moral training and genteel accomplishments',
designed as ‘coaching for success in the game of matrimony'.90 The
Twickenham school attended by Eliza and Charlotte Barlow seems to
have been typical. Fashionably situated near London, it was run by
good spinster ladies who ‘paid the strictest and most minute attention
to [the girls'] improvement in every useful and virtuous accomplishment'.
91 It is difficult to establish exactly what the girls were
taught. But they both had excellent handwriting and could write in
French; they referred to music and drawing lessons and one of Eliza's
letters sought to impress her father with a long account of a lecture
she had attended on Electricity. However there is evidence that this
school, like others of its kind, imposed an ‘austere regime' and ‘close
confinement', leaving pupils with ‘their constitutions undermined'.92
Robert Barlow feared that his nieces' health was being impaired ‘by
the anxiety and fatigue inseparable from their situation'. His wife
worried that Eliza ‘grows rather too much en bon point [podgy]' and
resolved to ‘make her take more exercise'. In 1806 Charlotte needed
sea air and the following year her health was ‘most astonishingly
improved by the kind care which has been taken of her for the three
weeks she has been at home'.93 Both girls did fulfil the object of their
education by finding eligible husbands – though the early collapse of
Eliza's marriage suggests that she chose hers too hastily.
It was more usual for well-off girls to be educated by tutors or
governesses, as happened in the case of the younger Barlow daughters.
They received such an excellent grounding from Miss Page that
William Barlow found them ‘infinitely better informed than the boys
in everything except Latin'. The girls' letters from the schoolroom
showed off their classical learning:
I have read the Grecian history and I like it very much; the following
are the characters I like the best, that is, Socrates, Leonidas, Miltiades,
Aristides, Eponimondas, Pelopidas and Alexander. . . . I am
sure you will smile at the idea of me reading Homer's Iliad; because
you will think I do not understand it, but I assure you I do, with
the assistance of Miss Page who is so kind as to explain every difficult
passage. . . . I hope you will excuse all the mistakes I have made, as
we always compose our letters ourselves.
Thegirls obviously enjoyed Miss Page'scompanytoo; Louisa liked their
daily walks and was pleased that ‘Miss Page is so kind as to read some of
Cicero's and Lord Chesterfield's letters to us'. Miss Page herself showed
an obvious concern for the ‘delightful children' during the divorce
case.94 Not all governesses proved as satisfactory. Colonel William
Kirkpatrick (Resident at Hyderabad 1793–7) found the letters of his
daughters' governess ‘very vulgar' and concluded that she ‘was not
qualified to give that sort of polish to the mind or deportment of the
children which I could wish to distinguish them'. He instructed his
father, who had care of the girls, to place them in a boarding school.95
Many of these children were lucky enough to have relations who
visited them and had them to stay for the holidays. In fact, schoolmasters
sometimes complained that frequent visits from parents'
indulgent friends interfered with the discipline they were trying to
maintain. Without such visits, however, children could be entirely at
the mercy of their teachers, though some claimed that harsh treatment
made men of them. Lieutenant-General Sir John Bennet Hearsey attributed
his soldierly powers of endurance to the hardships he suffered at
Manor House School in 1796–8 when he had no one to protect him and
he was ‘made into a regular household drudge'. His mother's return to
England ‘put an end to all this, and I was then treated like the other
boys'.96 The danger of maltreatment was increased if a child were left
at a school for years without going home for the holidays, as was likely
to happen in Anglo-Indian families. The percipient Dr Dick worried
about this risk when he moved his boys to Westminster School: ‘What
care will be taken of them there, I cannot guess, but there they must
now remain. . . . The very business of vacations alone at the English
schools is perplexing beyond measure and distressing to children
whose parents are at a distance.'97 There is no record of how the Dick
boys fared at Westminster, ‘the most fashionable school in England
. . . [but] notorious for its violence and lawlessness'.98 Perhaps their
experience was happier than that of James Anthony Froude, who was
bullied and starved there for an unbroken period of three and a half
years. It left, he said, ‘indelible marks on my memory and perhaps on
my character'.99
Direct and apparently uncensored evidence of what such long
periods at school felt like appears in the letters of George Yule and his
brother Robert. Even though their father, Major William Yule, had
retired from the Indian Army by the time he sent them to Dr Swete's
school near Bristol, the boys seem not to have gone home for the
holidays. Their letters tell of the long school day during which they
got little play and ‘scarcely any dinner', and of not daring to speak out
loud in the schoolroom or to run about and climb when they went out
walking. George was sorry ‘to hear that the pony is ill and the cat
dirty'; Robert was anxious that his mother should ‘learn baby to say
Georgy and Bobby'. They longed for more letters from home. Saddest
of all are their accounts of the holidays when ‘most of the boys are
gone'. Robert begged Mama to let them come home: ‘I cannot help
crying when I think of it.'100 The boys' pleas may have had an effect,
for after a couple of years the Yule parents removed them from Dr
Swete's care. But as the lads grew into adults the family separated once
again. George entered the Bengal Civil Service and became Sir George
Yule, while Robert went on to distinguish himself in the Indian Army
before being killed in the Mutiny of 1857. Their younger brother,
Henry, incidentally, also went out to India and produced the famous
glossary of Anglo-Indian words known as Hobson-Jobson.
Why, since English schools were so often unsatisfactory, did Anglo-
Indian parents not make greater efforts to educate their children in
India, where they could have kept a closer eye on their progress and
welfare? They could, like the French residents of Chandernagore and
Pondicherry, have hired tutors and governesses or set up small academies.
101 But such arrangements might not have produced the successful
English (or Scottish, or Irish) gentlemen and ladies the nabobs
wished their sons and daughters to become. In pursuit of gentility small
children were dispatched on dangerous six-month journeys halfway
round the world, to be received by relations and guardians they had
never met, not knowing when (or whether) they would ever see their
parents again. Coping with these physical and emotional hardships,
their parents believed, would help to give them the character needed
for success in a tough world of commercial competition, imperial
adventure and naval conflict. 

