SPRING 2008 NEWSLETTER 




"NO SILVER BULLET" SAYS TANYA BYRON
We reported last year that the Prime Minister expressed his personal concern about "all the violence that kids can see so easily now".  In an interview on the BBC Radio 4 Today programme he described violence and pornography on video and the internet as "terrible issues" and he announced the appointment of clinical psychiatrist Dr Tanya Byron to conduct a review of the situation.  

Dr Byron issued a call for evidence and it has been reported that 400 submissions were sent in for consideration.  Speaking at the Oxford Media Convention in January Dr Byron said that there was "no silver bullet" that would solve the problem.  She observed that "parents don't understand the risks posed by the internet" and press reports said she is expected to recommend a single classification system for video games in her report to be published in March 2008.  Her solutions are likely to focus on greater information for parents and voluntary actions from the computer and gaming industries.  

A few days before the Convention, the Prime Minister again expressed concern about computer games that show characters surviving being stabbed, but he cannot ban them.  He said: "I am very worried about video and computer games.  The industry has some responsibility to society and needs to exercise that responsibility."  Within a fortnight of Mr Brown's comments EastEnders on BBC1 TV portrayed another stabbing which the BBC said was justified by the context of the storyline!  

The online petition to the Prime Minister launched by mediawatch-uk in July 2007 calling for a reduction in violence and swearing on television closed on 10 January 2008 with 2,111 signatures.  

In a typically robust submission to Dr Byron mediawatch-uk said: 
"We believe it is a serious error of judgement to exclude the impact and influence of Film and Television on children and young people from the terms of this Review.  Our monitoring of more than 1,000 films screened repeatedly by the five terrestrial television channels over more than ten years, shows that the use of firearms in fictional violence is by far the most commonly portrayed violence, followed by violent assaults and then the use of knives and other offensive weapons.  It is precisely this kind of crime and disorder that has become such a problem in our society.  
We do not doubt that Mr Brown's concern is real bearing in mind that he now has young children who, no doubt, make the same demands as other children.  However, by not including Film and Television in this Review he has left out two of the primary sources of the very problem he has identified.  

In a meeting with Dr Byron we said our case for including Film and Television was substantially strengthened because of the latest developments enabling the downloading and viewing on-demand of TV programmes and films via the Internet.  
We said: "With so much emphasis now on and huge investment in, downloading programmes to view ‘on-demand' from competing broadcasting websites, the purpose of this Review could be seriously undermined.  We questioned the strength and effectiveness of existing regulations aimed at protecting the under 18s from harmful and offensive material in this new ‘downloading' environment.  In such circumstances the watershed, which broadcasters use to excuse excesses is an irrelevance."
The Byron Review

NEW CULTURE SECRETARY WELCOMED
Following the recent resignation of Peter Hain from the cabinet Andy Burnham MP (Leigh, Lancs) has been appointed Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport. Mr Burnham, said he had moved into his "dream job".  His brief includes several high-profile projects including the switch from analogue to digital television.  
Mr Burnham said it was "a fantastic time" to become culture secretary, "with the thriving cultural and arts sector in the country, preparations for the Olympic Games well under way and of course my family's home city this year is crowned as European City of Culture.  Anybody who knows me knows that I will put my heart and soul into this job.  "mediawatch-uk welcomes this appointment and we wish Mr Burnham every success hoping that under his tenure greater priority will be given to media standards.

THANK YOU...
We thank all those members and supporters who took the trouble to sign our online petition to the Prime Minister and we thank you, too, for all the many kind expressions of support we receive.

AN INNOCENT BOTTLE OF SAUCE?
We can all think of dramas or situation comedies which innocently used various props, like a bottle of sauce, to give the impression of realism and authenticity and we have all become accustomed to the advertising breaks on commercial television channels.  

However, a new development promises to change the character of commercial broadcasting in Britain for ever.  
In November 2007 the European Commission gave the go-ahead for products to be deliberately placed in programmes as a way of advertising good and services.  This radical change of policy for British broadcasting has come about largely because of pressure from advertisers who complain that the latest generation of television recorders enables viewers to skip past the adverts and so their huge funding of commercial television will in future be wasted unless the rules change to allow "product placement".  

The EC has said that such advertising techniques may not be used in news or current affairs or children's programmes or in religious services.  Commercial television differs from the BBC in that programmes are made to deliver audiences to advertisers.  This is not to say that there is no desire in the commercial TV sector to make good programmes for their own sake but the truth is that because Television now has to compete fiercely with other media, such as viewing DVDs, playing computer games and surfing the Internet, more ingenious ways of marketing have become necessary to ensure exposure to TV advertising is achieved.  

In 1996 the BBC commissioned a programme entitled ‘Tomorrow's Television' from Goldwyn Associates.  This very informative programme predicted that products, such as cars, would be shown in a film and it would be possible to switch to an advertising promotion for the car and from this ask the local dealer to bring the car around in your favourite colour and interior trim for you to test drive.  The Ford Motor Corporation in America has set up a new department that deals exclusively with Hollywood to plan how Ford cars can be placed in movies and TV programmes.  

Whilst mediawatch-uk has some sympathy for advertisers we are highly critical of the media establishment for failing to initiate any meaningful public debate or discussion about this most important change of broadcasting policy.  It will mean that programmes will unashamedly become surreptitious vehicles for marketing and we all need to be aware of this.  

mediawatch-uk has been advised by the Director General of the Advertising Standards Authority that "product placement" advertising was not contract by Ofcom to them in November 2004.  Christopher Graham told us that the new Audio-Visual Media Services Directive does relax the rules on Product Placement but the implementation will be a matter for Ofcom."

Additional information
Pedigree Paves Way for Product Placement on TV
Pedigree, the pet-food arm of Mars, has become the first company to fully fund a television programme on ITV in a move likely to preface wide scale product placement on commercial television in Britain.  
Pedigree is to finance Dog Rescue, a factual series for ITV1.  The commercial broadcaster is creating such shows amid expectations in the industry that the Government will give the go ahead in the next 18 months to allow product placement on television.  ITV said that it was in talks with 30 advertisers, from telecoms groups to retailers, to fund fully a range of productions, from drams to documentaries and factual programmes.  
Although at present ITV and other commercial broadcasters allow businesses to sponsor shows, full funding of programming content is new for British television. EU countries have been given the option of allowing product placement in most genres of commercial television, but not for news, sport, children's programming and current affairs.
The Times 24/1/2008
EU Directive

EU to Allow Product Placement on TV
The European Parliament has approved plans to allow limited product placement on TV and to introduce rules on ads in children's programmes.  This Directive on audiovisual media services, which aims to also cover new media services such as internet TV and on-demand TV services, will come into force in member states by the end of 2009.  In terms of product placement, the new directive broadly states that it should "in principle" be prohibited, but with certain exceptions.  News, current affairs, documentaries and children's programmes will remain free of product placement.
MediaGuardian 30/11/2007
Read more...

EU Media Services Directive approved
The European Parliament today approved the text of the Audio Visual Media Services Directive (AVMS) which had been submitted to it by the Council of Ministers. The European Parliament made no amendments to the text which the Council had agreed.  This means that European negotiations on this Directive are over.   The Directive will come into force when it is published in the Official Journal of the European Union, and we understand that this will happen at some point over the next few days. The UK and other Member States will then have two years to implement its requirements.
DCMS News 29/11/2007
Read more...

EU Sets New Digital Media Rules
European ministers have agreed on new rules for television and on-demand video on the internet, allowing more advertising and "product Placement".  The European Commission says the new version of the 1989 "TV without Frontiers" directive will make the EU's audiovisual market more competitive.  Viewers will have to be informed when product placement - putting a sponsor's product in a TV show - takes place.  
The practice will remain banned from children's news and programmes.  The new package also features the country-of-orgin principle, meaning that broadcasters are governed by the rules of the home country, even if their programmes are transmitted in other states with different rules.
BBC News Online 25/5/2007

New TV Rules for EU
The European Union is close to agreeing rules that would limit television product placement and advertising and allow cross-border broadcasters to follow the regulations of their home country, the European Commission said.  It has set out a number of proposals to member states and the European Parliament.  Viviane Reding, Information Commissioner, was confident of an agreement by the end of May on the "Audiovisual Without Frontiers" directive.
The Times 10/3/2007

PRIVILEDGED TO TALK WITH
By Pauline Webborn
"Pornography is easy to download on your mobile phone and most teenagers do it - True?"  Eight slightly bowed teenage heads nod in undeniable agreement. These were just a few of the many teenagers I have been privileged to talk with during the last few months of my work in schools around the country. Head teachers are keen for mediawatch-uk to share their concerns about the media with young people, who are spell bound by all there is to be consumed from TV and the Internet. 
The reality of how easy access to deplorable images is affecting the minds of our young people is not difficult to establish, what is of more concern, is what the long term effects of this diet of immoral garbage will have on relationships and family life in the future.  

I am encouraged by how many of these young people are keen to discuss the idea of ‘cleaning up' TV and the Internet. Many of them have never entertained such ideas and for many it is a novel and lively discussion!  Please encourage discussion with the young people you are in contact with, try suggesting they write to Andy Burnham MP (Culture Secretary) with their thoughts!  

Our website continues to attract a daily increasing number of visitors and we have been excited to see a number of new members join online. Please tell your friends to have a look, we work hard to keep the information relevant and up to date. Please let us know what you think.






