Home Secretary's proposals for Extension of Pre-Charge Detention
      
The MCB remains fully committed to prevention of terrorist criminality and to that end will support all processes which will assist in that essential matter of public security. 

However the MCB strongly opposes any extension to the existing period of pre-charge detention. Its opposition is not driven by any dogma but by stark lack of evidence in support of the need for extension. We believe that even the current period is too long, having led to the over long detention of large number of innocent persons. 

The MCB notes that the case for extension has received no support from various shades of political spectrum. It is explicitly opposed by highly knowledgeable professionals and well respected experts. MCB believes that political posturing in this sensitive area is most unhelpful to the cause of community cohesion. 

On the one hand the MCB feels encouraged by the Prime Ministers' commitment to consensual decision making on this subject, on the other hand it notes that the period of pre-charge detention is being treated as a commodity fit to drive a bargain. 

It is our considered view that any extension is wholly unnecessary and totally disproportionate. The debate surrounding this issue is seen as grossly unjust victimisation of a community under the spotlight and is likely for that reason to have the effect of fuelling anger and frustration. 

We urge our government to eradicate the roots and causes of terrorism rather than just devise measures that ostensibly deal with the symptoms of this evil. 


MCB welcomes the decision by the Sudanese Authorities
      
The Muslim Council of Britain welcomes the decision by the Sudanese authorities to release British teacher Gillian Gibbons. Ms. Gibbons was arrested and tried after allowing her students to name a teddy bear Muhammad. 

"We thank the efforts of Baroness Warsi and Lord Nazir in this matter. Their visit to Sudan to persuade the authorities to pardon Ms. Gibbons should be welcomed by all." Said Dr Muhammad Abdul Bari, Secretary General of the Muslim Council of Britain. "There was clearly no intention on the part of the teacher to deliberately insult the Islamic faith. The children in Ms Gibbons' class and their parents have all testified as to her innocence in this matter. We are glad that this has finally been recognised. Ms. Gibbons should never have been arrested in the first place. We are sure she will be warmly welcomed back to the UK by all Britons, both Muslim and non-Muslim." 


MINAB leads the way for the standard based approach towards self regulation
      
M I N A B 

29th November 2007 

MINAB leads the way for the standard based approach towards self regulation 

The Mosques and Imams National Advisory Board (MINAB) launched a wide-ranging consultation process with key stakeholders across the country on its proposed constitution and standard based approach towards self regulation of mosques and imams. 

Communities Secretary Hazel Blears said: 
"The constitution and the standards being published today are a positive sign. It shows that Muslim communities want to make the changes that will build community cohesion and ensure that mosques are playing a role at the heart of communities. It is important that mosques and community leaders now sign up and commit to working with MINAB to ensure that Muslim communities see real improvements in standards. 

The changes are important because they are coming from within the community itself. Whilst we can support them, determining the way that mosques are run is not something that the Government can do from the outside. It has to come from within." 

Chairman of the Conservative Ethnic Diversity Council Lord Sheikh said: 
“MINAB will take a very positive step providing practical advice, guidance and support which will enable the stakeholders to achieve self-regulation. It will also help to improve the quality of work they undertake and the provision of various services. 

This will enable the Muslims to be better citizens and interact more fully with other communities in the country. Furthermore, it will promote the role that Muslims play in the advancement and well being of the UK. 

The launch was attended by leading imams, Muslim scholars and community leaders and highlighted the importance of the role and steps that are being implemented to improve the involvement of women and the youth in the running of mosques.” 

Spokesperson for the steering group of MINAB said: 
“MINAB is consulting a standard based approach towards self regulation to build capacity within the Muslim community to deliver high quality services through mosques and imans. A series of road shows and focus groups across the UK will take place over the next four month.” 


Gross Overreaction from Sudanese Authorities
      
The Muslim Council of Britain deeply regrets the decision of the Sudanese authorities to jail the schoolteacher Gillian Gibbons over the naming of a teddy bear. 

"This case should have required only simple common sense to resolve. It is unfortunate that the Sudanese authorities were found wanting in this most basic of qualities. They grossly overreacted in this sad affair and this episode. Gillian should never have been arrested, let alone charged and convicted of committing a crime. We hope that Gillian will be able to return home without much further delay," said Dr Muhammad Abdul Bari, Secretary-General of the Muslim Council of Britain. 

MCB Appalled At Sudanese Decision to Charge Gillian Gibbons
      
MCB Appalled At Sudanese Decision to Charge Gillian Gibbons 

The Muslim Council of Britain is appalled at the decision of the Sudanese authorities to charge the British schoolteacher, Gillian Gibbons, for allegedly 'insulting religion'. 

"This is a disgraceful decision and defies common sense. There was clearly no intention on the part of the teacher to deliberately insult the Islamic faith. The children in Ms Gibbons' class and their parents have all testified as to her innocence in this matter. We call upon the Sudanese President, Umar al-Bashir, to intervene in this case without delay to ensure that Ms Gibbons is freed from this quite shameful ordeal," said Dr Muhammad Abdul Bari, Secretary-General of the Muslim Council of Britain. 


Launch of consultation by Mosques and Imams National Advisory Body(MINAB)
      


The Mosques and Imams National Advisory Board (MINAB), an organisation founded by an alliance of leading Muslim organisations on 29th November 2007 will launch a wide-ranging consultation process with key stakeholders across the country on its proposed Constitution. 

“This will be a historic day for the Muslim communities in the UK as it not only marks the beginning of public consultation on the proposed constitution but is also the start of consultations on the first ever draft standards for spreading good practice in the governance in mosques, educational institutions and centres for training of Imams and religious scholars”, said the spokesperson for the steering group of MINAB. 

MINAB is a wholly independent community led initiative. It came into existence because of the pressing need recognised by the Muslim community to develop places of worship and learning also as centres of excellence of good governance and community cohesion, involving all sections of the community especially women and youth. 

MINAB will build on the examples of good practice, governance and transparency of mosque management committees that are already in place in many mosques and will endeavour to provide capacity building tools to its members wherever necessary. 

“It is a body which will enable its members to regulate themselves and to raise their standards of performance to the highest level”, said a spokesperson for the Steering Group of MINAB. 


MCB calls for Release for Teacher in Sudan
      

The Muslim Council of Britain calls upon the Sudanese government to intervene in the case of the arrested schoolteacher, Ms Gillian Gibbons, with a view to ensuring that she is released without delay. 

"This is a very unfortunate incident and Ms Gibbons should never have been arrested in the first place. It is obvious that no malice was intended," said Dr Muhammad Abdul Bari, Secretary-General of the Muslim Council of Britain. 


MCB responds to PM Gordon Brown's speech on anti-terror measures
      
The Muslim Council of Britain warmly welcomes the statement today by the Prime Minister to address public security and protection while ensuring that Britain remains cohesive and proud of its multi -faith and multicultural composition. 

Dr Muhammad Abdul Bari, Secretary General of the MCB welcomed measures to increase public security and protection at rail stations, airports and shopping centres. 

“These are clearly sensible proposals designed to protect all of us from the terror threat. As such they deserve the support of all sections of our society. We remain unconvinced though of the need to increase the current period for detention of suspects before trial. However we feel reassured by the tone of the comments made by the Prime Minister in this regard in that he is committed to a consensual approach. 

We believe that there is compelling evidence which demonstrates that even the 28 day period has caused wholly unjustified and overlong detention of many persons. 

Detention of innocent persons fuels anger and alienation and despite the enormity of the threat and potential for harm, the MCB urges agencies responsible for implementing legislation on anti-terror to bear in mind that gaining and retaining the confidence of communities is critical to their work. Terrorism has no faith, and we must all redouble our collective effort to deny any succour to its recruiting sergeants. The MCB stands ready and willing to assist in every way it can.” 

The increased support that the government has announced for efforts to tackle extremism at the grassroots level is also to be welcomed. We urge the government that in seeking delivery of this essential work at the grass roots level, it must choose its partners with care and good sense ensuring that properly engaged and representative bodies are enlisted for support.”, said Dr Muhammad Abdul Bari, Secretary-General of the Muslim Council of Britain. 


MCB Response to 'lessons in Hate' article of The Times Newspaper
      
Sir 

Once again your paper asks us to submit to your divisive rhetoric which drives a wedge between British Muslims and the rest of society. Time and again we have asserted our religious obligation to seek the common good and reach out to everyone -- of all faiths and none. The MCB does not tolerate any messages of hate, whatever its source -- and have said the law should take its course. 

We cannot readily submit to your demand of 'policing' our affiliated organisations since you fail to offer us a credible evidence-base. Your research, in which you base your call for action, is characteristically flawed and the assumptions it deploys would be hastily thrown out by reputable research authorities. 

We name but two flaws. The first being that many of the bookshops cited in the report are privately owned and the institutions in question have a normal, commercial relationship with each other. The second flaw is the Report's irresponsible support for sectarianism by preferring one tradition of Islam over another. 

Your paper will do well to reduce the tension and the breakdown of social cohesion generated by divisive organizations such as the Policy Exchange. We wonder how such organizations have such sway over your paper, especially as Anthony Browne, a Policy Excahnge director has been described by a former Home Secretary as someone who promotes views 'bordering on fascism'. 


Policy Exchange Publishes Another Futile Report 
      
The Muslim Council of Britain (MCB) views the Policy Exchange's latest offering as another divisive attempt to drive a wedge between British Muslims and the rest of society. 

Today's report from Policy Exchange entitled 'The Hijacking of British Islam' plumbs new depths in the ongoing and transparent attempts to try and delegitimise popular mainstream Islamic institutions in the UK and replace them with those who are subservient to neo-conservative aims. 

The report cultivates an insidious programme of generating sectarianism amongst British Muslims by preferring some traditions of Islam over others. From its inception, the MCB has been a pioneer in creating a space for the many rich traditions of Islam. 

 


