Appalling conditions still plague England's mental health hospitals

Embargoed until 00:01hrs Thursday 15 December
Today mental health charity Mind responded to the results of the first independent inspections of hospital cleanliness in England, undertaken by the Healthcare Commission.
Sophie Corlett, Director of Policy at Mind, said:
“Despite evidence that the state of the physical environment influences recovery or deterioration of health, we now see that mental health hospitals are still in a shocking condition. There must be a change of culture within mental health services to raise standards of hospital cleanliness. Only then will service users' basic dignity be ensured.  
 
"In 2002, the Department of Health stated that the physical appearance of mental health wards "acts as a tangible statement of value to service users, carers and staff." (1) Three years on and the Health Commission has found that mental health service users are still not getting equal treatment within the NHS.  Standards of cleanliness in mental health wards have been found to be "markedly poorer" than across other services and all six of the worst scoring organisations are NHS mental health hospitals. Mind's 2004 Ward Watch campaign (2) highlighted the appalling conditions on many mental health wards."
Census supports Mind concerns over racism in the NHS

Black people more likely to be hospitalised, detained, secluded and subjected to control and restraint
The Count me in* census provides alarming statistics backing up Mind's ongoing concerns that there are worryingly high levels of direct and institutional racism in the NHS. Seven years on from Rocky Bennett's death, the census reveals that Black men are 29 per cent more likely than average to be subjected to control and restraint.
Sophie Corlett, Mind's Director of Policy says: "Black people have similar rates of common mental health problems as other ethnic groups – and yet this census shows that they are 44 per cent more likely to be sectioned under the Mental Health Act. The Government must listen to the evidence, and change the draft Mental Health Bill which clearly will have particular impact on Black people, and currently creates rather than solves racial equality issues. The Government has so far failed to conduct proper racial equality impact assessments for the Bill – it is vital that they now work with the national Black and Minority Ethnic mental health network to produce these.
For some time, black service users have been telling us of the difference in their treatment. The census demands some urgent answers to what seems to be routine subjection of black people to more extreme measures than white people. Why are so many more coming to treatment via the criminal justice system, instead of receiving treatment when they first need it?
We welcome the census as a crucial part of the Government's ‘Delivering Race Equality' drive, which must now lead to activity to address the issues, and we hope it will be continued on a rolling basis to ensure fullest information."
Richard Brook to leave Mind

After four and a half years as Mind's Chief Executive, Richard Brook will leave the mental health charity in February 2006 to become the Chief Executive of the Office of the Public Guardian and Public Guardian (designate), marking an important step towards implementation of the Mental Capacity Act 2005.
Speaking today Mind's Chief Executive Richard Brook said:
"I have found working for Mind tremendously exciting and challenging at this significant time for mental health. I have valued Mind's determination to speak out on behalf of the 1 in 4 people who experience mental distress, and know the organisation will continue to strive to change public perception and raise awareness of the many current issues."
David Henry, Chair of Mind's Council of Management, said:
"Richard Brook's legacy to Mind and to the mental health sector in general is difficult to summarise in a few words. His personal commitment has been huge, and he has been dedicated to Mind's campaigning role, ensuring that the voice of the service user drives our work.
Mind has moved on enormously during Richard's tenure as Chief Executive. His contribution has been invaluable in enhancing Mind's reputation as a robust, outward-looking and campaigning charity. His drive to guarantee that users are listened to over issues such as drug regulation, mental health legislation and provision of appropriate health services has been key to Mind's recent development. We wish him well in his new role.
Mind's trustees are determined to identify a successor who will continue to champion the key mental health issues of the day in a similarly robust fashion."
Mind welcomes NHS investment to provide 'appropriate places of safety'

For immediate release: Thurs 20 October 2005
Today mental health charity Mind has responded positively to the Department of Health's announcement of £130 million capital investment in the outdated mental health estate.
The Department of Health has pledged that part of the investment will ensure each mental health trust has access to an 'appropriate place of safety' for the assessment of people brought in by police under Section 136 of the Mental Health Act. Mind has long been concerned about the use of police cells as 'places of safety'. Unfortunately police officers do not always have the experience and training necessary to cope with these situations, and police cells are certainly not suitable or therapeutic environments for people in acute distress. In 2003/4 Mind submitted evidence to both the Joint Committee on Human Rights (JCHR) and the Joint Scrutiny Committee on the Draft Mental Health Bill on these issues. The JCHR agreed with Mind's position, suggesting that it may be a breach of human rights to detain an individual experiencing mental distress in a police cell rather than a hospital.
The investment is also intended to go towards updating and improving inpatient wards and Psychiatric Intensive Care Units (PICUs). Mind's 2004 Ward Watch survey revealed the woefully untherapeutic conditions experienced by mental health service users in many hospitals, and the Department of Health's own audit figures show that a third of PICUs and low secure units failed on critical or serious estate issues. 
Today Sophie Corlett, Director of Policy at Mind, said:
"Mind has been arguing that dedicated suites for assessment under Section 136 should be available within all major hospitals for some years now.  These specialist facilities need to be within a healthcare environment that could also respond to a need for emergency treatment in case of physical health problems. 
We welcome the announcement of this investment in the mental health estate and particularly the pledge to provide all mental health trusts with an ‘appropriate place of safety'. We hope that the investment will reach all parts of the country, including rural areas. This is a step in the right direction - but it must be remembered that there is still a very long way to go."
Code of Practice rejected in House of Lords ruling: 
Mind issues urgent plea for its defence

Thursday 13 October 2005
Code of Practice rejected in House of Lords ruling: Mind issues urgent plea for its defence
"…a set-back for a modern and just mental health law." Lord Steyn
Case: Regina v Ashworth Hospital (now Mersey Care National Health Service Trust) (Appellants) ex parte Munjaz (FC) (Respondent)
Mind is appalled today at the judgement given by The House of Lords in this important case concerning the use of seclusion, allowing Ashworth Hospital to reject the Mental Health Act 1983 Code of Practice*1 "lock, stock and barrel" (judge Lord Steyn), by a majority of three to two. The previous Court of Appeal ruling saw all three judges*2 unanimously supporting Mind's argument against Ashworth. 
What this could mean
The Code was drawn up to ensure that patients could rely on tolerable minimum standards of care. This ruling has opened the door for Ashworth and other hospitals to ignore the Code whenever they choose. Mind is deeply disappointed that the most senior court in England has seen fit to allow this state of affairs to develop. Hospitals and Local Authorities can now have policies not compliant with the Code on issues including sectioning decisions, restraint, patients' visiting and correspondence rights, random personal searches and aftercare. For example:
* The Code states that restraint must not involve tying a patient to any part of a building, but a hospital could potentially now have a policy allowing this. The patient would not be protected by the Code at the time, and so would now be forced to raise it afterwards as a human rights issue in court.
Mind intervened in the case because we believed it raised matters of great importance for all patients using mental health services. We believe the rules about how patients are secluded, or given forcible medical treatment, need to adhere to a nationally agreed standard. In this case, Ashworth Hospital made up its own rules which allowed the patient to be secluded for lengthy periods without proper safeguards in place to protect his human rights. This is a worrying reverse in a mental health system that has seen human rights progress far since the shocking days of asylums.
Both the claimant and Mind argued that all hospitals had to comply with the standards set by the Code, unless there were "good" reasons for departing from it. We argued that the Code had to have binding force in order for seclusion and many other practices covered by the Code to be compliant with safeguards set by the European Court of Human Rights.
In today's judgement from the House of Lords, the leading opinion was delivered by Lord Bingham, supported by Lords Hope and Scott, Lords Brown and Steyn dissenting. Lord Bingham overruled the Court of Appeal on the grounds that so long as a local policy was compliant with English common law and did not itself violate Convention law, there was nothing in English law which required local policies to be compliant with the Code. In his view, to give the Code the status attributed by the Court of Appeal deprives local managers of their judgmental authority and has a "strong (impermissable) centralising effect". Mind believes that he has therefore sold the rights of individual patients down the river to protect the "authority" of the local manager.
Mental Health Bill
Mind is seriously concerned at this reduction of the regulation of human rights at a time when the Government's draft Mental Health Bill proposals are likely to make many more members of the public subject to compulsory treatment.
Lord Steyn says "How society treats mentally disordered people detained in high security hospitals is, however, a measure of how far we have come since the dreadful ways in which such persons were treated in earlier times. For my part, the decision today is a set-back for a modern and just mental health law."
Henrietta Marriage, Head of Mind's Legal Unit says:
"This judgement will make it impossible to regulate the care and treatment of people in the most vulnerable situations possible. We will be doing our utmost to ensure that anyone who feels they have been mistreated as a result of this change in the law has the opportunity to challenge their treatment, taking cases to the European Court of Human Rights if necessary. We encourage people in this position to contact us for advice: E: legal@mind.org.uk; T: legal helpline, 0208 519 2122. "
Mind Cymru responds to Wales Assembly publication of key documents on adult mental health services in Wales

On 10 October 2005 the Wales Assembly Government will mark World Mental
Health Day by publishing four key documents:
* Under Pressure - report of the Risk and Quality Review of NHS Mental
Health Services (Feb 2005)
* Report on Medium Secure Services, prepared by Health Inspectorate Wales
* Revised National Service Framework for adult mental health services
* Wales Assembly Action Plan for Mental Health for further development of
mental health services
Additionally the Audit Commission in Wales will publish:
* Adult Mental Health Services in Wales: A Baseline Review of Service
Provision, Wales Audit Office

