This is me. Six years old and standing in a sack in the middle of a field somewhere in the middle of England a long time ago. 

I don't know why I'm here or what I'm doing - I don't have any idea what the purpose is of standing in this field, all I know is they want me to jump - hold the sack up as tight as I can and jump jump jump to the finishing line. 

I'm surrounded by people but all alone. There's a horrible feeling in my tummy and an itch on my leg, like a fly crawling over it. I shiver and wait for a whistle to blow. 

Just looking at the finish line gives me a tight feeling all over. Don't think about it. All right I won't. I'll look somewhere else instead. Up there is a good place. Crick my neck and up there suddenly, up in the dirty hot sky, there's a bird - could be any sort of swifty sharp-feathered bird - but you can tell it's going somewhere far far away, could be anywhere - Africa and Egypt and Asia Minor, the places in the spelling test. It's someone else's sky, the bird's sky and I wish it was mine too and that I was going with it, far away from here - from this sack this field and this stupid and perplexing day which, if the bird looks down, it won't even have the faintest idea is called Sports Day. 

* 

This is the story of a girl who lost a race. Who loses all races. A girl who cannot run or jump or fight or speak up in class or even, in fact, put herself forward or stand up to be counted in any way. 

A girl with kinked mouse hair and stick legs and skinny raw knees and a head full of lunatic ideas she dare not voice. A girl who has big feet and a lively face and an eager, wiry body but no killer instinct whatsoever. A girl who is afraid, always afraid, not of losing but of daring to make the big and terrifying statement that is competing. 

* 

Because the world has rules - complicated, harsh, mystifying rules - I am a nervous child. Mostly afraid. Light, delicate, nervy and afraid - so afraid - of breaking the rules when I'm not looking, by mistake. 

So I stay alert, I can't ever relax. If I don't stay tense and pay attention there will be something I never knew or didn't realise that will seem to come out of nowhere and then my heart will swerve and I will go red or wet myself or die. My heart will beat so fast it will spiral off the edge of my body and stop. Dead. And so I live with the fear that any minute now someone will ask me to do something I don't know how to do, ask me to remember something I never even knew in the first place. A lesson I was absent from, a method I missed, an idea I never fully understood. And then I will be stuck, blank, I won't know how. Then what will happen? 

Fire, suffocation, drowning, bleeding, laughter, scorn, death. These are the consequences of relaxing. 

Home - I like home. I know the rules of family, of home.They are calm and unchanging and they make a warm and even kind of sense to me, even though sometimes I get punished. Slap on the hand, or the high jump which means a smack bottom or straight to bed. Sometimes a spanking with the smooth side of a hairbrush. 

'That didn't hurt,' I say. But it did hurt, it does, and when I'm not feeling furious then I try to believe what they say: that they only do it because they love me. 

At home there are curtains and towels and bedspreads and piles of soft clean things that feel and smell right. At home someone is always there to pick you up and say, There, there. My baby sister fell into the flower beds and got scratched by roses - bright, surprising criss-crosses of blood even through her nappy - but apart from that, as long as you don't touch the stove and as long as you hold on when you go downstairs, there are no dangers at home. At home you flourish and grow, even when you're naughty. Because at home you didn't mean it and you'll do better next time and you're trying and you're punished for your own sake. I'd like to stay at home for all my life, live there and be there and sleep in my own bed and be my Mum's helper and never have to go out into the Big Girl's World. That would be my ideal life. The life of the Ladybird Key Words Reading Scheme. 

'My Little Helper,' says Mummy as she pegs out the tea towels on the wavy, blowing line,'my Princess and my Helper and my Little Friend, Jules, that's what you are.' 

My best thing is delivering the milk. Father Christmas brought my lorry and it has four wheels and a yellow string to pull it. Every day I go along the floor to where my Mum is washing up and I look up at her with her hands wiggling around right there in the middle of the bubbles and I say: 'How many pints today?' 

And she says in a special casual voice as if she doesn't know me, 'Three please.' 

'Three?' 

'Yes thanks a lot.' 

And I put the three white plastic bottles on the step near her feet and then I walk back to the sofa. Very slow and a bit fed up like a real grown-up doing work. But inside my heart swoops and sings with the fun of it: I've just delivered the milk! 

* 

If you don't join in, you get nowhere in life. That's what her Mum says. And she should know. She flew to boarding school on the Isle of Man when she was five, had her mouth washed out with soap for swearing at seven, left school at fifteen, married at twenty. And yet her Mum has always played the game, has always joined in, has always been tough in the face of competition. Her Mum is beautiful, proud, fierce, strong. When she went to boarding school she lied and told them she was a princess. Princess Maritza. They almost believed her. 

But this girl, her daughter, is not tough, is not beautiful or brave or strong. And she doesn't even care about it, well not very much. She could never even begin to pass herself off as a princess. She is a girl who doesn't want to come Second,Third or even First. Especially not First. More than anything, she wishes she could disappear, that she didn't have to be there in the first place. This is a girl who, when faced with a ball hurtling her way, will always do the same thing: turn and run as fast as she possibly can in the opposite direction. 

* 

Here is a photo of a baby, a sweet and tender weeks- old baby in a white dress snugged unmoving across its Mummy's shoulder, so small and young that its face is bunched into a duckling pout, fat lips, breast-milk breath, fingers curled, legs struggling in white woollen bootees, not yet ready to crawl or walk or run. 

The baby is safe. No one is asking it to enter any races yet.The baby is stuck into the album with silver corners, frozen safely and for ever on her Mummy's shoulder in July 1960. 

'You were a lovely baby,' my Mum says with a little sigh. 'When you came along, it was like I suddenly had a friend, first time in my life I wasn't lonely. I called you my Princess, my Sweetheart, my little Teddy Bear.' 

* 

Here I am - my first thoughtless movements. I kick. I gasp. I stretch out my hands.You would not know, looking at me in my carrycot, that I am not going to be competitive in the slightest. There are no clues that this baby with her white knitted bootees and slightly sallow skin will be the last one to be picked for netball, the one that no one wants on their team. 

When the baby moves, everyone says aaah. When she falls asleep in her carrycot with her hands bunched in the air, like flowers, they say, Look! Look at her little hands! - as if they've never seen hands before. When she wakes, she kicks her feet in ferocious, gasping silence for a while before the kicks grow more urgent and her breath seems to come undone and she wails. Someone always picks her up at this point, rescues her from herself. 

When the baby gets up on her knees and rocks, they all say, Oh look, look at her, what she's doing! When the baby shuffles along on her bottom or her belly, everyone looks pleased and interested. She smiles. A long thin line of dribble hangs from her lower lip and keeps on going till it touches the floor. 

The baby sits in her high chair and throws a blue poodle on the floor. When it hits the ground she peers over and laughs and laughs. A grown-up hand places it briskly back on her tray. She throws it again, laughs again. Her first sport. Poodle-throwing. 

* 

But - just look at her, this child in the sack in the field. Short brown hair cut straight round the ears like a boy's (not her choice by the way). Quite blue eyes which, if you look closer, have a felttipped band of dark around the iris, purplish lips slightly chapped and sore, big bunny front teeth flecked with white (from when she had the measles, very badly, one Christmas), bitten nails and the boniest knees you've ever seen. Bony and scabbed and bruised. She thinks they look like boy's knees.They do look like boy's knees. 

But it's worse than that. Big feet - big for her age and her size. She hates them. Good for tennis is what the grown-ups all say with their loud and definite voices, very good for stability. As if she should be glad. But she's not. She doesn't care about tennis, she hasn't ever hit a ball in her life - that's all in the future.And she doesn't care about stability, not at all, because this really is a long time ago, back in the middle of all our childhoods and - 

And the bird swoops over the hedge into the next field and disappears. And she's only six, well six and a bit, and the sack is rough and the field is wide and green and it's making her dizzy and feel a bit like crying when she thinks of what must happen when the whistle blows. 

* 

Water. The idea of water is in her life already. She likes water a bit but only if it's shallow. She doesn't want water anywhere near her face. She'll have a bath and play with the toys - tipping the Matey blue bathwater in and out of the red and yellow cups - but she screams if you try and wash her hair. 

One time her Mum gives her a wind-up submarine to play with in the bath and, while the girl's absorbed in letting it whirr round and round and dive under, her Mum quietly fills a bowl with water and tries to rinse her hair. 

Immediately she screams and struggles and fights. She thinks she's drowning.Water sloshes out all over the bathroom floor and she is In Trouble - that means smack bottom and straight to bed. 



