

At first we lived a mile or so out of the town, on the Pewsey Road, in hilly, well-wooded country. We lodged in a pleasant Georgian house - not neo-Georgian but the real thing - called Granham House, which had a rather grand drive . . . well, it seemed grand to me. The house was owned by a severe spinster called Miss Jeans, and she had a rather fluffy-brained assistant called Miss Avery. Miss Avery was terrified of Miss Jeans. Maybe we all were. She was very strict, and lost no opportunity to remind us how kind she was being. We were not the only family from the school living there. There were the Hendersons, and very possibly another family as well.

Behind the house there was a farm, and on the farm there was a farm-hand. I believe his name was Frederick, and he was a sadistic beast who terrified me. More than once he grabbed me, held me over the cattle pens and threatened to drop me in. I don't think it was a well-kept farm. I recall the floor of the pens as covered in thick, sticky, foetid liquid. I was frightened that he would drop me in among the hooves of the confused beasts. Frederick swore me to secrecy, on pain of doing something worse, and I've honoured that secrecy until today.

'Hendy' Henderson and his wife Barbara had two boys, Timothy and David. Timothy and I got on well enough, without ever becoming friends, but David was faulty, and he frightened me. He couldn't walk and lay in his cot long after he'd passed the age of cots. His face made strange twisted movements, and he cried terribly. I just didn't understand what was wrong with him. I later learned that he was what in those days was called a spastic. He made me feel extremely uncomfortable.

That first winter of the war was fearsomely cold. I had a china wash basin in my bedroom, and I would often have to break the ice in my water jug before pouring the water, complete with miniature ice floes, into the bowl. I don't recall complaining, but then I don't recall washing much either. An insect without a wanderlust could have lived very happily behind my ears. There was no central heating, of course. There was a tiny fireplace in each bedroom, but you only had a fire if you were ill, and the fire was so small that it wouldn't melt the ice on the inside of the windows.

Great drifts of snow lay at the side of the road to Marlborough. I remember skating on little ponds deep in the magical white woods. We drove through Savernake Forest, the trees rigid with frost, the birds silent, in our green Morris 8, HMM642, to the Kennet and Avon Canal, a frozen thread winding through the stiff, still countryside. We skated, gloriously, on its sparkling surface. What days. I've never skated since. It would be an anti-climax.

I remember crying when it thawed. What a disgusting thing is a thaw to a small child. The woods became like a million dripping noses. The mud was drear. I put away my sledge and my toboggan and my red mittens and I knew that things would never be quite as good again.

The summer of 1940 seems to me now to have gone on for ever. I recall it so vividly: the front garden with the hens roaming, the grown-ups having afternoon tea in the sunshine, Miss Jeans being sternly gracious.

The great joy of my life at Granham House was helping Harry collect the hens' eggs of a morning. It was exhilarating to find those perfect eggs gleaming in the straw. The smell of those huts, that strangely healthy, mealy, rotting smell, is in my nostrils still. Every morning I would write down the number of eggs laid. Yes, I'd learnt to write and count even though I hadn't started school yet. I assume that my mother had taught me.

Harry was Miss Jeans's odd job man. He was retarded, and I knew why: his birthday was on 29 February. If he only had a birthday every four years, it was natural that his mental age would be four times less than other people's. I was deeply upset when I discovered that my deduction was wrong.

Harry was kind and gentle, and I loved him, but suddenly I wasn't allowed to collect the eggs with him any more. I wasn't told why, and Harry couldn't understand why I wasn't friendly to him any more. I deduced, not unnaturally, that there was something wrong with him, something mysterious and unhealthy, something unsafe.

The truth was quite different and outside a five-year-old's comprehension. I only learnt it many years later. Miss Jeans, self-righteous little black-shawled Miss Jeans, sold her eggs on the black market and was frightened that my little black book would incriminate her. I suppose it's quite an honour for an author to have a book banned at the age of five, but my thoughts were for poor bewildered Harry.

The Battle of Britain passed me by. There were no aerial dog fights over Wiltshire. I only recall one incident whose intensity may perhaps have been caused by the tension of the times, and that was the dreadful affair of the runner beans.

Miss Jeans sent a parcel of runner beans to a relative. Miss Avery packed it in an old used envelope and forgot to cover up the address of Granham House. The beans travelled across England - and back. When the parcel was opened, the beans were shrivelled and black. I cowered, but not as much as Miss Avery, as Miss Jeans vented her mighty wrath. Her thesis was, I seem to recall, that with invasion imminent and the population under-nourished Miss Avery's stupidity had made Hitler's task much easier. His troops would overwhelm the bean-starved populace.

Towards the end of the summer of 1940, the Nobbses and the Hendersons moved to Marlborough itself, into a spacious, rambling 1920s house called The White House. It was rented and shared, but I'm sure the adults were pleased to have escaped the eagle eye of Miss Jeans, who always managed to give the impression that these metropolitan folk weren't quite up to the standards expected by the county.

I, of course, didn't want to move - it was the womb syndrome again - but I had to admit that The White House was lovely and had a big and beautiful garden.

Opposite us was a house so huge it had a little baby house at the gate. Gordon Richards, the jockey, lived there, but I never once saw him. Jockeys are, of course, notoriously small and difficult to spot.

That autumn I started school. Naturally I dreaded it, but my mother painted such rosy pictures of what fun it would be that in the end I went quite eagerly and was very disappointed that we had to learn things. Another boy was surprised to have to go on the second day. 'I went yesterday,' he complained indignantly. I had no idea why I was going to school, or what it was for.

My school was at the end of our quiet, prosperous road so, even for the first day, I could go on my own. It was called a kindergarten and it was run by a tall lady called Miss Kinder. Being reasonably bright, I deduced that it was called a kindergarten because it was run by Miss Kinder, and I had a furious row with a girl who told me she went to a kindergarten run by a Miss Brown. I told her, with fine scorn, that a school run by a Miss Brown was a browngarten.

I felt humiliated when I discovered that I was wrong and this incident, coming so soon after the February 29th debacle, caused me to mistrust intellectual speculation. My chance of becoming a distinguished philosopher may well have disappeared at that moment of disillusion. I may already have been doomed, had I but known it, to write for Dick Emery and Jimmy Tarbuck.

I endured two moments of even greater humiliation at Miss Kinder's. I don't wish to introduce a sordid note so early in the book - there'll be all too many opportunities for that later - but honesty compels me to admit that these humiliations were bound up with those necessary bodily functions which countless classical authors from Shakespeare to Jane Austen have managed to ignore completely. I refer, of course, to what were known then as number ones and number twos.

The first incident occurred on my first day. I'm often asked how autobiographical my work is, particularly my seventh novel, Second From Last In The Sack Race, the rites of passage one. I'll deal with this in more detail later, but I have to admit that Henry Pratt's first day at school was based on mine. I quote:

The pressure on his bladder grew rapidly, and he was far too shy to be able to ask to be permitted to relieve it . . .

And

There was no sign of Belinda Boyce-Uppingham. Henry was glad of that as he made his puddle.

'You'll have to go to the utility room, Ezra,' said Miss Candy. 'Take your trousers and pants off, wash them in the sink, and hang them on the pipes to dry. Show him the way, Henry, and bring me the bucket, the mop and the disinfectant.'

Cyril/Henry led Henry/Ezra to the utility room/locker room/boiler room, and there he spent his first morning at school.

And

Henry took off his trousers and pants and washed them with a bar of green carbolic. He had never washed clothes before. The soap didn't produce lather, just a greeny-white slime. The world of rinsing was also an unexplored continent to him and, despite his best efforts, much of the soap proved impossible to remove. He gave up, and put the long, baggy shorts and thick yellowing pants on the pipes to dry. Time passes slowly when you're five years old and have nothing to do except stand and watch your clothes drying. That morning was an eternity of misery to Henry, standing with his fat legs bare, and his shirt not even covering his cowering little willie, in the hot little room with the noisy boiler and the frosted-glass window.

And

Suddenly children were pouring into the utility room and looking at him and giggling as they collected their coats if they were going home to dinner or their sandwiches if they weren't. One older boy said, 'Look at his little willie,' and Patrick Eckington said, 'I can't. I forgot me magnifying glass,' and there was laughter, and then Miss Candy was there, saying, 'Your clothes are dry. Why haven't you put them on?' and he mumbled, 'Didn't tell me to,' and Miss Candy, who had a bottomless supply of minatory saws of her own invention, said, 'Mr Mumble shouted "fire" and nobody heard,' and he put his pants and shorts on with difficulty because the soap had caked hard, and the afternoon was a blur, and that was his first day at school, and it was to be the first of many, and they would all be like that, and life was awful.

There was still no sign of Belinda Boyce-Uppingham.

Well, ladies and gentlemen, there you have it. My first day at school. How astonished I would have been if I'd known that one day I would put the incident in a novel.

Right at the beginning of his first day at school, Henry had been told that there were so many Henrys that he would have to be known as Ezra. This also was based on fact. My father's name was Cyril Gordon Nobbs, though he was always known as Gordon. My name was David Gordon Nobbs, and now there were so many Davids in the school that I too would be known as Gordon. I hated the name. I hated my sudden Davidlessness. One is one's name as a small child, and now I wasn't entirely me any more.
