

Michelangelo had begun this daunting project with energy and enthusiasm, spending eight months in Carrara, sixty-five miles north-west of Florence, supervising the quarrying and transport of the white marble for which the town was famous, not least because both the Pietá and the David had been carved from it. In spite of several mishaps in transit - one of his cargo boats ran aground in the Tiber and several others were swamped when the river flooded - by the start of 1506 he had transported more than ninety wagonloads of marble to the square before St Peter's and moved into the workshop behind Santa Caterina. The people of Rome rejoiced at the sight of this mountain of white stone rising in front of the old basilica. No one was more excited than the Pope, who even had a special walkway built to connect Michelangelo's workshop with the Vatican and thereby facilitate his visits to the Piazza Rusticucci, where he would discuss his magnificent project with the artist. 

Even before the marble had arrived in Rome, however, the Pope's attentions were being distracted by an even larger enterprise. Originally, he had planned for his sepulchre to stand in a church near the Colosseum, San Pietro in Vincoli, only to change his mind and decide it should be installed instead in the grander setting of St Peter's. But soon he realised that the old basilica was in no fit state to accommodate such an impressive monument. Two and a half centuries after his death in ad 67, the bones of St Peter had been brought from the catacombs to this location beside the Tiber - the spot where he was believed to have been crucified - and the basilica that bears his name constructed over them. By a sad irony, this great edifice housing the tomb of St Peter, the rock on which the Christian Church was founded, therefore came to occupy a low-lying patch of marshy ground in which, it was said, there lived snakes large enough to eat babies whole. 

These undesirable foundations meant that, by 1505, the walls of the basilica were leaning six feet out of true. While various piecemeal efforts had been made to rectify the perilous situation, Julius, typically, decided to take the most drastic measures: he planned to have St Peter's demolished and a new basilica built in its place. The destruction of the oldest and holiest church in Christendom had therefore started by the time Michelangelo returned from Carrara. Dozens of ancient tombs of saints and previous popes - the inspiration for visions, healings and other miracles - were smashed to rubble and enormous pits twenty-five feet deep excavated for the foundations. Tons of building materials cluttered the surrounding streets and piazzas as an army of two thousand carpenters and stonemasons prepared themselves for the largest construction project seen anywhere in Italy since the days of ancient Rome. 

A design for this grand new basilica had been put forward by the Pope's official architect, Giuliano da Sangallo, Michelangelo's friend and mentor. The 63-year-old Sangallo boasted an impressive list of commissions, having designed churches and palaces across much of Italy, among them the Palazzo Rovere, a splendid residence that he built in Savona, near Genoa, for Julius II. Sangallo had also been the favourite architect of Lorenzo de' Medici, for whom he designed a villa near Florence at Poggio a Caiano. In Rome, he was responsible for making repairs to the Castel Sant'Angelo, the city's fortress. He had also repaired Santa Maria Maggiore, one of Rome's most ancient churches, and gilded its ceiling with what was said to be the first gold ever brought back from the New World. 

So confident was Sangallo of gaining the commission to rebuild St Peter's that he uprooted his family from Florence and moved it to Rome. However, he faced competition for the design. Donato d'Angelo Lazzari, better known as Bramante, had a collection of equally prestigious works to his credit. Hailed by his admirers as the greatest architect since Filippo Brunelleschi, he had built churches and domes in Milan and, after moving to Rome in 1500, various convents, cloisters and palaces. To date, his most celebrated building was the Tempietto of San Pietro in Montorio, a small classical-style temple on the Janiculum, a hill south of the Vatican. The word bramante means 'ravenous', making it an apt nickname for someone with the 62-year-old architect's overweening aspirations and vast sensual appetites. And the voracious Bramante saw, in St Peter's, the chance to exercise his considerable abilities on a larger scale than ever before.

The competition between Sangallo and Bramante had repercussions for virtually every painter and sculptor in Rome. A Florentine who had lived and worked for many years in Rome, Sangallo was the leader of a group of artists - among them his brother and nephews - who had migrated south from Florence to vie for commissions from the Pope and his wealthy cardinals. Bramante, a native of Urbino, had come to Rome more recently, though since his arrival he had been cultivating friendships with artists who hailed from various other Italian towns and cities, promoting them as a counterpoise to the Florentines whose careers Sangallo was attempting to advance. Much was at stake in the competition to design St Peter's, since to the victor would accrue wide-ranging powers of patronage as well as an enviable influence at the papal court. And, late in 1505, Bramante's faction dramatically seized the upper hand when his design - that for a huge, domed structure in the shape of a Greek cross - was accepted by the Pope in favour of the one submitted by Sangallo.

If Michelangelo was disappointed by his friend's failure to secure the commission, the rebuilding of St Peter's had an almost immediate effect on his own work. The tremendous expense involved meant that the Pope abruptly put the tomb project on hold - a change of heart that Michelangelo learned about the hard way. After shipping his hundred tons of marble to Rome, he was left with freight charges of 140 ducats, a substantial sum which he needed a bank loan to pay. Having received no money since the hundred florins more than a year earlier, he decided to seek reimbursement from the Pope, with whom he happened to dine in the Vatican one week before Easter. To his alarm, during this meal he overheard the Pope informing two of his other guests that he had no intention of spending another ducat on marble for the tomb - a shocking turnabout given his earlier zeal for the project. Still, before taking his leave of the table the sculptor was bold enough to broach the subject of the 140 ducats, only to be fobbed off by Julius, who instructed him to return to the Vatican on Monday. On Monday, however, he was spurned a second time when the Pope declined to grant him an audience. 

'I returned on Monday,' Michelangelo later recalled in a letter to a friend, 'and on Tuesday and on Wednesday and on Thursday . . . Finally, on Friday morning I was turned out, in other words, I was sent packing.' A bishop, witnessing these proceedings with some surprise, asked the groom who repulsed Michelangelo if he realised to whom he was speaking. 'I do know him,' answered the groom, 'but I am obliged to follow the orders of my superiors, without inquiring further.'

Such treatment was too much for a man unaccustomed to the sight of doors closing in his face. Almost as renowned for his moody temper and aloof, suspicious nature as he was for his amazing skill with the hammer and chisel, Michelangelo could be arrogant, insolent and impulsive. 'You may tell the Pope,' he haughtily informed the groom, 'that from now on, if he wants me, he can look for me elsewhere.' He then returned to his workshop - 'overwhelmed with despair', he later claimed - and instructed his servants to sell all of its contents to the Jews. Later that day, 17 April 1506 - the eve of the laying of the foundation stone of the new basilica - he fled from Rome, vowing never to return.

Pope Julius II was not a man one wished to offend. No pope before or since has enjoyed such a fearsome reputation. A sturdily built 63-year-old with snow-white hair and a ruddy face, he was known as il papa terribile, the 'dreadful' or 'terrifying' pope. People had good reason to dread Julius. His violent rages, in which he punched underlings or thrashed them with his stick, were legendary. To stunned onlookers he possessed an almost superhuman power to bend the world to his purpose. 'It is virtually impossible,' wrote a dumbfounded Venetian ambassador, 'to describe how strong and violent and difficult to manage he is. In body and soul he has the nature of a giant. Everything about him is on a magnified scale, both his undertakings and passions.' On his deathbed, the beleaguered ambassador claimed the prospect of extinction was sweet because it meant he would no longer have to cope with Julius. A Spanish ambassador was even less charitable. 'In the hospital in Valencia,' he claimed, 'there are a hundred people chained up who are less mad than His Holiness.'

The Pope would have learned of Michelangelo's flight almost immediately, since he had spies not only at the city's gates but in the countryside as well. And so barely had Michelangelo bolted from his workshop on a hired horse than five horsemen set off in pursuit of him. They tracked the runaway sculptor as his horse took him north along the via Cassia, past tiny villages with posting inns where, every few hours, he changed his mount. After a long ride through the darkness, he finally crossed into Florentine territory, where the Pope had no jurisdiction, at two o'clock in the morning. Tired, but believing himself beyond the Pope's reach, he alighted at a hostel in Poggibonsi, a fortified town still twenty miles from the gates of Florence. No sooner had he arrived at the hostel, however, than the horsemen appeared. Michelangelo stoutly refused to return with them, pointing out that he was now in Florentine territory and threatening to have the five of them murdered - a daring bit of bluff - should they attempt to seize him by force. 

But the couriers were insistent, showing him a letter, bearing the papal seal, that ordered him to return immediately to Rome 'under pain of disfavour'. Michelangelo still refused to obey, but at their request he wrote a response to the Pope, a defiant letter informing Julius that he did not intend ever to return to Rome; that in exchange for his faithful service he had not deserved such maltreatment; and that since the Pope did not wish to proceed with the tomb, he considered his obligations to His Holiness at an end. The letter was signed, dated and passed to the couriers, who found themselves with little choice but to turn their horses round and ride back to face the wrath of their master. 

The Pope would have received this letter as he prepared to lay the basilica's foundation stone, which was made, ironically, from Carrara marble. Among those assembled for the ceremony on the edge of the vast crater was the man whom Michelangelo believed had been responsible for bringing about his sudden fall from grace: Donato Bramante. Michelangelo did not think that financial considerations alone explained why the Pope had lost interest in having his tomb carved; he was convinced that a dark plot was afoot, a conspiracy in which Bramante was seeking to thwart his ambitions and destroy his reputation. The architect's plot consisted of persuading the Pope to abandon the project by warning him how it was bad luck to have one's tomb carved during one's lifetime, then proposing an altogether different commission for the sculptor, a task at which he knew Michelangelo could not possibly succeed: frescoing the vault of the Sistine Chapel.
