CHINA AND THE OLYMPICS Expect the Unexpected
Kerry Brown, ASSOCIATE FELLOW, ASIA PROGRAMME, CHATHAM HOUSE
INDEPENDENT THINKING ON INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
As the Chinese politburo lines up on
the podium during the Olympic
opening ceremony, the sound it most
fears is not the distant rumble of
clashes with protesting Tibetan
independence supporters beyond the
ornate walls of the newly-built bird's
nest stadium. Nor is it worried about
any seats left empty by boycotting
foreign heads of state. The sound
that would really strike fear into it is
the murmurs and hisses of a
disapproving Chinese middle class –
the urban population – some of them
in the stadium. And the very fact that
this looks even a little bit more likely
than it did a few months back must
cause President Hu Jintao, and
Premier Wen Jiabao, to sleep just
that little less peacefully each night,
as we get towards August 8.
mAYBE IT IS A GOOD THING. THERE
is increasingly realism in
China about what the
Olympics are going to deliver
in terms of enhancing the
country's image. What looked
like the world's greatest public relations opportunity seven
years ago, when news of China's successful bid for the
2008 games was greeted by ecstatic crowds in Beijing, is
now being swamped by criticisms from abroad.
The problems of Chinese involvement in Darfur were
the first signs that things were not going to plan. This was
first highlighted by the resignation by Stephen Spielberg as
creative advisor to the opening and closing ceremonies,
though the Chinese government has denied he ever
formally occupied this position.
But the outburst of violence in Tibet, and neighbouring
provinces, in March, was both unexpected, and raised
foreign unease and criticism several decibels. While not
deafening, the concern has started to become more critical.
How the Chinese government handles the next few months is
going to be vital for its credibility, among its own people, and
around the world.
We should expect the unexpected this year, as the last
three months have shown. The next crisis might come
from restive extremist Islamic groups in Xinjiang, taking
their chance now they see the world's eyes intensely focussed
on China, and stealing a trick from the Tibetans. It might
even come from the many disgruntled elements in the
Chinese Communist Party, whose grievances range from
being left behind by the economic reforms, to irritation at the
ruination of China's environment. Public surveys show that
the toll on people's health from pollution is one of the
things that most concerns Chinese.
DOUBLE WHAMMY
But there is another possible threat, and that is the
sudden return of inflation. At the annual National
People's Congress in February and March, the key worry
was not so much the problems in Tibet, though they
weighed heavy on the leadership's minds. The real issue was
the rise in inflation to almost nine percent, way beyond the
four percent it had hovered around for the last few months. In
his annual government work report, Premier Wen Jiabao
committed to stabilising this at six percent. But that already
looks ambitious.
And ominously for the central government, at least in
recent Chinese history, inflation has been the harbinger of
important and almost always very bad things. In popular
understanding the nationalist government of the Republican
Period between 1911 and 1949 was felled not by the
devastating Sino-Japanese war, or the civil war with the
Communists, but the cancer of inflation, and corruption.
This double whammy appeared again after the most liberal
period of modern Chinese history in the 1980s, leading to the
tragic events of May and June 1989 which culminated in
Tiananmen Square. The mantra since then is that, while
corruption and inflation on their own do not destroy
governments, together, and in periods of heightened tension,
as now, they make very bad bedfellows.
In some ways, attacks from outside China are helpful, at
least at the moment. They raise well-prepared nationalistic
shackles. The Olympics, after all, is the symbol par excellence
of westernisation, development and progress. Western media
carping about the Darfur and Tibet has been portrayed in
Chinese state – and more significantly – non-state – media as
nothing more than opportunistic hubris.
It has been oddly unifying for Chinese to experience this
wave of negative reporting, and to stand up and say that it is
unfair, and unbalanced. Even CNN had to admit that some of
its images of the violence in Tibet were ‘misleading'.
PRICE OF PORK
All the while, however, prices for staples like pork, rice,
beef, and vegetables have risen noticeably. China, home to a
billion pigs, saw many wiped out by disease last year,
exacerbating the problem. That has been accompanied
by a steep fall on the Shanghai Stock Exchange. The
Exchange is famously volatile; it lost nearly half its value
from 2000 to 2004, and suffered another steep drop
last February. But even so, the forty percent
plunge in the average price of shares
in the last two months has only
added to an increasing sense of
unease. And most urban
Chinese at least are well
aware of the problems
in the US economy
and how a
down turn there
could be deeply
problematic
for China in all
sorts of ways.
The
government is
now prepared
for protests
during the
Games by
foreign groups
sympathetic to Tibet, the
Falun Gong, or other human
rights cases.
The final International Olympic
Committee visit to Beijing last month
stipulated clearly that the thirty thousand
journalists expected to cover the event had to
have free internet access, and this was part of
China's contractual obligations when it agreed to host
the Olympics. The Chinese have, as yet, to say whether they
will honour this obligation, which is especially worrying in
view of the news clampdown during the worst of the Tibet
unrest in March.
VERY UNSETTLING
There is an air of greater realism, almost defiance, about
what the Games might finally deliver. It is highly unlikely to
be the great celebration by the rest of the world of China's
achievements that Beijing desired. But perhaps it was always
naïve to expect that.
What may well weigh much heavier on the minds
of the leadership in Beijing is the possibility, however
remote, that the Olympics itself may become a problem
in China. Key parts of the population disgruntled by
rising prices, economic uncertainly, and corruption, will
look at the $40 billion poured into the games, and start to
see it as an image of self glorification, corruption and
political mismatch. If the Chinese middle class starts
protesting on the streets in August, then things could get
very unsettling indeed.

Oil at
100
OIL CENTENARY
ROGER HOWARD, AUTHOR OF THE OIL HUNTERS: EXPLORATION AND ESPIONAGE IN THE MIDDLE EAST 1880-1939, CONTINUUM MAY 15
This month marks the centenary of a
truly pivotal moment in the history
of the Middle East, and indeed of the
wider world. For in the early hours of
May 26 1908, at a remote spot in the
Persian mountains, a drilling team
led by an intrepid British geologist,
George Reynolds, suddenly felt the
ground rumbling and then watched
a stinking black torrent burst
through. Amidst exultant shouts, oil
had been discovered in the Middle
East and a new era in international
relations was born. A century on, can
the oil boom continue?

aFTER A HUNDRED YEARS OF
massive output, on a scale that
no one would ever have
imagined at the time of George
Reynolds' discovery, there are
doubts that the Middle East will
continue to produce oil in such voluminous
quantities over the coming century. If newspaper
headlines about ‘peak oil' are anything to go by, the
region's future looks bleak.
Claims have been made that regional
production might soon reach a plateau before
starting to decline. On the premise that the price
of a barrel falls if global supply outweighs
demand, then Middle Eastern producers would
have diminishing revenues with which to cater
for their rapidly growing populations. Scarcely,
it must seem, could there be a more explosive
recipe for social unrest.
IN RESERVE
Fortunately the coming decades are likely to be
much brighter for the Middle East. Around 43
percent of the world's ‘proven' oil reserves – those
judged with reasonable certainty to be
commercially recoverable – are reckoned to be
located in just three Middle East countries – Saudi
Arabia, Iran and Iraq – while Kuwait and the
United Arab Emirates also have very large reserves
of around one hundred billion barrels each.
This is one reason why the International Energy
Agency has recently estimated that, by 2030, the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC), which is dominated by Middle Eastern
producers, will increase its global market share to
52 percent. This nearly matches the sixty percent
figure of its 1970s heyday and is significantly
higher than its current 42 percent share.
Of course a producer's claims about the size of
its reserves have to be treated with great caution,
since they are rarely backed by geological data or
subject to independent audit. But the Middle East
certainly still boasts many undiscovered petroleum
deposits. Although it is most unlikely that any such
fields would even remotely match the size of the
world's two largest, at Ghawar in Saudi and
Burgan in Kuwait, some important reservoirs will
undoubtedly be discovered.
UNEXPLORED
For example, after nearly thirty years of
war and international sanctions, Iraq remains
largely untouched by modern exploration
techniques. Whole swathes of its territory,
particularly the western deserts, are still almost
completely unexplored and even the main oil
bearing regions around Basra and Kirkuk have
not been exposed to the highly advanced methods,
such as deep and horizontal drilling, or 3 and
4D seismic prospecting, that international
oil companies have used extensively over the
past thirty years.
Only 27 of Iraq's eighty discovered fields are
currently productive. It is hardly surprising that
international oil companies, anxious to book
reserves and please shareholders, are currently
scrambling to win exploration and production
contracts, hoping to start work as soon as the
security situation improves and a domestic
legislative framework is established.
Another is the Gulf, which remains relatively
unexplored by random ‘wildcat' drilling that
can yield spectacular results. So far only around
two thousand wildcats have been drilled there,
and further exploration is likely to unearth
important discoveries.
The National Iranian Oil Company, for example,
operates just thirteen offshore fields, whose overall
daily output of 723,000 barrels has remained
largely unchanged over the past few years. But,
starved of foreign investment by years of sweeping
United States sanctions, it completely lacks the
necessary skills and technology to locate offshore
oil. The supergiant Kashagan reservoir that was
discovered on the Kazakh North Caspian Sea Shelf
in 2000, for example, is now being
explored and developed by a consortium of
companies, such as Shell and Eni, which
have just such expertise.
TECHNICALLY DEPRIVED
With the notable exception of Saudi Aramco,
nearly all the Middle East's state-owned
national oil companies are also technologically
deprived. Ever since the big oil companies
gradually lost their footing in the Middle East
from the end of the 1950s, when Arab
governments began to wrestle back control of
their natural resources, the region has failed to
reap the full benefits of western technological
advance. Kuwait's Burgan field, for example,
reportedly still uses the same British and
American equipment installed in the
immediate post-war years.
In the past few years, however, there have
been signs of a change of attitude. In most
countries, notably Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and
Iran, foreign companies are still officially
barred from taking equity ownership of fields.
But Arab national oil companies are
increasingly bypassing such prohibitions by
employing western contractors, such as Amec,
Fluor and Foster Wheeler, instead.
In years to come, a regional national oil
company, awash with vast quantities of
petrodollars, could even buy some of the
smaller international oil companies, such as the
Apache Corporation, thereby accessing western
skills without forfeiting ownership of reserves.
It is also possible that Iran will offer foreign
companies more generous terms than their
current ‘buyback' contracts.

