	On the face of it, narrativity and popular music are not the most obvious of bedfellows: narrativity is theoretically a feature common to all activities involving the representation of events in time, but it is almost invariably encountered in the context of storytelling. Popular music, on the other hand, tends to manifest itself in three- to four-minute songs, often intended as dance accompaniments, which describe essentially static—rather than kinetic—cameos, vignettes, or states of mind. Thus, from among a myriad British examples, one could cite The Beatles' 1963 track ‘I Want to Hold your Hand', or Frankie Goes to Hollywood's 1983 ‘Relax', as songs that contain no meaningful narrative elements. Thus it is hardly surprising that narrativity (as a term, a concept, or an analytical approach) is rarely—if at all—mentioned in three of the most influential monographs dealing with the study of popular music: Richard Middleton's Studying Popular Music, Allan F. Moore's Rock: The Primary Text, and David Brackett's Interpreting Popular Music.1 Conversely, discussion or even mention of music is almost invariably omitted from books dealing with narrative theory and narratology; the one notable exception to this rule is Seymour Chatman's 1978 monograph Story and Discourse: Narrative Structure in Fiction and Film, though even here musical narrative tends to be referenced briefly rather than being discussed in depth.2 Thus the narratives of the world, as Roland Barthes has characterized them, may indeed be numberless; but in Barthes's own list of narrative genres—which includes ‘myth, legend, fable, tale, novella, epic, history, tragedy, drama, comedy, mime, painting ... stained-glass windows, cinema, comics, news items, [and] conversation'—music is conspicuous by its absence. 
This is not the place for either a survey of narrative theory or a history of narratology; but even the most superficial investigation of the extant literature on the subject suggests a basic conflict between the fundamental intentions of narrative theory and the apparent resistance of musical texts to narrative interpretation. As H. Porter Abbott has written, 
Given the presence of narrative in almost all human discourse, there is little wonder that there are theorists who place it next to language itself as the distinctive human trait. Fredric Jameson, for example, writes about the ‘all-informing process of narrative', which he describes as ‘the central function or instance of the human mind'. Jean-François Lyotard calls narration ‘the quintessential form of customary knowledge'. Whether or not such assertions stand up under scrutiny, it is still the case that we engage in narrative so often and with such unconscious ease that the gift for it would seem to be everyone's birthright. 
Elsewhere, Abbott—in apparent confirmation of Barthes's view—asserts that ‘narrative is the principal way in which our species organizes its understanding of time' and that ‘[the] human tendency to insert narrative time into static, immobile scenes seems almost automatic, like a reflex action'. Ultimately, he argues, ‘wherever we look in this world, we seek to grasp what we see not just in space but in time as well'. 
The emphasis here (and elsewhere in the literature) on the temporal dimension of narrative immediately suggests a potentially strong link to the art form—music—that almost uniquely depends on time for its measurement. Jean-Jacques Nattiez has written, in an excellent critique of the early application of narrative theory to music, that, ‘through the work, the composer speaks to us' ; he goes on to quote Lévi-Strauss's suggestion that 
The musical work, which is a myth coded in sounds instead of words, offers an interpretive grid, a matrix of relationships which filters and organises lived experience, acts as a substitute for it and provides the comforting illusion that contradictions can be overcome and difficulties resolved. ... It is inconceivable that there should be any musical work that does not start from a problem and tend towards its resolution—this word being understood in a broader sense, consistent with its meaning in musical terminology. 
Yet Nattiez concludes his article by stating, fairly bluntly, that ‘music is not a narrative and that any description of its formal structure in terms of narrativity is nothing but superfluous metaphor'. Before proceeding further, it may therefore be useful to provide a brief overview of the musicological literature and the conceptual issues that brought him to this conclusion. 
 
The crux of the matter has been identified by Fred Everett Maus thus: ‘The attractive but problematic concept that shapes much recent work [in musical narrativity] is that an individual composition—whether a single movement or a multi-movement work—sometimes resembles, or simply is, a narrative, and that recognition of this is important for critical interpretation.' That the concept of musical narrativity is attractive is clear, not least from the tendency of most individuals to ‘hear' stories and ‘see' images while listening to music. Indeed, an experiment conducted by Nattiez—in which 300 children aged 11 to 14 were asked to interpret, in narrative terms, Dukas's L'apprenti sorcier but without being told its title—lies at the heart of his article. But after analysing the results of his experiment, Nattiez comes to a rather disappointing conclusion: 
while our experiment regarding Dukas seems to confirm that, beyond the projection onto a work of an explicit narrative plot, the listeners perceived what [Anthony] Newcomb calls ‘functional events', I am not certain that it is legitimate to speak of narrative. 
... As [Carolyn] Abbate and [Hayden] White insist, the listener, alongside the historian and ... the reader, is a ‘gap filler'. The narrative, strictly speaking, is not in the music, but in the plot imagined and constructed by the listeners from functional objects. 
No wonder, then, that Maus similarly concludes his Grove article by stating that ‘the exploration of instrumental music as narrative remains a tantalizing, confusing, problematic area of inquiry' ; and that delegates attending the narrativity sessions at the 2004 Symposium of the International Musicological Society conference in Melbourne, Australia, often seemed bewildered by what, exactly, it was that they were attempting to define and discuss. 
The existence of programmatic music notwithstanding, there is—it seems—good reason for agreeing with Stravinsky who, in one of his best-known remarks, asserted 
I consider that music is, by its very nature, essentially powerless to express anything at all, whether a feeling, an attitude of mind, a psychological mood, a phenomenon of nature, etc.... Expression has never been an inherent property of music. That is by no means the purpose of its existence. If, as is nearly always the case, music appears to express something, this is only an illusion and not a reality. It is simply an additional attribute which, by tacit and inveterate agreement, we have lent it, thrust upon it, as a label, a convention—in short, an aspect unconsciously or by force of habit, we have come to confuse with its essential being.
However, it is also important to note at this point that much of the foregoing discussion—and the content of much of the literature so far cited—has been concerned with instrumental, rather than vocal, music. Indeed, that theorists and analysts have apparently been so little concerned with vocal music is odd, for at least three reasons. First, most music—even within the limits of the Western art music tradition—is vocal rather than instrumental in nature; second, the customary presence in a vocal work of one or more texts immediately provides an entry point for narrative analysis; and third, one of the first—and most influential—studies of what came to be called musical narrativity, Edward T. Cone's The Composer's Voice, spends the first four of its eight chapters in a detailed, thorough, and extremely useful exploration of vocal music.
In summary, then, it might be suggested that even the best narrative interpretations of music succeed only because they are ultimately concerned with texted music (and therefore, by implication, find narrative elements in the music through association with the texts it sets); because they deal with programmatic music (in which musical ideas acquire narrative properties through specific composerly designation); or because they infer narratives through the subjective imposition—by the analyst—of particular meanings onto otherwise objective musical materials. The fundamental problem is perhaps that—as Abbott posited—our desire to read for narrative ‘seems almost automatic, like a reflex action'. In other words, we strive—in spite of ourselves—to perceive stories in musical texts that do not, per se, narrate. If there is a solution to this problem, then, it may lie in the acceptance, however reluctantly, of two basic principles: first, that narrative theory is, despite its superficial complexity (and rather abstract dryness), in essence a relatively simple tool that can aid us in the analytical interpretation of a variety of texted materials; and second, that from a musical point of view the main application of narrative theory may have to be restricted to those instances in which the musical material has been created in response to, or—better—as a setting of, a literary text. Furthermore, instead of applying narrative theory solely to the body of art music, it may prove more beneficial, at least initially (and pace Cone), to explore its usefulness in the interpretation of popular songs. It is this task to which the remainder of this article is dedicated. 



   [THESIS] 
 
Before moving to the main focus of this article—which argues that narrative is not only present in popular music, but is also in some cases a vital element in its interpretation—it is necessary to lay out the basic premisses from which I proceed. First, and most fundamentally, I would agree with Jean-Jacques Nattiez's view, cited earlier, that ‘in itself ... music is not a narrative and that any description of its formal structures in terms of narrativity is nothing but superfluous metaphor'. Second, but in partial contradiction of this view, I do, however, believe that music can become part of a narrative discourse, either in those instances where it is ascribed extra-musical meaning through association with an object or a concept—that is, where it acquires a leitmotivic function—or where it interacts with one or more other media. Third, in order to impose some limits on the material under consideration, I am restricting my examples to British pop and rock tracks of the approximate period 1960–85, specifically those that appeared at some point in the top ten single or album charts. However, the observations made should be applicable more generally. 
In concrete terms, I would suggest that there are five basic levels at which narrativity can operate in popular music texts:
1. The ‘control' level, at which there is no story per se in the lyrics, and as a consequence there is no element of narrative discourse in the musical setting. 
2. The lyrics contain elements of narrative discourse, but these are not reflected or supported in the (neutral) musical setting. 
3. The lyrics contain elements of narrative discourse, and these are supported by the musical setting. 
4. Both lyrics and music contain elements of narrative discourse, which to some degree operate independently of each other, though always in relation to an overlying story. 
5. A complex narrative discourse is rendered through multiple media, including lyrics, music, prose, and art work. 
In order to put some flesh on this skeleton, let me turn to some specific examples. 
Level 1—where there is no story per se in the lyrics, and no element of narrative discourse in the musical setting—can be illustrated, as suggested at the outset, by The Beatles' 1963 hit ‘I Want to Hold your Hand'. The lyrics of the song paint a typically static romantic cameo, in which the protagonist expresses his feelings directly to the antagonist. Although there are slight changes of perspective in the exhortations of verse 2 and the more reflective stance of the middle 8 (accompanied in the latter case by a new melodic and harmonic setting), the text merely amplifies the statements already made by the protagonist, rather than suggesting any actual narrative discourse. 

