Two important exhibitions on Brazilian art and culture were concurrently on show in
the UK from February to April 2006. Although both presented affinities in terms of
historical scope, their distinct approaches offer the reviewer an opportunity to discuss
the relation between curatorial practice and the dissemination of an art history that,
despite its relative obscurity, is increasingly attracting international attention.
Both exhibitions took their titles from works of art, respectively an installation by
He´lio Oiticica of 1967 and a photograph by Rubens Mano of 2002. They were curated by
non-Brazilians whose ambitious research focused on Brazilian art and culture from
the mid-twentieth century onwards. While Carlos Basualdo, with Tropica´lia at the
Barbican, surveyed a ‘movement' that purportedly still has pertinence today, Stephen
Feeke at the Henry Moore Institute traced shifts in strategies of practice from the
modern to the contemporary.1 The former approach presented the formative
elements and the main protagonists as well as suggesting current ramifications of
Tropica´lia. The latter proposed an array of intergenerational relationships with a
strong emphasis on the urban environment.

Basualdo has been directly engaged in the international dissemination of Brazilian
contemporary art for many years, establishing strong relationships with certain
Sa˜o Paulo-based art galleries through the work of artists such as Ernesto Neto, Marepe
and Alexandre da Cunha, among many others. The connection between the historic
and the contemporary was indeed made in the Barbican show, and will be discussed
shortly. Tropica´lia was nevertheless more than amovement in the fine arts and this was
reflected in the diverse parallel programme of events at the Barbican. It is in fact
arguable whether in the field of art, Tropica´lia was a movement at all. The exhibition
brought together ‘documentary' footage of music festivals, graphic design, musical
instruments, theatre sets and architecture. These were associated with the exhibition's
theme through an underlying presupposition: the resurfacing during the late
1960s of the idea of Anthropophagy. Oswald de Andrade's notion of cultural appropriation,
expressed in the Manifesto Antropofagico (Anthropophagite Manifesto) of 1928,
equated cannibalism with the Brazilian digestion of European culture.2 However, if in
the 1920s it referred primarily to the absorption of European modernism, in the 1960s it resurfaced as a means of negotiating a critical position in the light of North
American mass culture and the reaction to it by self-appointed guardians of Brazilian
cultural identity.

Much of the art in the show was connected by another presupposition, which
associated the ‘tropicalist movement' with the exhibition Nova Objetividade Brasileira
(Brazilian New Objectivity) held at the Museum of Modern Art in Rio de Janeiro in
1967. Participation in that exhibition seems to have been one of Basualdo's prerequisites
for selecting the ‘historic' artists in the show. The association was at first
convincing, since it was there that He´lio Oiticica exhibited for the first time his
installation Tropica´lia (Plate 1). Oiticica's contribution to the exhibition, Nova Objetividade
Brasileira, took the form of a complex ‘environment' composed of two Penetrables,
PN2 and PN3, which were in turn surrounded by various materials and objects such as
sand, plants, pebbles, poems written on wood and tiles, in addition to live macaws to
complete the tropical scenery. The precarious construction of the Penetrables, Oiticica's
generic term for works to be entered into, evoked the architecture of the favelas
(shanty towns), without, however, becoming mere representations. In the case of the
larger Penetrable, PN3, a television set tuned to a local station was placed at the end of
its labyrinthine structure. PN2 was a simple ‘box' with an open side, painted roughly
and in its red interior a written inscription claimed ‘Purity is a Myth'. The statement is
pertinent as Oiticica emerged as an artist within the neoconcrete group whose dissent
from concrete art rejected the overtly rationalist, mathematical orthodoxy in favour of
an exploration of the expressive possibilities of geometry. Tropica´lia, although maintaining
a connection to Oiticica's inherited constructivism, is nevertheless quite
distinct from his work of the neoconcrete period (1959–1961).
At the Barbican, Oiticica's Tropica´lia installation, placed centrally within the exhibition
space, was annexed to another of his environments, Eden. This configuration actually followed his 1969 exhibition at the Whitechapel in London. The inclusion of
both installations serve the implicit purpose of highlighting the fact that, while
Oiticica held his East-End exhibition, both the musicians Caetano Veloso and Gilberto
Gil also found themselves in London, exiled by the military regime, in power since the
1964 coup.

The singer/composer Caetano Veloso had appropriated the title Tropica´lia for one
of his own compositions released in 1968. That same year the album Tropica´lia ou Panis
et Circencis by Caetano, Gil and Os Mutantes was also released. Music and art became
associated and intellectual exchange flourished between the artist, the musicians and
mutual friends such as Roge´rio Duarte, Torquato Neto and Waly Saloma˜o. Despite this
exchange, Tropica´lia is primarily known in Brazil for its repercussions within the field
of popular music, becoming commonly identified as Tropicalism.

A fact that may have escaped Basualdo's curatorial intention was that the juxtaposition
of Oiticica's 1967 and 1969 environments also indicated a transition within
the artist's thinking, away from a Tropicalist emphasis and towards more experiential
propositions. Although one of the Penetrables in Eden still pays homage to Caetano and
Gil, the overtly tropical connotations are no longer present. Instead, the focus of the
environment is to be ‘lived in', where leisure, and perhaps even lazyness are offered as
open platforms for behavioural creativity (Plate 2). If Oiticica is generally associated
with his concepts of participation through the culture of carnival, and his experience
of life in the favela, his relevance as a key figure in twentieth-century art is somewhat
limited by these connotations. Oiticica's practice was accompanied by prolific writing,
constantly re-formulating concepts, analysing the work's reception and in turn
orienting the development of his ‘inventions'. These strategic shifts are what in fact
mark the artist's overall production, both before and beyond Tropica´lia.
In order to expand the significance of the ‘movement' the Tropica´lia exhibition and
its related literature refer to other events that occurred in 1967, the year that Nova
Objetividade took place. These include Glauber Rocha's film Terra em Transe (Land in
Anguish), and Oswald de Andrade's play O Rei da Vela (The Candle King) directed by Jose´
Celso Martinez Correˆa, which are somewhat reductively presented under the aegis of
‘Tropicalism'.

Being a member of Nova Objetividade's organising committee, Oiticica authored the
essay for the catalogue, where he outlined a number of items relating to the diverse and contradictory nature of avant-garde practice in Brazil. Oswald de Andrade and the
notion of Anthropophagy do indeed appear in the opening paragraphs of Oiticica's
essay. Yet they do so as a means of connecting the constructivist inheritance, which
was key to Oiticica's generation, with the ‘new figuration' predominant amongst
younger artists in that exhibition. Basualdo's Tropica´lia did indeed propose the
connection with that constructivist past, but it did so at the expense of ‘new figuration'.
The latter, with the exception of Antonio Dias, was suppressed at the Barbican
resulting in a number of missed opportunities (Plate 3). Thus, for example, Rubens
Gerchman's paintings, such as the iconic A Bela Lindone´ia (Pretty Lindone´ia) of 1966,
employing popular themes that explored bad taste and kitsch, and that would ultimately
lead to him being commissioned to design the record cover of Tropica´lia ou Panis
Circenses, did not figure in the exhibition (Plate 4).4 Nor was Wesley Duke Lee, one of
the inspirational figures behind the concept of Nova Objetividade as stated by Oiticica in
1967, present. Another omission was Antonio Manuel, who was invited by Oiticica to
integrate his work within the actual 1967 Tropica´lia installation. Manuel refused
Basuado's invitation on the basis that the exhibition included contemporary art and
so, naturally, he would have preferred to show more recent work.5
The work of other important figures of the period such as Anna Maria Maiolino
and Waldemar Cordeiro was very badly hung. The placing of such distinct work sideby-
side undermined each artist's exceptional creative trajectory. Beyond the obvious
limitations of what is after all a rather problematic exhibition space, the curatorial
approach emphasised certain aesthetic prejudices and socio-political associations
at the expense of a wider and more complex survey of the art of the period. This was
perhaps most notable in the absence of Raymundo Colares' Onibus (Bus) paintings.
These were originally included in Nova Objetividade and are excellent examples of
the cannibalisation of the constructivist legacy by a generation that matured in the presence of mass popular
culture. According to the
artist Cildo Meireles,
Colares' ‘Bus' paintings are
the best examples in Brazil
of the hybridisation of
the constructivismand Pop
Art.6 Basualdo chose
instead to show Colares'
series Gibis (1970), which
are more overtly inspired
by neoconcretismand were
placed in the exhibition
alongside Lygia Pape's Livro
da Criac¸a˜o (Book of Creation)
and Ferreira Gullar's
neoconcrete poems, which
actually date from the
neoconcrete period (1959
and 1960).
Nova Objetividade gathered
an eclectic group of
artists and one can note a
distinction established by
Oiticica himself between
his concept of Tropica´lia
and the exhibition as a
whole. While the poet and
critic Ferreira Gullar and the artist Lygia Clark, key figures within the neoconcrete
movement (1959–61) who were included in the 1967 show, had been central to Oiticica's
formative years as an artist, their association with Tropica´lia seems very tenuous
indeed. It was a pleasant surprise to see such work at the Barbican, yet it was unfortunate
that their historical significance was undermined in such a context.
The selection of works of art at Tropica´lia suggested a ‘grand narrative' for an art
history until recently considered peripheral. For over a decade the dissemination of
Brazilian art within the international circuit has adopted a form of strategic essentialism,
whereby all contemporary production is reduced to a diagram of influences
that connect Oswald de Andrade, neoconcretism (in particular Lygia Clark), and
He´lio Oiticica. This is a process of legitimisation that has been particularly successful
in bringing international attention to the 1980s generation of artists. If the
various historical associations between Tropica´lia and new figuration were ignored,
the space that was allocated to contemporary art, both within the physical space of
the exhibition and its catalogue, led towards the assumption that the curatorial
strategy was indeed guided by complicity with the art market. The inclusion of
young artists who have little or no connection with the concepts articulated in the late
1960s was masked by the fact that many of these contemporary inclusions were
commissioned specially for the exhibition. These were quite literally connected with
the theme.

Marepe's A Mudanc¸a (The Move) recalls the first lines of the lyrics of Caetano
Veloso's Tropica´lia song, ‘over my head planes/under my feet lorries', which referred to
the internal migration that the inauguration of Brasilia in 1960, and other socioeconomic
phenomena, provoked amongst the underprivileged classes. Rivane
Neuenschwander produced a ‘participatory' work commissioned for the exhibition
based around a Walt Disney comic book character that represented a ‘typical' lazy
rogue inhabitant of Rio de Janeiro. Lucas Levitan and Jailton Moreira added certain
Tropica´lia related items to their installation Inclinac¸o˜es Musicais (Musical Inclinations)
of 2002/04, composed of imaginary yet believable CD covers. Dominique Gonzales-
Foerster's work, despite being commissioned, fitted oddly within the exhibition. The
space allocated to it seemed excessive, considering its tenuous relation to the concept
of Tropica´lia and the restrictive space allocated to important ‘historic' works. Gonzalez-
Foerster produced a film depicting tropical detritus washed up on the shores of
Salvador's beaches. Other than the soundtrack by Arto Lindsay, the video acted as an
exoticising or at best anthropological gaze. Matthew Antezzo's commission was a
literal and uninteresting homage to Chacrinha, a popular TV personality who hosted
pop-music programmes for many decades with his catch phrase ‘Quem na˜o se
Comunica se Trumbica' (If you don't communicate you're stuffed). The Chacrinha
tapestry, produced in a Mexican workshop, was very likely inspired by a passage in a
letter by Lygia Clark to Oiticica.

