The Regent was the biggest and most luxurious of Portsmouth cinemas in the 1930s.
It was an exclusively first-run cinema (with one poignant exception, the showing of the
1933 I Was a Spy in the week Britain declared war on Germany in September 1939).
It was the only cinema with a tea room, and it had the biggest cinema organ in the
region [21]. It also had its own orchestra in the early part of the decade. It had a wider
price band than any other cinema; its seats ranged from 6d to 2/-. By contrast, a small
cinema like the Strand, which catered exclusively for the working class, would have a
price band from 4d to 1/- [22]. This pattern of price differentiation obtained for the
whole decade. The Regent had 1,992 seats—the next was the Plaza with 1,700—and
did not change its films twice a week (only the smaller cinemas did that). Its location
was significant; on London Road, just into the North End part of the city, and on the edge of the Copnor district. North End was, apart from Southsea, the most genteel part
of the city, with a relatively high proportion of owner-occupiers. North End was
respectable, whereas Copnor was upper-working-class. Of course, good public transport
meant that people would travel to the Regent if the film was sufficiently attractive;
but its immediate catchment area was clearly lower-middle-class.
If we now turn to the attendance figures themselves, we should begin to establish
patterns of ebb and flow, and gradually build up a map of the clientele's taste. In
interpreting the Regent figures, though, we must stress that the exceptional nature of the
evidence is likely to skew our conclusions. In order to get the full picture of
Portsmouth's film-going habits, we would need comparable admissions figures for all
the other cinemas, and these do not exist. It would also be desirable, in a perfect world,
to have a week-by-week list of fare at other cinemas, in order to establish the
competition for all Regent films. This is an extremely onerous task for the whole
decade, but I have attempted it for a few key films which I analyse below.
Bearing these with provisos in mind, however, the ledger is a key resource for film
scholars. A year-by-year total of the overall admissions is at the top of the page. The
figures have been slightly weighted [23].
First of all, is it possible to trace any changes consequent upon Sunday opening?
There had been considerable controversy in Portsmouth about this issue [24]. The
Council Minutes record the heated debates which took place, with the issue being
decided at a public meeting where local electors voted in favour of Sunday opening by
a majority of 13,357 [25]. It finally started in June 1933, but was restricted to after 8
pm, because of fears by some pious locals that earlier opening would imperil the
spiritual well-being of the populace [26]. The Regent's figures, however, show no
increase in attendance consequent on Sunday opening, and no marked alteration in
taste-patterns; there was the same proportion of flops, medium box-office performers
and major hits as before. Clearly, the moral panic evinced by some of the guardians of
the city was unjustified.
What about seasonal change in attendance? Christmas week at the Regent always had
very poor returns, almost always in four figures: 5,704 for Mister Cinderella in 1936, and
5,910 for Love is News in 1937. By contrast, the figures for New Year were always
buoyant: 23,293 for Showboat in 1936, and 24,227 for Oh! Mr Porter! in 1937. Summer
conditions affected attendances: a spell of very hot weather in 1934 sent figures
plummeting, and from 16 June to 11 August the figures are poor. However, a really
important film would pack audiences in, whatever the weather. 21,183 patrons thronged to see Evergreen in August that year, and Mutiny On the Bounty drew 26,136
viewers during a hot spell in August 1936. Clearly, patrons were prepared to sweat it
out for films that were vital to their pleasure or stimulus, but they would never turn out
at Christmas. The Regent managers knew that, and accordingly would screen any old
tosh at Yuletide, such as Mister Cinderella in 1936. They carefully tailored their booking
patterns to their patrons' needs, unlike other managers elsewhere in the country. One
Manchester manager came a cropper when Looking on the Bright Side ‘was put on in a
noted Jewish house in Yom Kippur week' [27].
Another local determinant on attendance figures was censorship. Many of the
Portsmouth Watch Committee Minutes were lost in bombing during the war, so there
are no detailed policy debates for us to scrutinise, but it seems clear that the Watch
Committee was fairly permissive. Certainly it instituted a scheme in 1934 in which it
reclassified ‘A' films as ‘U', and this continued throughout the rest of the decade [28].
This meant that more children could attend a range of films, and they could also attend
Snow White, which was originally an ‘A' film, on their own. As we shall see below, this
film was the runaway hit of the entire decade in the city.
We are now in a position to construct a map of the film preferences at the Regent.
During the period in question, 453 first features were shown, though it is important to
recall that we only have attendance figures for 452. Table 2 above shows the number
of British and American first features.

What is significant about these figures is the stability of the ratio of Hollywood to
British features. The latter clearly held their own throughout the period. It would
also be useful to know the number of American and British second features. In
the period under consideration, there were 319 second features. The disparity with the
first features is because of the programming of shorts, about which there is no
information.
In general, the Regent's booking figures suggest that it was well in excess of the
quota of British films required by the 1928 Cinematograph Films Act. But it was in
the first features that it satisfied and exceeded the quota, and not in the second
features.
In order to progress our analysis, we need a more refined categorisation of the
attendance figures. I have no evidence about what the Regent's managers thought
constituted a ‘hit', but I propose to categorise as a ‘runaway hit' anything over 25,000.
Let us call anything a ‘major success' if it was over 19,000. A ‘medium success' can be
anything over 15,000, while ‘run-of-the-mill fare' can be anything over 10,000. Let us
say that a ‘total flop' was anything under 10,000. I shall assume that the first feature
was the primary determinant in audience choice.
Runaway Hits
The 13 ‘runaway hits' of the decade—nine of which are American, and four British—
are listed in Table 4.
Three of these—the two Jack films and Aunt Sally—are British comedies starring Jack
Hulbert and Cicely Courtneidge, respectively. They both deal with characters who are
aspirational, upwardly-mobile, and energetic, and who are markedly devoid of sex
appeal. They try hard and, although clumsy, they succeed. This may well have provided
a potent message for the Regent's patrons, who, we must recall, came from the
respectable side of town but bordered on the downwardly-mobile part.
Significantly enough, none of the ‘runaway hits' foregrounded sexual attraction or
pleasure. Min and Bill dealt with the undignified cavortings of two elderly down-andouts.
There was little or no love interest in the American adventure films in the list. Top Hat is too refined to be sexy. The greatest hit in the entire decade was Snow White and
the Seven Dwarfs. Besides drawing 35,671 patrons in July 1938, it also attracted 18,298
in September of that year. It is worth considering Snow White's competition for that first
phenomenal week. Mad About Music, starring Deanna Durbin, was showing at the
Odeon, and would have tempted the Regent's musical-loving audiences. The Marx
Brothers' Monkey Business was showing at the Classic, and might have appealed to the
Regent's patrons, though they usually preferred British comedies. Otherwise there was
no real alternative. Wings of the Morning was showing at the Rex, but it had already
played to good houses at the Regent in September 1937. South Riding was showing at
the Troxy, but films with a social conscience were never Regent fodder. In addition,
Snow White had unparalleled puffs from the local cinema critic, who was normally very
measured in his views: ‘it's more worth waiting for than any picture made for the last
few years …there is so much to be seen than one cannot take it all in, and one has to
see it round all over again' [29].
The combination of poor competition and unusual journalistic support do not
provide a total explanation for Snow White's phenomenal success, however. It was
clearly liked by the Regent's patrons because it was part of the non-sexual paradigm.
And because it was a cartoon and in colour, it was able to evoke primal narratives about
sexual awakening and virtue rewarded. It offers a mythical resolution for anxieties about
profane love—and in a period which is just after the Abdication crisis. Prince Charming
is Snow White's prize for her many tribulations. In order to gain her reward—the Good
Prince, as perhaps opposed to the Bad Prince in everyone's minds—Snow White has to
learn to do without her seven little acolytes.
The second biggest Regent ‘runaway hit' was Cavalcade. Here again the competition
was rather weak. The Sign of the Cross was at three of the biggest cinemas, and The Lost
Chord at three others. The religiosity of the one and the solemnity of the other would
not have appealed to the habitually frivolous Regent patrons. The interventions of the
local newspaper critic were, as with Snow White, unusually effusive: ‘Everybody,
whether young or old, should make an effort to see Cavalcade, as it shows some of the
gripping events of the past' [30]. But again, this combination of poor competition and
strong newspaper support does not wholly account for the success of Cavalcade. Noel
Coward's play presents a case for the bourgeoisie; it can liaise between the aristocratic
and working classes, because it is stable and they are not. Its brand of patriotism is
premised on a compelling interpretation of recent history, which throws equal weight
on triumph and catastrophe. Such even-handedness was well received by audiences
across the country, of course; but it seems likely that the denizens of the Regent were
able to sing along with Cavalcade's tune for two reasons. First, it was Portsmouth, home
of the brave, and second, the Regent's audiences, as I have suggested, were on the cusp
of the middle class. They would be bound to like a patriotic film that placed their class
securely at the centre of history.
Major Successes
If we now turn to the ‘major success' category, we can see the contrast between the 69
British and American first features.
The high ratio of British to American films in this category is remarkable, when we
compare this table to that of the overall films shown. The high placing of the British
films in the ‘major successes' category provides powerful evidence about the popularity
of well-made British films with British audiences. But more can be deduced from this category. Not a single realist or socially-conscious film appeared in it (or indeed, in
‘runaway hits'). There were also very few action or adventure films. Rather, Regent
audiences favoured the exotic—they liked being ushered into an unfamiliar world which
tested the boundaries of their own. In 1932 they liked The Blue Danube, in which a
swarthy gypsy abandons his sweetheart for a countess, and loved Sternberg's Shanghai
Express, with wicked Marlene Dietrich. One can just imagine a local girl intoning in
front of a mirror: ‘It took more than one man to change my name to North End Nellie'.

