The chemical physicians decision to make their (almost) last stand on the issue of flight from plague was relatively unusual in attempting to use the experience of plague to bolster their collective reputation and in articulating a coherent alternative to the usual position on flight. However, their effort to use the epidemic as proof of their right to practise medicine echoed the arguments of many earlier irregular practitioners, as did their use of plague as a trial of the effectiveness of their theories, something which they had frequently demanded before 1665.83 Obviously, they were unusually aggressive, both in their condemnations of the College and in their formation of a corps of plague physicians. Yet it was still essentially the same attempt to justify their usurpation of the College's privileges on the grounds of popular need that had been made many times before by other irregulars, albeit pushed to its furthest extent. Indeed, despite Thomson's heated rhetoric, more College physicians were present on an official and voluntary basis in London during the 1665 plague than in any earlier epidemic. 
The different form and desperate edge of the chemical physicians' proposal, seeking corporate endorsement as city physicians and thereby emphasising subservience to the authorities, may have been driven by the widespread fear of disruptions to the body politic in the 1660s and the related problems that their plan for a Society had encountered. When it was first mooted early in 1665, the Society had attracted significant patrons, including the Archbishop of Canterbury.84 However, on the eve of the plague it was in trouble at court.85 The College was rebutting chemical physicians' claims to practise a more Christian and effective medicine with potent accusations of fanaticism, anarchism and enthusiasm, and dismissing their ambitions to change the legal structures surrounding medicine in London as a republican, levelling initiative.86 These charges were deeply troubling for their cause, even though few chemical physicians sought complete liberty from regulation in medicine. 
It should be noted that attempts to locate this medical opposition to flight within a broader theological context are problematic. In a recent essay, Grell has argued that the chemical physicians articulated a resurgent religious opposition to flight that was ‘obviously a direct consequence of their religious and natural philosophical outlook' with ‘few supporters ... outside their ranks'.87 The relationship between physic and theology has been much debated, and, irrespective of whether a particular sectarian position is involved, it is clear that many chemical physicians saw themselves as pursuing a more pious medicine than the Galenists.88 This may plausibly have pushed them towards an idea of medicine more akin to a clerical vocation. However, Grell's assertion that the chemical physicians opposed flight because they shared a ‘Christian spirituality' – manifest in their natural philosophy – with ‘many of the early reformers', relies on his earlier conclusion that these reformers opposed flight by physicians, ignores the plurality of ‘Christian' positions on flight, underplays the sectarian diversity of the chemical physicians, neglects other irregular deployments of plague practice, and fails to consider that – despite the slandering of Galenism apparent in the chemists' tracts – there is little sign that they were, in practice, significantly more religious than the College fellows: we should expect members of both groups to have reacted to a genuine theological imperative to stay.89 
The contestable nature of the arguments that irregulars built around flight can be seen in another of the occasions on which the events of the 1665 plague were used against the College of Physicians. In the late 1660s and 1670s, the physicians' flight surfaced in a pamphlet war between the London apothecaries and a faction of College physicians who were proposing that physicians should verse themselves in experimental philosophy and make their medicines themselves, cutting apothecaries out of learned medicine.90 It was a controversial project even within the College, with clear parallels with the chemical physicians' campaign against the College. Like the chemical physicians' claims, it was founded on a contested philosophy. Moreover, as the apothecaries' defenders charged, it would ‘destroy the very being of a Corporation of the City of London'.91 Making such a difficult case needed every scrap of argument which could be brought to bear. 
Plague was first mentioned by the physician Christopher Merrett in his initial contribution, A Short View of the Frauds and Abuses Committed by Apothecaries, published in 1669. Attacking apothecaries for illegally practising physic – one of the main reasons he and his associates put forward for circumventing them – he argues that their most serious encroachments had occurred in the last decade, in particular since ‘the Plague time', when, ‘(most Physicians being out of Town) they took upon them the whole Practice of Physick, which ever since they have continued'.92 It was an attempt to position the apothecaries as recent invaders in physic, and is probably the source of the mistaken commonplace linking the 1665 epidemic to the transition of the apothecary into a general medical practitioner.93 In fact, as Merrett would have known, apothecaries were practising physic long before 1665.94 However, his comment made sense as part of an angry polemic that portrayed apothecaries as radicals and innovators – dangerous labels in Restoration London, as the chemical physicians had earlier learnt. 
Unfortunately, by haphazardly incorporating the plague into his diatribe, Merrett gave the apothecaries an easy opportunity to retaliate and defend their irregular practice. In their responses, Merrett's critique is transformed into a defence. Without the work of apothecaries during the plague: 
it's well known the King's Subjects (then much distressed) [would] had been in a worse and deplorable condition: The Doctors, with their Worships Greatness, being fled: May the wisdom of our nation, the Parliament, never forget to encourage such Men; neither the Citizens of London to value their friends 
Plague illustrated their citizenship, significant because citizens of London could pursue any trade they chose, and their importance in treating ordinary people – a reminder of the excessive charging often blamed on physicians. In its evocation of neighbourliness and charity, the argument echoes earlier claims by irregulars. Although the tract avoids the military metaphor adopted by the chemical physicians, it gives a similar warning about the future: ‘who knows (but providence) when we may be belonging to the like assistance'.95 
In his embarrassed response, Merrett substantially revised his comments, protesting that: 
few Apothecaries that were able to maintain themselves abroad, stayed in London. Neither did any Physician leave the City till the College had made choice of as many of themselves as the City thought meet to attend that service. Besides, many Seniors of our College remained, as many I dare say, as there did of the better sort of Apothecaries in proportion, and doubtless, ‘twas as acceptable service to the Citizens of London (whom he here Claws) to have City Physicians in the Country with them, where they might have some employment also; as to stay in the City to the hazard of their lives, when they had scarce any Patient that remained there.96 
Merret now minimised the apothecaries' role, suggesting that it was forced on them by a lack of alternatives. He also stressed the work of the College physicians. They did not flee willy-nilly. Rather, in line with the advice of most plague tracts, they left with decorum after arrangements had been made for London. Indeed, in an echo of Nathaniel Hodge's assertions, they largely went in the service of those citizens who were their regular patients, thus protecting the ‘head' of the body politic, preserving the recently re-established order of society and continuing their normal style of work. 
Plague was only a minor theme in this dispute, but Merrett's clumsy change of tack is nonetheless striking. As he had quickly discovered, the apothecaries' presence during the plague reinforced the grounds on which they could exculpate their medical practice as being justified by the imperatives of charity and emergency. However, Merrett had clearly not anticipated this. The absence of the physicians during plague was, in his opinion, perfectly reasonable. He had himself left London. Merrett's slip hints that while the flight of physicians might be becoming more controversial in the 1660s, as the efforts of the chemical physicians suggest, opposition had yet to displace the traditional acceptance of their departure.97 
For medical practitioners in early modern England, the decision to flee from plague was a moral problem which they resolved on an individual basis in the same way as most of their contemporaries. Unlike clergymen and magistrates, they faced no generally recognised special obligation to remain at work during an epidemic. However, during the seventeenth century, practitioners, particularly those outside the corporate system, were increasingly using plague practice as a way to establish a reputation and, within London, as a strategy in regulatory disputes with the College of Physicians. Even if flight could be justified, the polemics of irregulars could easily exploit the gap between cautious departure and heroic staying. 
The place of the plague in such disputes derived from its potential as a moral test and an excuse from legal restriction: it extended a more general political and economic discourse which subverted the privileges of the College of Physicians. Because of this, the division between regular and irregular seems more prominent than any more profound differences of religion or philosophy in defining the boundary between the supporters and opponents of flight in the seventeenth century. London's corporate medical system gave plague a particular kind of leverage in these cases. However, the transformation of public reputation into rights could, in a different form, be appropriated by more orthodox practitioners. In France, for example, the official service of French physicians in the plague of Marseilles in 1720 – which occurred on an unprecedented level on this occasion – was carefully presented as evidence to strengthen their professional authority, in a deliberate echo of the signal labours of Catholic priest-heroes, such as St Carlo Borromeo. As Brockliss and Jones have noted, this eighteenth-century use of plague promoted a new ethic of ‘personal presence and visual surveillance which was deliberately linked to [physicians'] public utility, as well as to the progress of their discipline'; ‘A new image of the physician was being constructed – and its ingredients included the lives and deaths of medical men as well as their words and boasts'.98 
Plague's use within political and legal appeals in English medicine suggests that rejecting flight had some resonance among the élite as well as the poorer sorts. But its failure to enter the plague tract literature or provoke extensive commentary indicates that it remained a minor concern; if such criticisms were made outside the medical world, they were made quietly, and did not coalesce into a widespread opposition to the flight of medical practitioners. Thomson's view that flight was a breach of their vocation remained marginal. Plague was an unstable signifier. It might be presented as an emergency. But it could also be understood as a time apart, when responsible and wise men saw to their affairs, arranged substitutes if necessary and then departed. This was, as we have seen, how Merrett countered the apothecaries; indeed, it is why he made his slip in the first place. Flight could be justified, and was the preferred choice for most of those, the rich and powerful, with the ability to leave. It is significant that the chemical physicians and nonconformists received no reward from the Crown or City, despite their claims. 
It was not until the early nineteenth century that the idea of physicians having an ethical duty to care for the sick during epidemics became generally diffused, let alone accepted, in the English-speaking world as part of the creation and dissemination of an ideal-type of moral professional capable of self-regulation and deserving of concomitant respect and rewards.99 With this development, the history of plague epidemics was reinterpreted to provide examples of virtuous doctors who could exemplify the new ethics. The analysis of flight presented here underlines the great differences which separate modern ethical responses to epidemics from those of the early modern period. Retrospective moral diagnoses are all too easy, and all too treacherous, as was underlined in recent attempts to sift the records of early modern plague for guidance on ethical duties in the face of a more modern epidemic – AIDS.100 

