Wednesday 5 July 2006
TREASURY
Children and Young People's Review
The Economic Secretary to the Treasury (Ed Balls): In July 2005, the Government announced that a second Comprehensive Spending Review (CSR) would be undertaken, reporting in 2007. Ten years after the first CSR, the Government have shown that a strong economy and sound public finances can be delivered at the same time as sustained and substantial growth in investment in public services. Looking forward, there are new challenges Britain will need to address in order to lock in these benefits for the decade to come, including:
The intensification of cross-border economic competition as the balance of international economic activity shifts towards rapidly growing emerging markets such as China and India;
demographic and socio-economic change, such as the rapid increase in the old age dependency ratio as the 'baby boom1 generation reaches retirement age;
the acceleration in the pace of innovation and technological diffusion and a continued increase in the knowledge-intensity of goods and services;
continued global uncertainty and poverty, with ongoing threat? Of international terrorism and global conflict; and
increasing pressures on our natural resources and global climate from rapid economic and population growth in the developing world and sustained demand for fossil fuels in the advanced economies.
These changes will have fundamental and far reaching implications for public services and will require innovative policy responses, co-ordination of activity across Departmental boundaries and sustained investment in key areas. Budget 2006 therefore announced that the CSR would be informed by a series of policy reviews. One of the reviews announced at the Budget was a joint HM Treasury and Department for Education and Skills policy review of children and young people.
The Government's approach since 1997 has improved the lives of children:
The risk of a child living in poverty has declined, and 500,000 fewer children live in relative low income poverty than in 1998;
there are nearly 400,000 fewer children living in workless households,
educational attainment has increased at all key stages over this period;
in 1997 there were only 83 comprehensive secondary schools where 70 per cent. or more of pupils achieved five or more good GCSEs—by 2004 this had risen to 413; and
in 1997 a third of children left primary schools without the literacy and numeracy skills necessary to succeed at secondary school and beyond—now 79 per cent. achieve these basic standards in English and 75 per cent. in maths.

5 July 2006 : Column 38WS
These successes have transformed the life chances of children since 1997. However, in Support for parents: the best start for children, published at the pre-Budget report, HM Treasury and the Department for Education and Skills identified further steps to be taken to improve the outcomes for children and young people. To take forward these conclusions and inform the 2007 Comprehensive Spending Review, the policy review of children and young people will consider:
How services for children and young people and their families can build on the three principles identified in support for parents, the best start for children—rights and responsibilities, progressive universalism and prevention—to improve outcomes for children and young people;
Under the umbrella of the children and young people review, sub-reviews will focus on:
How services can provide greater support to families with disabled children to improve their life chances;
what strategy should be adopted over the next ten years to deliver a step change in youth services and support for young people;
how services for families and children at risk of becoming locked in a cycle of low achievement, high harm and high cost can be reformed to deliver better outcomes.
Submissions from interested organisations and members of the public to inform the review can be sent to: cypreview@hm-treasury.gov.uk
The terms of reference covering each component of the children and young people's review are available in the Libraries of both Houses.
The Government will report on the Comprehensive Spending Review in 2007.
COMMUNITIES AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Housing Act 2004
The Minister for Housing and Planning (Yvette Cooper): Further steps in delivering our commitment to help communities tackle bad landlords and long term abandoned empty properties come into force tomorrow.
We continue to encourage councils to work with residents and landlords to ensure that local communities are not being blighted by the actions of a minority. We also want to see a thriving private rented sector offering good quality and well managed homes. We have already required councils to implement a national licensing scheme for Houses in Multiple Occupation and to consider the benefit of discretionary licensing within their locality. As part of the implementation of provisions in sections 72 and 95 of the Housing Act 2004, from tomorrow, councils will be able to prosecute landlords or other persons managing or in control of licensable houses in multiple occupation who have failed to apply for their licence. Operating without a licence is a criminal offence and can result in a fine of up to £20,000. Tenants and councils will also have the opportunity of recovering any rent or housing benefit paid over the previous 12 months.
Also from tomorrow councils will be able to apply to residential property tribunals for an interim Empty 
5 July 2006 : Column 39WS
Dwelling Management Order on long term abandoned or derelict properties. Some 300,000 private sector homes in Britain have been empty for more than six months and many lie empty and abandoned for years at a time, causing considerable distress for neighbours and local communities. Empty Dwelling Management Orders can only be granted where there is no reasonable prospect of it being occupied and where other routes have been tried, to work with the property owner to bring it back into use. Exceptions are in place to protect owners who have good reason to keep their dwelling unoccupied, for example temporary absence, second homes, properties on the market and inherited properties, which are exempt for a further six months after grant of representation (probate) is obtained. The tribunal must also consider the effect the order would have on the rights of the property owner and take into account the interests of the community.
The Department will tomorrow also publish guidance to local authorities on the use of empty dwelling management orders on the departmental website at http://www.communities.gov.uk/index.asp?id=l501339 and has previously published an advisory booklet for property owners.
CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
Village Halls (Temporary Event Notice)
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport (Mr. Shaun Woodward): I am pleased to inform the House that I have carefully considered the responses to the public consultation which took place between 9 August and 5 October 2005 about the temporary event notice regulations made under the Licensing Act 2003. I have also taken into account the second stage research paper on village halls and licensing published on 28 June by action with communities in rural England.
I have concluded that there is no consensus in favour of a further increase of the temporary event notice limits in respect of village halls or similar community premises. In particular, I have noted that residents' associations and local authorities are generally opposed to any further relaxation of these arrangements. The Secretary of State does not therefore plan to change the relevant regulations in the immediate future. For the time being, the limits will remain those approved by Parliament prior to the 2003 Act receiving Royal Assent.
I have also considered the question, raised in response to the consultation, of whether it should be made easier for temporary event notices to be given in bulk, for example, at the start of the calendar year.
I have concluded that it would not be appropriate to encourage bulk applications. Temporary event notices may only be subject to challenge by the police on crime prevention grounds.
If applications were to be made in bulk in January, the police would have to decide then that they had no objection to a whole series of events stretching many months into the future. If the second or third event 
5 July 2006 : Column 40WS
resulted in disorder, the police would have lost their right to intervene to stop the fourth and subsequent events from taking place. Against the background of an already liberal regime, I do not consider that it would be right to promote bulk applications.
However, I have also noted carefully what has been said by respondents to the consultation and other correspondents about the perceived burden of having to specify a designated premises supervisor on a premises licence granted under the 2003 Act. This individual is required to hold a personal licence. It has been suggested that this is particularly difficult for volunteers involved in village hall and community work. Removing the requirement to specify a designated premises supervisor would require changes to primary legislation. With the approval of Parliament, appropriates change might be made to the primary legislation using a regulatory reform order to be made in due course under the terms of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Bill which is currently being scrutinised by the other place.
After careful consideration, I am prepared to consider bringing forward such a proposal for Parliamentary consideration subject to the outcome of the public consultation that would form part of regulatory reform order procedures. In anticipation of that public consultation, the Government are not able to give a guarantee now that we would proceed by laying such an order. A great deal will depend on the nature of the responses received.
I expect the Independent Fees Review Panel, which is currently considering a broad range of issues relating to the Licensing Act 2003, to make recommendations in its final report in November this year which may relate to village halls and similar community premises.
I intend to consider any such recommendations with an entirely open mind and if appropriate, would consider expanding the scope of any regulatory reform order that might be proposed.
ENVIRONMENT, FOOD AND RURAL AFFAIRS
Environment Council
The Minister for Climate Change and the Environment (Ian Pearson): My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, represented the UK at the Environment Council in Luxembourg on 27 June.
The Council adopted a political agreement on the proposed directive on the assessment and management of flood risks. Discussion focused mainly on the dates and deadlines to be included in the text, and, briefly, on resolving the circumstances under which a member state must obtain the agreement of affected neighbours, before taking measures which could have transboundary effects. On dates, the UK was successful in obtaining longer (until 22 December 2010) for the completion of existing work that will be used to satisfy the requirements of the directive on a transitional basis. Council also agreed changes to the deadlines for completion of the first preliminary risk assessments 
5 July 2006 : Column 41WS
(2012), and for the first review of flood risk maps (2019). Flood management measures that have a ‘significant' effect on flood risk in neighbouring states will be subject to prior agreement between the member states concerned. Most member states endorsed the scope proposed by the European Commission, namely coverage of all rivers and coastal zones within the EU; a matter on which the UK has expressed misgivings at each stage of the negotiation on grounds of proportionality and subsidiarity. Given that the final text provides much greater flexibility for member states than the original Commission proposal, and that the burdens are consequently much lighter, the UK was on balance able to support the agreement reached in Council, along with all other member states.

