Summary
The UK e–University project was effectively wound up last year by HEFCE, having spent £50 million of public money but having succeeded only in attracting 900 students. We inquired into the issue to find out why this had happened, what lessons could be learnt from the failure of the project, and to consider the future for e-learning and e-Universities in the UK.
Our findings are that the UKeU failed largely because it took a supply-driven rather than demand led approach. This supply-driven approach, combined with the very ambitious nature of the venture in an emerging market that did not sustain the high expectations of demand, and an inability to work in effective partnership with the private sector, led to the failure of UKeU to meet its targets, aims, and objectives. The launch of the first UKeU courses was delayed until September 2003. When launched, they attracted just 900 students against a target of 5,600. Furthermore, despite it being a condition of grant, UKeU failed to attract significant private investment.
We have also concluded that there was insufficient market research. There was no formal market research undertaken to assess either the level of demand or the nature of the demand and the type of e-learning required. There was no systematic evaluation of the markets, no thorough and robust market research, and no understanding of consumer demand.
UKeU also focused too much on providing an integrated e–learning platform. UKeU allowed the development of the technology platform to drive its strategy and the development of programmes. It had a skewed focus on the platform, based on an assumption that once this was right, the original projections of very high student numbers would be easy to realise. Unfortunately this assumption was not based on research evidence, but on an over-confident presumption about the scale of the demand for wholly internet based e-learning.
The project failed to form effective partnerships with, or gain significant investment from, the private sector. UKeU’s attempt to form genuine partnerships with the private sector was a commendable aim and could have helped it to stay competitive and market orientated. Instead, UKeU became another example of how difficult the public sector finds it to form successful partnerships with the private sector. The failure to find private sector partners or investors should, however, have caused the holding company, HEFCE and the DfES to have concerns sooner rather than later about the viability of the project. One issue which provoked public comment was the awarding of bonuses to senior executives of UK e–U. The bonus scheme and potential share packages are examples of the anomalies that were caused by the fact that the structure and systems were set up under the assumption that private investment would be part of the project. When little investment was forthcoming, the structure and systems were not changed to reflect the circumstances in which UKeU was operating. Systems and structures that may have been considered appropriate when set against the original plan became inappropriate for a venture that was almost entirely publicly funded. We consider that for either the private sector or the public sector the bonuses paid to senior staff were wholly unacceptable and morally indefensible.
The argument that they reflect private sector practice does not stand up to scrutiny. Any company which paid bonuses of this kind having underperformed in the way that UK e–U did would face severe criticism from its shareholders.
We do not want the Government to become increasingly risk-averse as a result of what happened with UKeU experience. Instead it should learn from this experience and, in the future, take a more experimental approach to such high risk ventures. This would involve focussing more on testing various models and prototypes; taking an evidence-based approach; involving the private sector as partners in a more organic process; undertaking effective risk-assessment procedures; and setting open and transparent success criteria for such projects.
We recognise the important role the Government has to play in providing support,
information and guidance for e-learning to develop within HEIs. The Government’s role in providing an overarching national strategy for e-learning is vital to ensure consistency, coherence, and clarity of purpose in developments across the sector. The Government must clarify its national strategy for developing e-learning in the UK and how it intends to invest in and support e-learning across the HE sector in a way that provides coherent progress.

1 Introduction
1. In February 2000, the then Secretary of State, David Blunkett, announced the ambitious project to establish the e-University as a single vehicle for the delivery of UK universities’ HE programmes over the internet. The Government allocated £62 million to the HEFCE for the project over the period 2001–2004.
2. UK e-Universities Worldwide Ltd (UKeU) and e-Learning Holding Company Ltd were established in 2001. In September 2003 UKeU launched its first programmes, attracting just 900 students against a target of 5,600. On 25 February 2004, the HEFCE Board decided that in future HEFCE funding should support the development of e-learning in universities and colleges—in effect the HEFCE terminated UKeU. £50 million out of the Government’s allocation of £62 million has been spent on the project.
3. The Committee announced its inquiry into the e-University project on 16 June. Our purpose was to account for the expenditure to date (£50 million), to clarify why the UKeU venture failed, what lessons could be learnt from the failure of the project, and to consider the future for e-learning and e-Universities in the UK.
4. Over the course of the inquiry, we took evidence from Dr Kim Howells MP, Minister for Higher Education; David Young, Chairman of the Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE); Sir Howard Newby, Chief Executive of the HEFCE; Sir Anthony Cleaver, former Chairman of UKeU; Mr John Beaumont, former Chief Executive of UKeU; Sir Brian Fender, former Chairman of the e-Learning Holding Company Ltd; Dr Adrian Lepper, Secretary to the Board, e-Learning Holding Company Ltd; Mr Leslie Stretch, Vice President of Sun Microsystems UK Ltd and Mr David Beagle, Account Manager of UKeU project, Sun Microsystems UK Ltd. 
5. One issue about the conduct of this inquiry caused us concern. Meetings of select committees are televised at the request of broadcasters. The first meeting in this inquiry, with David Young and Sir Howard Newby of HEFCE, during which some serious criticisms were made about the way in which UKeU was run, was televised. The second meeting, at which Sir Anthony Cleaver and John Beaumont of UKeU responded to those criticisms, was not. Therefore the criticisms gained wide currency but the responses did not. We regard this as extremely unsatisfactory and it offends against natural justice. We recommend that the way in which decisions to televise select committee meetings are made is reviewed with a view to giving Committees a more active role in the process.
2 Background to the UKeU
Context
6. The original idea for the e-University project was being discussed in 1999 at the height of the dotcom era. The context in which the idea was developed goes some way to explaining the highly ambitious nature of the project. It was a time when there were thought to be no limits to the potential of the internet. The Minister said to us: ‘I think we certainly have to go back to that period when it looked as if it would be possible to deliver all kinds of education on line.’
7. At the height of the dotcom era there was also a sense of urgency that if you didn’t strive to take your share in this global market straight away, you would lose out. David Young, Chairman of HEFCE, said: ‘When the initiative was launched, as I say in 2000, the mood in government and elsewhere was quite clear that there was a much greater risk in failing to grasp the opportunity to make immediate progress on developing the UK as a major player in delivering e-learning to a global market.’
8. By 2000, a number of on-line learning ventures had been launched in the US: the Western Governors’ University, Pheonix University, e-College and many others. The experience of what was happening in the US at this time certainly contributed to the feeling of pressure for the UK to establish its share of the global e-learning market. In a speech that announced the e-University project, the then Secretary of State for Education, David Blunkett, said that the role of the e-University project was to ‘concentrate resources from a number of partners on a scale which can compete with leading US providers.’ As the current Minister for HE, Dr Kim Howells, explained in his evidence to the Committee:
‘It was also informed by a kind of fear that the Americans were going to capture
students and that they were actually going to capture students in this country.’
9. The context in which the idea of the e-University was formed led to it becoming a highly ambitious global project. It was intended to be the ‘flagship provision of UK higher education excellence,’ that would establish the UK as a leading player in the market for online learning. The extent to which the highly ambitious nature of the venture contributed to the failure of UK e-Universities Worldwide (UKeU) will be considered further in this report.

Setting up UKeU
The Government’s proposals:
10. In February 2000, the then Secretary of State, David Blunkett, announced the project to establish the e-University as a vehicle for the delivery of UK universities’ HE programmes over the internet. The ambitious nature of the Government’s proposals were clear from the Secretary of State’s speech. He said that ‘e-learning has become a big business’ and, as a result, ‘a new national initiative is needed to maximise Britain’s chances of success in this global environment.’ He announced that it would be the HEFCE that would ‘bring forward proposals for a new collaborative virtual venture—a consortium of ‘e-universities…to create a new partnership between universities and the private sector.’ 
11. The Government allocated £62 million to the HEFCE for the project over the period 2001–2004. The guidance that was given to HEFCE in the Secretary of State’s Grant Letters in 2000, 2001, and 2003 regarding the UKeU is included in Annex 1.
The HEFCE’s role in setting up UKeU
12. Following the Government’s announcement of the e-University project, the HEFCE set up a steering committee in February 2000 chaired by Professor Ron Cooke, the then Vice Chancellor of the University of York. In May 2000, PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) was employed to develop a business model. CHEMS7 were asked to undertake some initial market research. PwC reported in October 2000 and, in November 2000, HEFCE consulted the sector on the model that PwC had proposed.
13. In December 2000, an interim management team was appointed with an interim CEO, Nick Winton, and others drawn from the private sector, to establish the new company structure. In spring of 2001 the HEFCE announced the conclusions of their consultation with the sector. 74% of those who responded agreed with the HEFCE board’s decision to go ahead along the lines proposed: an operating company and a holding company to oversee the role of the operating company.
14. In its memorandum to us the HEFCE stated:
‘Our original model was for a joint venture between a consortium of HEIs (supplying
the learning programmes) and private sector partners (putting in the technology,
marketing and business drive). However, PwC took the view that many HEIs would
be involved in e-learning globally, and so it would be cost-effective to have a central
vehicle accessibly by all HEIs.’

The operational structure of HoldCo and UKeU
15. As recommended in the PwC business model, in 2001 UK e-Universities Worldwide was established as a private company. This was to encourage private investment in UKeU. HEFCE also established a holding company to oversee the work of the operating company.

16. The holding company, e-Learning Holding Company Ltd (HoldCo), was a private
company limited by guarantee.
