Defra’s Executive Agencies
This chapter reports on Defra’s six Executive Agencies. It
outlines their aims and objectives, their funding for 2004-05,
their performance against their service standards and targets,
their key developments and a forward look to 2005-06.
In 2004-05, Defra had six Executive Agencies:
• Rural Payments Agency;
• Veterinary Laboratories Agency;
• Central Science Laboratory;
• Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science;
• Pesticides Safety Directorate; and
• Veterinary Medicines Directorate.
On 1 April 2005 the State Veterinary Service was also launched as a Defra Executive Agency.
Ministers have also announced the intention to create two additional agencies: the Sea
Fisheries Inspectorate and the Decontamination Service.
Each of these provides its own unique contribution to achieving Defra’s aim and objectives
and is therefore integral to the work that Defra does. This chapter provides only a very broad
overview of the work of its Executive Agencies, and each will publish its own Annual Report
and Accounts in the summer.
185

Rural Payments Agency
Aims and objectives
The Rural Payments Agency (RPA) is Defra’s largest executive agency and a major customer
facing delivery arm which provides services in making payments, carrying out inspections and
recording animal movements.
The aim of RPA is to operate Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) measures that are delegated
to it within England and, as appropriate, the UK, and to provide high-quality and accessible
data on animal traceability within Great Britain. It will deliver a high-quality service that is
responsive to the needs of its customers and operate as economically, efficiently and
effectively as possible, in accordance with EU accreditation requirements and the policies laid
down by the Secretary of State and, as appropriate, those of the devolved administrations.
RPA is also a source of delivery experience and advice to policy divisions within Defra.
RPA is the accredited Paying Agency responsible for all CAP schemes in England and for
certain CAP schemes throughout the UK. In addition to making the payments the Agency
carries out related inspections and scrutiny to ensure EU accreditation requirements are met.
It is also the funding body for receiving and accounting for all UK CAP Guarantee funds. RPA
delivers payments for other farming support such as the Over Thirty Months Scheme (OTMS)
and administers the National Fallen Stock Scheme (NFSS) on behalf of the National Fallen
Stock Company.
RPA includes the British Cattle Movement Service (BCMS) which is Defra’s centre of expertise
and service delivery on animal and identification. BCMS operates as a GB-wide organisation,
and must meet the requirements of the Scottish Executive, the National Assembly of Wales,
as well as Defra.
Following the decisions on implementation of CAP Reform, RPA has focused strongly on the
successful delivery of the new Single Payment Scheme (SPS) to be introduced for the 2005
scheme year. RPA will continue with its Change Programme that will see greater use made of
technology and innovation to deliver services efficiently and effectively.
RPA’s objectives are to:
• administer those CAP schemes, in support of the Department’s policy and
objectives, and other services that are delegated to it in full conformity with EU and
domestic law and accreditation requirements;
• provide operational advice in the support of policy formation;
• comply with UK Corporate Governance principles;
• provide fair, responsive, and high-quality services to its customers, minimising
administrative burdens placed on the industries it serves;

• operate within spending review agreements using resources economically, efficiently
and effectively, while delivering all agreed schemes, services and targets;
• provide high-quality and accessible data on animal traceability to support public
health, animal health and welfare requirements; and
• maintain and continue to develop core capability and flexibility to meet changing
requirements.
Funding in 2004-05
Figure 30 sets out the Rural Payments Agency’s main funding for 2004-05. This funding
comes within Defra’s Departmental Expenditure Limit (DEL).
Figure 30: Rural Payments Agency Departmental Expenditure Limit resource funding
2004-05

Figure 31: Rural Payments Agency Annually Managed Expenditure (AME)
funding 2004-05

The bulk of this expenditure is for CAP payments and is reimbursed to the UK Treasury by
the EU.
Performance in 2004-05 against targets
The 2004-05 RPA Business Plan included a number of key business plan targets. Progress
against these targets is monitored throughout the year. The business plan targets are
presented under the balanced scorecard headings of business process, customer, finance
and people.

Figure 32: Rural Payments Agency performance in 2004-05 against targets

Public Service Agreement target 10: Achieve a reduction of 10 per cent of the unit
cost of administering Common Agricultural Policy payments by 2004-05 and an
increase to 95 per cent electronic service delivery capability for such payments by
31 March 2005.

RPA has met the efficiency element of the target, but will not now meet the other element
until 2006. In view of this a final assessment of partly met will be given for this target.
The Public Service Agreement target relates to efficiency and service improvements that will
be delivered by the Rural Payments Agency (RPA), an Executive Agency of Defra.
The present CAP information systems operated by the RPA are made up of discrete and
dated systems with few common business process components or shared IT systems and
databases. Under the RPA Change Programme the existing business processes and
supporting IT systems will be replaced/upgraded to enable significant efficiency and customer
service improvements.
On 31 January 2003 a contract was signed with Accenture to deliver RPA IT Applications
(RITA). RITA scope includes a generic systems platform for processing both farm and trader
schemes, land and customer registers and a customer call centre. The contract covered farm
and trader based schemes, current at the time, although it anticipated the potential for
change the mid-term review might bring.

The proposed new systems will:
• provide customer focus by simplifying the collection of data from traders and
farmers, reduce duplication of effort and focus on the needs of the farmers and
traders rather than on administrative convenience;
• provide a new flexible co-ordinated IT system designed to support the new business
processes and electronic service delivery, and to react to change and enable the
introduction of new schemes quickly and efficiently;
• be user friendly and developed in a way that minimises need for training; and
• minimise manual intervention in processing payments and hence reduce costs.
Performance
The RPA Change Programme supports the delivery of the RPA Mission Statement of a
customer focused organisation delivering high quality services, including processing payments
and receipts, conducting inspections and recording animal identification, to Government and
the rural community.
Significant progress has been made including:
• the merger of the Intervention Board and Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food’s (MAFF) regional offices to create RPA;
• closure of four of the six sites targeted for closure;
• agreement of the new organisational design (incorporating a planned reduction of
over 1,500 staff);
• merger of RPA and the British Cattle Movement Service;
• first tranche of voluntary redundancies (400 staff) have been identified and leaving
dates agreed;
• second exit strategy has been instigated;
• implementation of the new finance system (Oregon);
• implementation of a Human Resources Self Service System (HRSS) integrated with
Oregon;
• deployment of a new corporate intranet (IRIS);
• digitisation of 1.7 million parcels of land and the design, development and
deployment of the Rural Land Register database to maintain them;
• RPA business case updated; and
• implementation of Customer Service Centre and Customer Register.

Given these factors, and the importance of making timely SPS payments to claimants, a
conscious decision was taken to re-plan the programme schedule in order to reduce risks to
SPS in 2005 by deferring non-essential elements to later in the programme schedule.
This rescheduling of the programme delays the delivery of the on-line (e-capability)
functionality which means the target of having 95 per cent e-capability by 31 March 2005
will not be achieved but will be delivered in 2006.
Despite this rescheduling, RPA has met the Public Service Agreement target of a 10 per cent
unit cost reduction in 2004-05.
The Change Programme incorporating CAP Reform not only remains on track for delivering
the annual benefits in the original business case (£35.9 million), albeit the date that these
benefits will be realised from has been delayed as a result of re-planning the
programme schedule.
Factors Affecting Performance
Rescheduling of the programme resulting from delays in the design and build of the new
system caused by:
• supplier performance issues;
• resource/skills constraints;
• incorporating CAP Reform within the programme; and
• delays in finalising EC Regulations and SPS policy decisions.
Key developments
Some key developments in 2004-05 have been:
• entitlement register for the SPS established;
• new Customer and Land registers went live;
• new Customer Service Centre and Document Management Unit established
at Newcastle;
• significant improvements to the cattle tracing database in terms of reliability and
accessibility delivered; and
• the Agency is co-ordinating the new cross compliance inspections.

Looking forward to 2005-06
Some key challenges in 2005-06 are:
• the Agency will receive the first SPS claims and make the first payments under
the SPS;
• the Agency will develop a web-based service allowing customers to submit CAP
scheme forms electronically; and
• the Cattle Tracing System e-take up project for 2005 is set to deliver 50 per cent
of transactions to the cattle tracing system through electronic channels by the end
of 2005.
Veterinary Laboratories Agency
Aims and objectives
The Veterinary Laboratories Agency (VLA) provides Defra and other government customers
with specialist veterinary research, consultancy, surveillance and laboratory services in the
areas of:
• transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE);
• statutory and exotic bacterial and viral diseases;
• food and environmental safety;
• emerging diseases and welfare; and
• international trade.
VLA’s aim is to:
• provide its customers with the highest-quality scientific data and advice to support
evidence-based policymaking while providing best value for money;
• work collaboratively to deliver leading edge veterinary research, surveillance,
consultancy and laboratory testing services through a series of integrated science
programmes;
• maintain an emergency response capability for animal health and public health
threats; and
• develop colleagues to their full potential and recognise their individual and
collective contribution.

Funding in 2004-05
Forecast income for 2004-05 is approximately £95 million. Discussions about income for
2005-06 are in progress with Defra customers, who provide about 90 per cent of VLA’s
income. Fully calculated results will be made available in VLA’s 2004-05 Annual Report and
Accounts.
Performance in 2004-05 against targets
The performance set out in Figure 33 is correct up to December 2004, the date at which the
latest performance data was available prior to publication.
Figure 33: Veterinary Laboratories Agency performance in 2004-05 against targets
• Implement

Key developments
Some key developments include:
• VLA was formally designated as the World Organisation for Animal Health (Office
International des Epizootes – OIE) first reference laboratory for antimicrobial
resistance. VLA is now the OIE reference laboratory for 13 diseases or topics;
• MedVetNet (in which VLA plays a key role) was launched in September 2004. This is
an international network for the prevention and control of zoonoses funded by the
EU Framework 6 Programme. It is made up of 5 veterinary and 5 public health
institutes from 8 countries, including VLA. Their overall objective is to develop a
network of excellence for the integration of veterinary, medical and food sciences,
to improve research on the prevention and control of zoonoses;
• this year alone the mycobacterial research team has published 25 peer-reviewed
papers, including a number in prestigious journals;
• significant progress has been made in TSE experimental challenge studies,
investigations into rendering practices and modeling in support of the National
Scrapie Plan;
• the Rabies Team, through extensive worldwide links, has worked to develop a new
understanding of the epidemiology and pathogenesis of rabies, particularly of
European bat lyssaviruses;
• VLA’s unique veterinary surveillance network, working in partnership with private
veterinary practices, was expanded to include new surveillance centres at the Royal
Veterinary College in Hertfordshire and the Liverpool Veterinary School;

