Introduction
Abstract
Laccases are oxidase enzymes produced by "white rot' fungi as part of a complex armoury of redox enzymes
used to break down lignin – part of the carbon cycle of nature. Laccases alone or in combination with redox
co-catalysts have been shown to oxidize xenobiotic compounds under conditions that can be described as
"green'. This paper describes some novel oxidations using the laccase–mediator method and some current
limitations to the use of this technology.

Introduction

Laccases are extracellular fungal glycoproteins containing
four copper atoms in the active site. They catalyse the oxidation
of a variety of organic substances via a four-electron
reduction of oxygen to water. In vitro, laccases will oxidize
electron-rich compounds such as phenols and anilines; however,
the redox potential of laccase alone is not high enough
to break carbon–hydrogen aliphatic bonds. However, in
the presence of a redox co-catalyst or mediator, oxidation
of certain carbon–hydrogen bonds becomes feasible [1–3].
The enzyme oxidizes the mediator which can diffuse away
from the enzyme, oxidize a substrate, then the reduced
mediator returns to the catalytic cycle. The stoichiometric
oxidant is oxygen. Since these oxidations occur in water at
close to ambient temperature (20–40?C), the potential exists
for a green and environmentally friendly oxidation method
for xenobiotic molecules. The absence of any complicated
cofactor recycling is also very attractive for the organic
chemist.
The catalytic cycle is shown in Figure 1 along with a
range of commonlaccasemediators (not comprehensive). The
mediator–substrate oxidation has been reported to occur via
an ionic mechanism, or two radical mechanisms, electron
transfer or hydrogen atom abstraction [4,5]. TEMPO
(2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy free radical) and its
analogues favour the ionic pathway and mediators such
as HBT (1-hydroxybenztriazole) and ABTS [2,2_-azinobis-
(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonic acid)] react via radical
pathways [4,5].
The question should be asked: why should the synthetic
chemist seek out novel oxidation techniques? For example,
aldehydes can be produced from alcohols via oxidationwith a
wide range of reagents: chromates, manganese (IV), SeO2, hypervalent
iodine, halogens, sodium hypochlorite/hydrogen
peroxide plus catalyst, Swern-type reagents andmany others.
However, many traditional chemical reagents have handling
Key words: aldehyde, aromatization, green oxidation, laccase, mediator, N-dealkylation.
Abbreviations used: ABTS, 2,2_-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonic acid); HBT, 1-
hydroxybenztriazole; TEMPO, 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy free radical.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed (email andrew.wells@astrazeneca.com).
and environmental issues when used on scale, selectivity
may be poor and some may have very poor atom economy.
Hydrogen peroxide is cheap, readily available with few
apparent environmental concerns, but chemical selectivity
and safety issues such as reagent accumulation and highly
exothermic reactions can make scale-up and production
hazardous [6–8].
So as we strive for a greener and more sustainable economy,
there is a growing interest in the application of laccase–
mediator systems as green oxidants in many diverse areas
including wood pulping [3] and bioremediation [9], more
specifically the oxidation of persistent organic pollutants
such as dyes [10] and polyaromatic hydrocarbons [11] and
waste streams from food production [12]. In the area of
organic synthesis, laccase–mediator oxidations have been employed
for the oxidation of functional groups [4,5,13–15],
the coupling of phenols and steroids [16,17] and the construction
of carbon–nitrogen bonds [18] and as the key steps
in the synthesis of complex natural products [19].
Aryl aldehydes can be produced via oxidation of the corresponding
benzyl alcohols. To date, much of the work had
focused on electron-rich aromatics such as veratraldehyde
and anisaldehyde [4,5,15]. In order to expand the scope and
understanding of this interesting green oxidation, we report
our results in this exciting area.
The bulk of the reactions reported here were run in pH 4.5
citrate buffer at 2.5–10% (w/v) substrate concentration, with
1–3 weight% of laccase (0.8 unit · mg?1) and 5–30 mol% of
mediator for 4–48 h at 30–35?C.
Synthesis of aldehydes
Since the reaction is water-based, we thought that laccase–
mediator oxidationwould be ideal for the synthesis of heteroaromatic
aldehydes, especially pyridines, since these are often
quite water-soluble. This oxidation has been demonstrated
using stoichiometric oxonium perchlorate salts derived from
4-acetylamido-TEMPO in dichloromethane [20]. Hence we
chose to see if catalytic TEMPO could be used, the oxonium
salt being generated by laccase oxidation. Indeed, with a
few weight% of enzyme and 10–20 mol% of TEMPO
in pH 5 buffer at 30–35?C, excellent yields of aldehydes
(A–D, Figure 2) could be obtained from the corresponding
carbinols. Several attempts to produce 2-acetylpyridine
(E) from 1-pyridin-2-yl ethanol gave only very low yields
of product although 4-methoxyacetophenone (F) could be
readily produced in50%plus yield under identical conditions
[19]. We concluded that (F) or its precursor must inhibit the
enzyme.
2,6-Bis(hydroxymethyl)pyridine (G) can give two products,
the mono-aldehyde (H) and/or the dialdehyde (I).
Our initial attempts gave approx. 1:1 mixtures of (H) and
(I), but with moderate fine tuning (certainly not optimized)
the yield of mono-aldehyde (H) could be increased to approx.
45%, with the residue being mainly unchanged diol (G).
Thus the laccase–mediator method shows promise for the
selective mono-oxidation of diols. In comparison, it has been
reported that mono-aldehyde (H) can be produced from (G)
in 70% yield using 66 mole equivalents of manganese dioxide
in chloroform [21].
For all pyridine carbinols, no oxidation was observed
with laccase or mediator alone, and TEMPO was the only
successful mediator identified, suggesting that an ionic pathway
is required for oxidation of these electron-deficient
aromatics.ABTS or HBTgave only a few per cent conversion
into products [5].
2-Furan-2-yl methanol and 2-thiophen-2-yl methanol
were cleanly oxidized to the corresponding aldehydes (J) and
(K) with no major by-products detected by HPLC.
Oxidation of sulphur compounds
Free thiols (RSH) have been shown to be potent inhibitors
of laccases, presumably via co-ordination of the thiol to the
copper atoms in the enzyme active site [15]. We attempted
a laccase–TEMPO oxidation of thioanisole, and saw no
sulphoxide or sulphone formation, even with high concentrations
of enzyme and mediator. While some inhibition of
the laccase was apparent, enough activity remained to suggest
that laccase oxidation of thioether-containing molecules may
be a possibility. Indeed this proved to be the case, with a high
yield (88%) of thioanisaldehyde (L) being produced from the
corresponding alcohol (Figure 2). This was a very selective
reaction with no sulphur oxidation or Dakin-type (phenols)
by-products being produced.
Primary benzyl amines
By analogy with aryl alcohols, we expected primary benzylamines
to give aldehydes after oxidation to the imine
and subsequent hydrolysis. By and large, this was the case
for a range of substrates, with aldehydes (M), (N), (O),
(P) and (Q) being produced in 40–100% yield (see Figure
2). Oxidation of benzylamine to yield benzaldehyde (R)
was very sluggish and low yielding. Further investigation
revealed that the laccase used (Trametes versicolor) was
severely inhibited by benzaldehyde, suggesting that product
inhibition could be problematicwith substrates that are oxidized
to produce benzaldehyde. Curiously, T. versicolor was
inert to most of the other aldehyde products except for 2-
thiophein carboxaldehyde (K), which was a weak inhibitor.
During the oxidation of 4-aminomethylbenzoic acid, apart
from the expected product (Q), two by-products were
detected and identified by HPLC. These were identified
as terephthalic acid (T) and 4-cyanobenzoic acid (S), both
formed at approx. 10% yield. This interesting observation
shows that the laccase–mediator system is capable of oxidizing
the initially formed imine intermediate to a nitrile [22],
and further oxidizing the primary aldehyde product to a
carboxylic acid [23]. The concentration of (S) did not change
after complete consumption of the benzylamine, but the
concentration of (T) did increase (reaching ?40% yield) at
the expense of (Q).
Tert-amines
N,N-Diethylaminomethylbenzene has been reported to be
quantitatively oxidized to benzaldehyde by T. villosa laccase–
TEMPO [15]. Due to potential problems with benzaldehyde
inhibition, we examined N,N-diethylaminomethyl-
4-trifluoromethylbenezne (U), the corresponding aldehyde
being relatively non-toxic to T. versicolor. Rather than aldehyde
(O), we observed a surprising dealkylation reaction
producing (V) and (W) as initial products, giving approx.
1:1:1 mixtures of all three possible amines, along with small
amounts of aldehyde (O) (Figure 2).
Following on from this unexpected result, we briefly examined
N,N-dimethylaminomethylbenzene and dibenzylamine
with laccase–TEMPO and found similar behaviour,
e.g. mixtures of products arising from N-dealkylation and
benzaldehyde were detected.
Oxidation of hydroxylamines
We also examined the oxidation of hydroxylamines to produce
oximes and nitrones and found that for a range of
compounds, oxidized products could be produced in very
high yield for primary and secondary hydroxylamines. A
free hydroxy group is not necessary for the reaction since
O-hydroxylamine ethers also give high yields of products
(Figure 2). As opposed to pyridylcarbinols, both ionic and
radical pathway mediators (TEMPO and ABTS) could give
high product yields.
Our key driver for the study of hydroxylamine oxidation
was to look for enantioselectivity in the oxidation. In all cases
examined where the hydroxylamine was dosed as a racemate,
chiral HPLC/GLC showed no enrichment of a single
enantiomer. Thus we conclude that the oxidation occurs away
from any chiral influence of the enzyme (N.J. Turner, T. Eve
and A.Wells, unpublished work).
Aromatization
Although at a very early stage of development, the laccase–
mediator system shows promise in certain aromatization
reactions, giving high yields of aromatic compounds from
dehydro-aromatics (see Figure 2) for the oxidation of
Nifedipine. In this case, a radical pathway is preferred, with
TEMPO being an inefficient mediator.
As with the carbinols, oxidation occurred under very mild
conditions with catalytic amounts of enzyme and mediator.
Typical chemical reagents for this type of transformation are
chromates, manganese dioxide, hypervalent iodine reagents
and oxygen and cobalt catalysts, so laccase–mediator aromatization
does appear to be a green alternative.
Fate of mediators
Product or substrate inhibition is a potential drawback for
any enzyme-catalysed process. This can to some extent be
addressed by supporting the protein in an inert matrix [24]
or modifying the reaction conditions [25]. In order to ensure
maximum productivity, it is essential to measure the stability
and activity throughout the reaction to ensure that active
enzyme is present. With laccase–mediator oxidations, we
have found that it is also vital to monitor the concentration
of mediator present since this can change throughout the
reaction. In some reactions, the TEMPO concentration remains
fairly constant and catalytic activity is good. In some
cases, the TEMPO concentration decreases rapidly at the
start of the reaction and then levels off. Some reactions, although
few, consume relatively large amounts of TEMPO,
rendering the process uncatalytic! Examination of these
reactions by GLC–MS showed that the fate of the TEMPO
was predominately deoxygenation (Figure 3), to give 2,2,6,6-
tetramethylpiperidine. Looking at the catalytic cycle for
TEMPO (Figure 3), there is no requirement for oxygen
transfer from TEMPO or its oxonium ion in the catalytic
cycle, so the mechanism of deoxygenation is unclear –
possibly some interaction and oxidation process with the
protein?
In other laccase oxidations, we have been looking at HBT
as a laccase mediator. HBT acts as a radical mediator rather
than ionic, but a severe factor limiting catalytic productivity is
again deoxygenation to benztriazole. Indeed, for recalcitrant
substrates in the presence of large amounts of enzyme and
HBT, deoxygenation is the predominant process seen.When
this occurs, rapid deactivation of the enzyme is also seen,
suggesting some interaction of the oxidized mediator with the
protein. A similar deoxygenation of HBT has been reported
in manganese peroxidase-catalysed oxidations [26].
Mediator stability and unfavourable interactions of the
oxidized mediator with the protein can severely limit catalytic
efficiency of these oxidation processes.
Conclusions
The use of laccase–mediator oxidations does show promise as
a green and environmentally friendly alternative to chemical
oxidation with a wide range of substrates. The use of modern
molecular biology techniques can produce more stable and
active recombinant proteins for use as catalysts. However, a
key area for research to drive this green technology forward
must be the study of the fate of mediators and the synthesis
of "designer' mediators to improve efficiency.
