The paper begins by outlining MacIntyre's conceptual framework of
virtues, goods, practices and institutions, characterizes the virtuous business
organization and describes the levels notions of the agent, institution and
environment. It draws some tentative conclusions as to relationships between
the features of the levels and the likelihood of institutional protection of
virtue-embodying practices, and concludes by considering and drawing out
implications from the case of Traidcraft plc.
Before commencing, however, there are two points we should note. The
first is that MacIntyre's concerns are with bureaucratic organizations in
general "whether in the form of private corporations or of government
agencies' (MacIntyre 1985: 25), and his characterization of bureaucratic
managers is similarly generic rather than specific to corporations. Our focus
in this paper, however, is specifically with business organizations and, as
such, while many of the issues that MacIntyre's framework addresses might
equally be applicable to bureaucratic organizations in general, we do not
directly address this issue.
The second point is that MacIntyre's understanding of capitalist organizations
draws heavily on what has been termed "managerial capitalism',
although elements of "investor capitalism' (see Nielsen 2002) or "stock market
capitalism' (Handy 2002) are also readily observable in his work. MacIntyre
himself accepts that different capitalisms exist, and in the 1995 preface to the
republication of his Marxism and Christianity (1953), he argues that the social
democratic form (which we may take as being close to the "stakeholder' form
— see Hutton 1995, but also Hampden-Turner and Trompenaars 1993) is
inevitably vulnerable to the incorporation and destruction of trade unions and
a consequent return to a form in which "[w]orkers would so far as possible
be returned to the condition of mere instruments of capital formation'
(MacIntyre 1995: xv). The extent, then, to which different forms of capitalism
are more or less conducive to organizational virtue is an important question,
but one which we can address only indirectly here. We will, however, return
to both these points briefly in our conclusions.
MacIntyre's Virtues–Goods–Practice–Institution Schema
Goods, Practices and Institutions
The significance of MacIntyre's work in general and its application to
contemporary organizations was addressed in the first paper of this special
issue (Beadle and Moore 2006). From this, it is clear that MacIntyre's arguments
for and developments of virtue ethics, and their application specifically
to the area of business, are already well documented and have received critical
review (see Beadle 2002; Moore 2002, 2005a, 2005b, for example). In order
to explore this further here, however, we begin by returning to MacIntyre's
oft-quoted definition of a practice:
"Any coherent and complex form of socially established cooperative human activity
through which goods internal to that form of activity are realized in the course of

trying to achieve those standards of excellence which are appropriate to, and partially
definitive of, that form of activity, with the result that human powers to achieve
excellence, and human conceptions of the ends and goods involved, are systematically
extended.' (MacIntyre 1985: 187)
Internal goods derived from practices, both the excellence of products and
the perfection of the individual in the process (MacIntyre 1985: 189–190, and
see also MacIntyre 1994: 284 and below), can be contrasted with external
goods such as fame, power, profit or, more generally, success. When achieved,
MacIntyre argues, these external goods are "always some individual's
property and possession. [They are] characteristically objects of competition
in which there must be losers as well as winners' (MacIntyre 1985: 190). With
internal goods, however, although there is competition in one sense, this is
competition to excel, and so benefits all members of the community engaged
in the practice (MacIntyre 1985: 190–191).
In order for practices to flourish, however, institutions are required to
provide for their sustenance:
"Institutions are characteristically and necessarily concerned with ... external goods.
They are involved in acquiring money and other material goods; they are structured
in terms of power and status, and they distribute money, power and status as rewards.
Nor could they do otherwise if they are to sustain not only themselves, but also the
practices of which they are the bearers. For no practices can survive for any length
of time unsustained by institutions. Indeed so intimate is the relationship of practices
to institutions — and consequently of the goods external to the goods internal to the
practices in question — that institutions and practices characteristically form a single
causal order in which the ideals and the creativity of the practice are always vulnerable
to the acquisitiveness of the institution, in which the cooperative care for common
goods of the practice is always vulnerable to the competitiveness of the institution.
In this context the essential feature of the virtues is clear. Without them, without
justice, courage and truthfulness, practices could not resist the corrupting power of
institutions.' (MacIntyre 1985: 194)
MacIntyre's description of institutions and their relationship with practices
can be applied in almost any context. MacIntyre himself indicates that, "the
range of practices is wide: arts, sciences, games, politics in the Aristotelian
sense, the making and sustaining of family life, all fall under the concept'
(MacIntyre 1985: 188). Our argument here is that this can be extended to
include organizational life in general and business organizations in particular.
But the essential association and tension between practices and institutions, and
between internal and external goods, gives the texture of organizational life a
central dilemma, which we depict here (see Figure 1) and explore further below.
MacIntyre acknowledged that, in After Virtue, he did not pay particular
attention to what he termed "productive practices'. He later made good that
lack of attention by referring specifically to productive crafts such as "farming
and fishing, architecture and construction':
"The aim internal to such productive crafts, when they are in good order, is never
only to catch fish, or to produce beef or milk, or to build houses. It is to do so in a
manner consonant with the excellences of the craft, so that there is not only a good
product, but the craftsperson is perfected through and in her or his activity.'
(MacIntyre 1994: 284)

But what is it that enables the craftsperson to seek and realize such
perfection? To answer this question requires commentary on MacIntyre's
notion of virtue and its relationship to goods, practices and institutions.
Virtues and Institutional Governance
MacIntyre initially defines the virtues as:
"dispositions not only to act in particular ways but also to feel in particular ways. To
act virtuously … is to act from inclination formed by the cultivation of the virtues.'
(MacIntyre 1985: 149)
But he later links virtues, goods and practices more specifically:
"A virtue is an acquired human quality the possession and exercise of which tends to
enable us to achieve those goods which are internal to practices and the lack of which
effectively prevents us from achieving any such goods.' (MacIntyre 1985: 191)
Virtues, therefore, are enduring character traits (as, of course, are vices),
not practice-specific, but spanning and necessary to the flourishing of any
practice. The virtues, however, receive their full warrant in the context of the
notion of a narrative quest towards one's telos – the good as such: "[t]he
virtues are precisely those qualities the possession of which will enable an
individual to achieve eudaimonia and the lack of which will frustrate his
movement toward that telos' (MacIntyre 1985: 148). The telos, or purpose or
good, of human life is given the name eudaimonia by Aristotle. MacIntyre
translates this as something like, "blessedness, happiness, prosperity. It is the
state of being well and doing well, of a man's being well-favoured himself
and in relation to the divine' (MacIntyre 1985: 148).
The virtues enable the individual to achieve the goods internal to practices,
and the achievement of those goods across a variety of practices and over MacIntyre, in drawing attention to the central dilemma of his schema, notes
that, "practices are often distorted by their modes of institutionalization, when
irrelevant considerations relating to money, power and status are allowed to
invade the practice' (MacIntyre 1994: 289). Thus, an important part of the
whole virtues–goods–practice–institution schema is to focus on the level of
the institution in order to assess what features of the institution will better
enable it not to distort the practice that it houses. Equally, there is a need to
focus on the virtues necessary to sustain what we might call such virtuous
institutional forms. Following from this, we can ask: what would characterize
an institution in good order, one that protects and perhaps extends the excellences
of the practice that it houses?
The Character of the Virtuous Institution
Evidence from a variety of studies (Akaah and Riordan 1989; Baumhart 1961;
Brenner and Molander 1977, for example) highlights the importance of peer
and superior influence on the ethical behaviour of managers. It has been argued
(Klein 1988 and Moore 2005b) that an appropriate way of conceptualizing this
is to think not just in terms of particular individuals and their exercise (or not)
of the virtues at the institutional level, as MacIntyre does, but also in terms of
institutional -level virtues (and vices), and hence of institutional character.
Just as MacIntyre talks of the concern for external goods and the acquisitiveness
and competitiveness of the institution, it seems perfectly possible, by way
of analogy or projection (Goodpaster and Matthews 1982: 135), or by way of
metaphor (Morgan 1997: 4–8 and passim), to speak of the institution as having
a virtuous or vicious character, or a character that is somewhere between these
two extremes. Klein comments that, "formal organizations can function like a
moral person … they potentially have something analogous to character, which
can be evaluated as virtuous or vicious' (Klein 1988: 56).
A virtuous institutional character, then, might be defined as the seat of the
virtues necessary for an institution to engage in practices with excellence,
focusing on those internal goods thereby obtainable, while warding off threats
from its own inordinate pursuit of external goods and from the corrupting
power of other institutions in its environment with which it engages (see
Moore 2005b).
Taking business organizations as a particular form of institution (one
housing what MacIntyre, as we have seen, calls "productive crafts') and
drawing from the definition of virtuous institutional character given above, the
concept of the virtuous business organization can be explored. A business
organization with a virtuous character would, first, be aware that it is founded
on, and has as its most important function, the sustenance of the particular
business practice that it houses. Second, and following from this, the organization
would encourage the pursuit of excellence in that practice. Third, it
would focus on external goods (such as profit and reputation) as both a
necessary and worthwhile function of the organization (they are goods, not
bads), but only to the extent necessary to the sustenance and development of the practice. Finally, the organization would be such as to be able to resist the
corrupting power of institutions in its environment with which it, in turn,
relates, such as competitors, suppliers or those that represent the financial
market, where these encourage a single-minded concentration on external
goods.
Which particular virtues would characterize virtuous business organizations?
Although we might consider a wider list (Moore 2005b includes the
cardinal virtues, for example), it is clear that justice, courage and truthfulness
(MacIntyre 1985: 194, cited above) are the sine qua non of MacIntyre's
schema, together with the virtues of integrity and constancy (MacIntyre 1999:
317–318), which refer to their consistent application across practices and
over time.
The virtuous business organization would require courage in order to resist
the corrupting power of institutions with which it relates, and to minimize the
effects of the environment on its character where these might be damaging.
It would require justice in order to distribute external goods appropriately; to
weigh its own advantage with that of the wider community; to foster its own
excellence through, for example, an allocation of roles that ensures that those
who are truly best at particular tasks are appointed to do them; and to generate
internal harmony through ensuring that subordinates accept the justice of their
place (Klein 1988: 60). Solomon's (1992) emphasis on trust (by which we
should infer the virtue of both offering trust to others and being trustworthy
oneself) contains within its definition the necessity of truthfulness for the
conduct of business.

