

The width B of the 200 reflection, modelled as a Lorentzian function, was extracted by deconvolution of the equatorial intensity profile and used to calculate the dimension T of the crystalline lattice normal to the 200 plane using the Scherrer equation 

where K, the Scherrer constant, was set at a value of 0.9 appropriate for crystalline cellulose (Newman 1999). This gave a value of T = 2.42 nm. 

Fig. 5 WAXS pattern from celery collenchyma cellulose. The fibre axis is horizontal 


Discussion
Different estimates of the microfibril diameter were obtained by SAXS, WAXS and NMR. None of these methods gave an unambiguous single value for the microfibril diameter. Each method gave a range of possible diameters together with structural constraints that varied with diameter. To understand the origin of the differences between these estimated diameters it is necessary to consider what is measured by each of the techniques, and what assumptions underlie the calculation of microfibril diameter from the measurements. 
The determination of microfibril diameters by SAXS often simply involves modelling the intensity profile using a Bessel function on the assumption that microfibrils of fixed diameter, usually in the hydrated state, are uncorrelated in position and have a low packing density. Jakob et al. (1994, 1995) were able to estimate the microfibril diameter of spruce wood cellulose as 2.5 nm from the first minimum of the Bessel function. In the case of the dried celery collenchyma cellulose examined here, the intensity profile was best described by a convolution of the Bessel function from individual cylinders and a distinct interference function arising from an array of correlated objects. The first minimum of the Bessel function was difficult to locate in the presence of both background intensity and the interference function. 
We are not aware of previous observations of a distinct peak arising from the contribution of an interference function in SAXS patterns from native cellulose, although Jakob et al. (1995) were able extract the contribution of a minor interference function by plotting the deviation of the SAXS intensity curve observed for spruce wood from a modelled Bessel function. Softwood microfibrils are known to be aggregated in their native state (Wickholm et al. 1998), and differ structurally from microfibrils of primary-wall cellulose. In the present experiments we took account of both form and interference functions simultaneously by simulating scattering from modelled arrays of microfibrils with partially disordered lateral spacing. 
The models consistent with the SAXS observations had microfibrils of approximately uniform diameter that probably lay at some point within the range 2.4–3.2 nm. The mean centre-to-centre distance was 3.6 nm. Thus there appeared to be gaps between adjacent microfibrils. The gaps presumably contained hemicellulose chains that were packed loosely enough to provide X-ray contrast with the microfibrils. Although a circular model was used to calculate dimensions from the NMR data, the curve of SAXS intensity against q does not discriminate directly between circular, square and other approximately isodiametric shapes. 
The dimension 2.4 nm, calculated from the width of the 200 reflection in the WAXS pattern using the Scherrer equation, is that of the crystalline lattice normal to the 200 plane. It lies at the bottom end of the range of microfibril diameters estimated by SAXS. Similar or still smaller values have previously been observed for primary-wall cellulose using WAXS. For example Thimm et al. (2002) obtained a dimension of 2.0 nm from similar experiments on celery parenchyma cellulose. Factors such as internal lattice defects can contribute to the broadening of equatorial reflections that is used to estimate the dimensions of the crystalline lattice through the Scherrer equation, so these diameter estimates are a minimum. Further broadening of the 200 reflection may arise from the microfibril geometry and the nature of the surface chains. To illustrate these effects we must temporarily abandon the circular geometry used hitherto in this paper. 
Figure 6A shows the most commonly assumed model for the arrangement of chains in microfibrils of higher-plant cellulose, with the 110 and 1-10 lattice planes forming the microfibril surfaces. B shows an alternative arrangement. At present there is no firm evidence on which to discriminate between these and other lattice orientations for such thin microfibrils, hence our preference for circular models where possible in the present work. In model A the Scherrer dimension associated with the 200 reflection is nearly 3 nm at the centre of the microfibril but diminishes to zero at the left and right corners. It would thus be predicted that the radial intensity profile of the reflection would not conform to simple Scherrer theory but that application of the Scherrer equation would yield an approximate dimension considerably under 3 nm. Model B does not give rise to this problem. It would be advantageous to obtain Scherrer dimensions in different directions using the 110 and 1-10 reflections (Jakob et al. 1995), but these reflections were almost superimposed and their respective widths could not be determined. 

Fig. 6 Two possible arrangements of cellulose chains in the cross-section of an approximately square microfibril. All chains are positioned in conformity with the cellulose I? lattice and the direction perpendicular to the (200) lattice plane is arrowed 

In applying the Scherrer equation to cellulose it has normally been assumed that the crystalline lattice extends to the microfibril surface. From NMR it is known, however, that the surface chains differ conformationally. It needs to be asked whether the surface chains should be included in the Scherrer dimension or not. Their mean conformation is known to be different in detail and less flat than that of crystalline cellulose chains, but this may not prevent coherent scattering if the surface chains are similarly positioned to those of the interior lattice. However it seems unlikely that they will contribute to the Scherrer dimensions of the lattice if they are tilted into a substantially different rotational orientation. Their rotational orientation is unknown, and also affects the interpretation of the NMR data. 
These uncertainties mean that microfibril diameters greater than the Scherrer dimension of 2.4 nm, as suggested by the SAXS experiments, would also be consistent with the WAXS data. The smaller diameters within the range 2.4–3.2 nm are only possible if the position and tilt of the surface chains are in reasonable conformity with the interior lattice. 
The deduction of microfibril dimensions from the NMR spectrum depends on the correct assignment of spectral peaks to chains in the interior and at the surface of the microfibril. There is agreement that the cluster of C-4 peaks around 89 ppm can be assigned to chains in the ordered interior of the microfibril but the 80–86.5 ppm region contains contributions from surface chains of varying degrees of disorder and from hemicelluloses (Newman 1998; Viëtor et al. 2002; Wickholm et al. 1998). Assuming that the microfibril dimensions are constant and can be described by a simple circular model, the interior region accounts for a fraction A i/A of the cross-sectional area given by: 

where R is the overall radius and S is the thickness of the surface monolayer of chains. The cross-sectional area of one chain in the cellulose I? lattice A o = 0.317 nm2 (Nishiyama et al. 2003). If the surface monolayer were a continuation of the crystalline lattice we could estimate S = (A o)0.5 = 0.563 nm. This assumption, or similar assumptions based on square models like Fig. 4A (Newman 1999), underlies past calculations of microfibril diameter by NMR (e.g. Ha et al. 1998). It leads to a calculated diameter of 2.6 nm for celery collenchyma cellulose when hemicellulosic chains are excluded. This is close to the diameter estimated by WAXS. Reasonable agreement between microfibril diameters from NMR and WAXS has been noted previously (Thimm et al. 2002) but both depend on the assumption that structural differences between the crystalline interior and the surface layer of the microfibrils can be neglected. If the surface chains are tilted so that they lie flat on each of the surfaces of the microfibril illustrated in Fig. 6A, the thickness S of the surface layer is reduced to 0.4 nm. With the observed ratio of surface to interior chains the calculated microfibril diameter then falls to 1.8 nm. If the surface chains are tilted in the opposite direction so that their wide axes project radially outward from the microfibril, the thickness S of the surface layer is increased to 0.8 nm and the calculated microfibril diameter increases to 3.6 nm. Thus the NMR data can be made consistent with the full range of microfibril diameters possible from SAXS (2.4–3.6 nm) simply by varying the assumptions about the rotational orientation of the surface chains. At the lower end of the SAXS range of diameters, the surface chains would be close to their orientation within the crystalline lattice, while at the upper end they would be tilted towards the radial direction. Coincidentally, this matches the constraint on orientation of the surface chains imposed by the WAXS results. 
Integrating the SAXS, NMR and WAXS data, assuming that the hemicelluloses lie outside the microfibril but dropping the assumption that the surface and interior cellulose chains are equivalent, it was possible to model the distribution of chains in the microfibril for the 2.4–3.6 nm range of diameters consistent with the SAXS data. Within the spaces between the microfibrils the packing density of hemicellulose chains was low except at the largest diameters, ranging from 0.15 at microfibril diameter 2.4 nm to 0.46 at microfibril diameter 3.2 nm. It seems likely that these hemicellulose chains were concentrated between microfibrils at their points of closest approach, helping to control the microfibril spacing. The mean gap width between 3.2 nm microfibrils is 0.4 nm, the thickness of a hemicellulose chain laid flat. It is more difficult to envisage how microfibrils of the smallest postulated diameter 2.4–2.6 nm, might be maintained at the right spacing since their associated hemicelluloses are particularly sparse and the mean interfibrillar gap is greater than the maximum width of a hemicellulose chain. Somewhat larger microfibrils are not excluded by our NMR and WAXS data, provided that the cellulose chains in the surface layer of the microfibril are tilted into a different rotational orientation from those in the crystalline interior. Incorporation of hemicellulose chains into the surface layer, a possibility not explored in detail here, would decrease the microfibril diameter that is consistent with the NMR data. 
Diameters of only around 2 nm, based on NMR or WAXS, have been suggested for "crystallites' of primary-wall cellulose in previous publications (e.g. Ha et al. 1998; Smith et al. 1998). The larger diameters observed here may be due in part to coalescence of crystallites during the isolation of celery collenchyma cellulose. This is evident from the NMR spectra, in which the C-4 and C-6 signals assigned to interior chains account for slightly more (32%) of the cellulose signal intensity here than in spectra from intact cell walls (Ha et al. 1998; Smith et al. 1998; Newman 1999; Viëtor et al. 2002) leading to a diameter of 2.6 nm for celery collenchyma microfibrils when calculated on the assumptions that were adopted in these publications. 
As explained above, this may underestimate the diameter if the surface chains do not conform to the crystalline lattice. The same uncertainties apply to published NMR and WAXS diameters for primary-wall cellulose "crystallites', which could therefore be too small by an unknown amount, perhaps up to nearly 1 nm. Diameters of microfibrils of cotton or flax cellulose would then also be underestimated for the same reasons although the effect is less noticeable for these larger microfibrils. 
The range of microfibril diameters that best fit the data for celery collenchyma, 2.4–3.2 nm, corresponds to between 15 and 25 chains. A 36-chain model, originating from calculations by Herth (1983), is often assumed for the nascent microfibrils emanating from the terminal complexes responsible for both primary-wall and secondary-wall cellulose in higher plants. If one terminal complex synthesises one microfibril, it seems likely that the number of chains involved is less than 36. 
Acknowledgements  Parts of this work were conducted as part of a long-term proposal at the ESRF to TJW. We thank BBSRC (grant no. BBS/B/09643), EPSRC and SHEFC for financial support.

