1. Introduction
Pelican crossings are now commonplace on roads in the UK. They are essentially signal controlled crossing points where a pedestrian is able, through use of a button, to call a red signal to halt the traffic. Such crossings are generally perceived positively by the public (more so than the main alternative—unsignalised zebra crossings), they have a good overall safety record and are typically installed for safety reasons (see DoT, 1995 for further detail). Despite this, accidents still occur at such crossings and continued monitoring of their safety is important. In Britain in 2002 there were 1584 reported pedestrian injuries in accidents on Pelican crossings (4.1% of total pedestrian casualties (DoT, 2003a)). Much safety monitoring in the Britain and many other countries has been carried out using accident frequencies (IHT, 1990a, IHT, 1990b and Zeeger et al., 2002). Because accidents are rare, monitoring requires a long time frame and sometimes, at particular sites, it is impossible to obtain sufficient data for analysis. In addition, the accidents must have already happened before the data can be collected. As one of the aims of monitoring is to give early warning if something is going wrong (IHT, 1997) then time may be lost before a dangerous situation can be rectified. Consequently, there is a need to develop a monitoring method using another safety indicator, which occurs more frequently, and can be used as a proxy for accidents. As safety assessment and evaluation should ideally be made quickly, it is important that the monitoring is undertaken automatically and hence, the safety indicator used needs to be measurable automatically and ideally readily available on site. The aim of this paper is to evaluate the feasibility of developing a simple transferable method for automatic monitoring of traffic safety at Pelican crossings. 
This paper reviews and evaluates research which has examined the potential for automatic monitoring of different kinds of safety indicator. It then goes on to describe a method used here to measure safety using vehicle speed and deceleration behaviour from which the occurrence of pedestrian–vehicle conflicts can be determined. The final part of the paper looks at the feasibility of using the methods developed to monitor safety automatically using the standard in situ loops in place on the approaches to Pelican crossings. 
2. Background
Probably the most widely used non-accident based safety indicator is traffic conflicts (Perkins and Harris, 1968, Hayward, 1968, Allen et al., 1977 and Hyden, 1987). Traditionally, most traffic conflict techniques either involve direct observations (Hyden, 1987 and TRRl and IHT, 1987) or are based on video observations (van der Horst, 1984, van der Horst and Wilmink, 1986, Jansen et al., 1988 and Tenkink and van der Horst, 1990). Such techniques are not easily adapted to automatic data collection. Another safety indicator that has been proposed is vehicle deceleration (Balasha et al., 1980, Bonsall et al., 1992 and Hupfer, 1997), which can be collected automatically (Darzentas et al., 1980, van der Horst and Brown, 1989 and Bonsall et al., 1992). However, none of the data collection methods applied used the standard equipment already available at Pelican crossings. Darzentas et al. (1980) used a pair of coaxial cables installed at points 50 and 3 m before the stop line. van der Horst and Brown (1989) and Bonsall et al. (1992) collected deceleration data using instrumented cars, though a large number of such cars is needed to obtain sufficient data for safety monitoring (Bonsall et al., 1992) and this makes the method impractical. 
Another problem is that there are no satisfactory models relating vehicle decelerations with other safety indicators such as accident frequencies or conflicts. When proposing vehicle deceleration as a safety indicator, Balasha et al. (1980) did not relate it to any safety indicators but defined near accidents where there was rapid vehicle deceleration, that differed from the normal experience. Bonsall et al. (1992) developed models to predict accident frequencies using vehicle decelerations. However, as accident data needs to be collected for a long period, the deceleration data and accident data cannot be collected simultaneously. As the vehicle speed and deceleration profiles changed during the study period, Bonsall et al. (1992) found that the relationships were not useful. They suggested that changes to the road environment, such as traffic management schemes and traffic calming were the cause of the changes. Consequently, decelerations need to be related to a safety indicator that can be collected simultaneously, such as conflicts. 
Hupfer (1997) suggested that deceleration to safety time (DST), the constant deceleration needed to avoid a collision, is a reliable safety indicator in pedestrian–vehicle conflicts. He also proposed four conflict levels using deceleration. However, it is not obvious how he came to these conclusions, and the model relating decelerations to pedestrian–vehicle conflicts was not mentioned. 
Given the limitations of the existing work it was felt that a logical progression would be to develop models that examined the relationship between vehicle decelerations (collected from standard loops installed at Pelican crossings) and pedestrian–vehicle conflicts. In order to develop the models, driver reaction (change of speed) during conflicts at Pelican crossings needed to be examined. Similarly, it is necessary to understand something about how pedestrians react when they are involved in conflicts. Previous researchers have studied road user behaviour in conflicts in many situations (Hyden, 1987, Jansen et al., 1988, van der Horst and Brown, 1989 and Varhellyi, 1998) but not at Pelican crossings, perhaps the nearest being the studies by Tourinho and Pietrantonio (2003) who examined pedestrian conflicts at signalised intersections or Lord (1994) who looked at conflicts between pedestrians and left turning vehicles at signalised intersections. 
3. Method
3.1. Data collection and transcription
The research was undertaken at a busy main road Pelican crossing in Leeds in the UK. During the 5-year period prior to the research records showed that there were six injury accidents at the site, two of which involved pedestrians. Information on signal settings, road user behaviour and pedestrian–vehicle conflicts were obtained by analysing data collected by direct measurement, video recording and automatic recording using standard "system D' loops. These are three in situ loops (x, y and z) designed to detect vehicle presence and installed, respectively, at points 39, 25 and 12 m upstream from the stop line of the crossing. 
Three additional pairs of pneumatic tubes were installed on the approach to the crossing. The tubes were needed for three reasons: 
• The data loggers linked to the xyz loops could not calculate vehicle speed over each loop. This problem was overcome by putting down a pair of pneumatic tubes 1 m apart (called T12 here) on top of the z loop, as shown in Fig. 1. 

Display Full Size version of this image (23K)
Fig. 1. Pneumatic tubes location (T12) in relation to the z loop (L12). 
• Vehicle speed and deceleration data were needed in advance of the x loop to examine aspects of driver behaviour approaching the loops. Tubes were put down at 57 and 56 m before the stop line. These points were chosen because they were far enough from the Pelican that the speeds were not influenced by activities on the crossing. According to Darzentas et al. (1980) and Varhellyi (1998) usually drivers do not decelerate before these points. Furthermore, at these points there were lighting columns at which the data logger and its box could be chained and locked.
• An additional pair of tubes was needed to record vehicle speeds close enough to the stop line so that driver behaviour between the z loop and the stop line could be recorded. Tubes were put down at points of 4 and 3 m before the stop line. These points were chosen so that almost all stopping vehicles crossed these tubes and their speeds could be recorded.
Two video recorders were placed on the roof of an adjacent tall building. The first was to collect pedestrian and vehicle data in the vicinity of the crossing. This included the time each vehicle arrived at each loop or tube when approaching the crossing, the lane(s) used by the vehicle, and pedestrian crossing behaviour away from the crossing. The second camera was to collect signal settings, pedestrian behaviour and driver behaviour at the crossing. The locations were sufficiently high to prevent obstruction of view by large vehicles such as buses. 
The data from video were transcribed using the VIDS and PROGRESS programs (Marsden, 1995). The VIDS program was used to transcribe signal setting data (especially the beginning of the green for pedestrians period), pedestrian data (pedestrian step-off times and arrivals from which average walking speed was calculated), and vehicle flow; while the PROGRESS program was used to track the passage of each vehicle crossing the loops and tubes. The programs are able to record events with an accuracy of a hundredth of a second. The VIDS program can record up to two events (such as the time a vehicle arrives at point 1 and the time a vehicle arrives at point 2) simultaneously as many times as required. For each event up to six categories can be applied, such as motorbike, car, light goods vehicle, heavy goods vehicle, bus and other. The PROGRESS program can record more than two events but only once for every record. Each event can also be divided into up to six categories. In this research the VIDS program was used to record either one or two events with up to two categories, while the PROGRESS program was used to record six events with six categories. 
3.2. Detection of the presence of pedestrian–vehicle conflicts
Hyden (1987) developed the following definition of a traffic conflict: 
“A conflict is either an event that would have led to a collision if both road-users had continued with unchanged speeds and directions or a near-miss situation where at least one of the road-users acts as if they were on a collision course”.
This importantly expanded upon earlier definitions to allow for the inclusion of near misses. Hyden's method bases a conflict on the time to accident if the speed and direction of the participants remained unchanged. An alternative approach is using post-encroachment time (PET) which in this context is the difference between the moment a pedestrian leaves the area of potential collision and the moment of arrival at the potential collision by the conflicting vehicle possessing the right of way (Cooper, 1984). 
For this research, the occurrences of pedestrian–vehicle conflicts were initially detected using PET. Usually, in a pedestrian–vehicle conflict at this site, one vehicle was involved with more than one pedestrian as the presence of the signals tended to group pedestrian crossing actions. Furthermore, when a vehicle decelerated, the vehicles behind were forced to decelerate. The data were grouped into time intervals of 1 min that was similar to the cycle time of the Pelican crossing. Models were then developed to relate the severity of conflicts with vehicle speeds and decelerations. During piloting it was found that it was also possible to relate vehicle speeds and decelerations with time to accident (TA). Eventually the occurrence and the severity of conflicts could be detected by using vehicle speeds and deceleration. 
4. Behaviour of road users involved in pedestrian–vehicle conflicts
In an ideal situation there would be no conflicts at a signal controlled crossing such as a Pelican. However, at this site conflicts occurred both as a result of driver and pedestrian non-compliance with the light settings. Most driver non-compliance occurred during the flashing amber to drivers period (i.e. drivers should not proceed unless the crossing is clear of pedestrians)—this accounted for 23.3% of the conflicts in the morning and 21.4% in the afternoon. The other key period for conflicts was during the green for drivers phase when 51.4% of the conflicts in the morning occurred and 61.0% in the afternoon. This latter group of conflicts is likely related to the delays experienced by pedestrians (50% of pedestrians experience signal-imposed delays of more than 27 s). 

