There was some interrelation between characteristics, for example, sleep and caffeine. Sleep problems were similar across the lower levels of caffeine consumption with 34% to 38% of those consuming 1 to 10 caffeine-containing drinks per day reporting at least moderate sleep problems, whereas 48% consuming higher levels of caffeine reported moderate or severe sleep problems (although the number in this group was small).
However, multivariate analysis (Table 2) suggests that age, gender, sleep problems, anxiety, and pain elsewhere in the body were each independently associated with headache, although the strength of these associations was reduced in the multivariate analysis compared with age and gender adjusted individual analysis. Two multivariate analyses were conducted to explore comorbid pain, the first, where the dichotomous variable of any comorbid pain was used and the second, where this was replaced by the number of areas with comorbid pain. Findings were consistent between both approaches.
Headache Severity and Associations.—Respondents were classified for overall headache severity using a scale combining pain severity and headache-related disability. The effect of headache severity on headache associations was then explored using this classification (Table 3). Sleep problems showed an overall increased strength of association with higher headache severity grade, and these associations became stronger with sleep problem severity across all except headache grade I. Headache was associated with an increased likelihood of possible and definite anxiety within all headache severity grades, but the strength of the association increased with higher headache grade and was more pronounced for definite anxiety than possible anxiety. The association of any comorbid pain with headache was stronger with increasing headache grade, as was the association with increasing number of areas of other pain.
Headache Frequency and Associations.—Respondents with headache in the previous 3 months were classified into those reporting headaches less than weekly and those reporting at least one headache a week. The associations with headaches and the trends across severity levels for sleep, anxiety, and comorbid pain, were found in both headache frequency groups, but both the strength of the association and the trends were more marked in the higher frequency category (Table 4).
Migrainous Symptoms and Associations.—A similar pattern of association to that found for all headache was found in the 'likely migraine' group (n = 485)—data not shown. The associations were stronger in the 'likely migraine' group, for example, definite anxiety OR 8.37 (95% CI 5.6, 12.6) for the migrainous group compared with OR 4.09 for all headache sufferers.
Self-Perceived Causes.—Respondents were asked which, if any, of a list of factors, they thought were related to some, most, or all of their headaches. More than two-thirds (1320, 71%) of headache sufferers felt at least some of their headaches were related to stress levels they had experienced (Table 5). Tiredness was also a commonly reported factor (65%), as was having too much work to do (41%), and menstrual cycle for women aged 18 to 55 years (449 of 812, 55%). Reported to a lesser degree were disruptions to eating and sleeping patterns.
Women were more likely to report stress, tiredness, and food related factors compared with men, and 44% of men reported that at least some of their headaches in the previous 3 months were related to alcohol compared with 25% of women. The percentage of respondents reporting any individual factor was lower at older ages except stress, caffeine, and menstrual cycle, for which the highest percentages were reported by 36 to 50 year olds, and certain foods as a cause which was slightly increased in those aged over 50 years.
 
Headache was associated in a cross-sectional survey with the concomitant presence of anxiety and sleep problems in particular. The strength of these associations increased with higher levels of anxiety and sleep problem. Headache was also associated with reporting comorbid pain on a pain manikin, particularly in the neck and other upper body areas. Respondents' headaches were not clearly associated with their reports of a diagnosis (either current or previous) of epilepsy, stroke, or Raynaud's disease, although the numbers with these diagnoses were small and this might have affected both the estimates and in particular their statistical strength. Headache occurrence in a 3-month period was not associated with whether or not a respondent consumed alcohol or caffeine, although there was a link observed between headache and heavy caffeine consumption. Multivariate analysis confirmed that these associations were independent, although the estimates were weaker, compared with the age and gender adjusted analysis alone, indicating some correlation between these different factors. The magnitude of the associations with headache was generally found to increase with greater headache severity and frequency grade, particularly anxiety and sleep problems. The associations for the group of respondents reporting migrainous symptoms with their headaches showed a similar pattern but with stronger associations compared with the all headaches combined group.
The study is limited in that we did not attempt to diagnose the type(s) of headache that respondents were suffering but considered the associations for all headaches. Whilst the associations for individual headache types are of interest, for this study we considered headache from a general population viewpoint and many sufferers will not have their headaches diagnosed (largely because most sufferers do not seek the advice of a doctor about their headaches). However, such individuals could potentially benefit from information on strategies to reduce their headache occurrence and severity.
Survey responders had a higher percentage of females and older people compared with the target population and our previous investigations of non-response bias suggest that this results in a slight underestimate of the prevalence of headache. Whilst there is a need for caution in generalizing prevalences from the study results, this is unlikely to affect the nature of any associations found.
The headache classification used was based on respondents' reports of headache occurrence and pain and disability over a 3-month period, and will therefore be subject to some recall bias over that period. Misclassification however would have tended to underestimate the strength of any real associations. Some respondents (n = 87) reporting low headache-related disability did not report headache pain level and therefore were not able to be classified into a headache severity level. In addition, there were inconsistencies between the time periods studied, with headache characteristics and effects being measured for the previous 3 months, whilst other health measures related to the previous week or month only.
Many of the previous studies of the associations of headache have looked at specific headache diagnoses or severe headache only, and our study demonstrates that some of these associations exist with headache of all severities. Sleep problems have been found to be associated with tension-type headache, and both migraine and tension-type headache are more common in those women who report lack of refreshment after sleep.10 Our study shows that in a general population sample, sleep problems are associated with all headaches combined, and that increasing levels of sleep problems are associated with both greater headache severity and frequency levels.
Migraine and other severe headaches have been shown to be associated with both depression and anxiety disorders.13-16 A recent population survey in Norway found migraine and nonmigrainous headache to be associated with both anxiety and depression (although the association was weaker for depression) and both associations persisted after adjusting for the other.36 This Norwegian study also reported an increasing likelihood of anxiety and depression with increasing frequency of headache. Our study, like the Norwegian study, demonstrated the association of anxiety with all headaches combined, and a weaker association for depression, in the crude and age and gender analysis. However, when we looked at those who reported depression alone (without co-existing anxiety) there was no association with headache occurrence. The association with anxiety persisted after taking account of the other variables in a multivariate analysis and the relationship showed a trend with increasing anxiety level and with increasing severity and frequency of headache.
The Norwegian population survey also found that headache sufferers were more likely to report musculoskeletal symptoms compared with nonsufferers and that the strength of the association increased with increasing headache frequency.37 Our findings for comorbid pain were similar, with headache sufferers more likely to report comorbid pain, and the association being stronger for sufferers with more frequent headaches. Additionally, we found that the strength of the association increased with increasing headache severity level. We also found that headache had a stronger association with pain areas closer to the head area, that is, the associations for neck and shoulder pain were stronger than those for the lower quadrants of the body. A different Norwegian population survey has also demonstrated the link between headache occurrence and neck and shoulder complaints and additionally found those who reported that one complaint occurred frequently were more likely to have reported that the other occurred frequently.38
The findings for caffeine appear to confirm previous findings for migraine and tension-type headache where consumption was not related to headache occurrence.10 However, we did find an association between heavy caffeine consumption and headache occurrence. The previous data for alcohol consumption is less clear10,39 and our results found no association. However, respondents with grades III to V headaches were less likely to report that they drank alcohol, 63% compared with 68% without headache, and 74% in grades I and II, which may suggest that some sufferers with more severe headaches opt not to consume alcohol.
Comorbid conditions are an important issue in the care of migraine patients. Other studies have reported that sufferers show an increased number of other health problems compared with nonmigraine controls, 1.5 conditions compared to 1.1540 and that migraine is known to be associated with stroke in young women,18,19 epilepsy,41 and possibly Raynaud's disease.42 However, migraine is only one type of headache and a recent prospective study in Finland found that, for men, chronic headache was also a predictor of stroke.43 We were interested in all headache types combined and found that none of the diagnoses showed a significant association with headache occurrence. However, the point estimates for association were elevated and so our results must be regarded as inconclusive because of the low numbers with these morbidities in this general population sample.
Headache sufferers identified stress and tiredness as two main factors related to their headaches, with two-thirds stating at least some of their headaches were related to these problems. Our findings confirm those from previous studies where sufferers identified stress as a major factor in headaches.1012 Other precipitants reported in these studies were similar to our findings of self-attribution and included alcohol, lack of sleep, cold or fever, smoking, weather changes, food, and menstruation. Sufferers' self-attribution of headache causality contrasted with the results from the observed associations where no relationship was found between headache occurrence and reported consumption of alcohol and caffeine. One-third of sufferers reported at least some of their headaches were related to drinking alcohol and one-sixth reported headaches related to drinking caffeine. This apparent contradiction is most likely to be explained by the fact that a lack of an overall link with alcohol and caffeine consumption is still compatible with attribution of individual headache episodes to consumption.
This study has identified a number of characteristics that were associated with recent headache and many of those characteristics were interrelated. While these characteristics are potential causes of headache, it may equally be that headaches cause the problem. However, we can conclude from our study that clinical conditions such as stroke and epilepsy, which have been associated with migraine, have proportionately less impact on headache in general in the population as a whole. Whatever is the cause and effect, sleep disturbance and psychological distress are intimately wound up in headache and any treatment approaches to these problems in primary care need to take account of this concurrence and their likely effect on increasing the impact of headache on disability and work.
We are now undertaking a prospective study in this same population in order to disentangle the cause and effect in these associations and to investigate the potential for both prevention of onset and recurrence of headache, and for secondary prevention of disability associated with this common symptom.

