Abstract
Objective
To compare methods commonly used to derive minimal important differences and recommend a rule for defining patients as clinically improved on the low back pain-specific Roland-Morris Disability Questionnaire (RMDQ). 
Methods
447 primary care low back pain consulters completed a questionnaire at consultation and 6 months. Patients were classified as having achieved an important change based on methods with the best theoretical qualities, that is, the standard error of measurement, reliability change index (RCI), and modified RCI (RCindiv), and using a 30% reduction in score from baseline. To assess clinical importance, improvements based on these methods were compared with improvements on other back pain-related measures. 
Results
The percentage of patients rated as improved ranged from 14 to 51% by method. Using a simple rule it was possible to identify patients who had clinically important improvement (36%), patients not improved (53%), and a group of possible improvers (11%). Clinical improvement is shown if RMDQ score is reduced by 30% from baseline and back pain is rated as better on a global rating scale. 
Conclusion
A minimal clinically important difference is derived that is clinically relevant, incorporates the measurement error of the RMDQ, and allows subjects with different grades of severity to improve. 


Keywords: Minimal clinically important difference; Low back pain; Disability; Distribution-based methods 

Article Outline
1. Introduction 
2. Study population and questionnaires 
3. Stage 1—Comparison of methods to determine a MID for improvement 
3.1. Anchor-based methods (MID-A) 
3.2. Distribution-based methods (MID-D) based on measurement error 
3.3. Stage 1 results
4. Stage 2—Comparison of derived MIDs with other back pain-related measures 
5. Stage 3—Incorporation of an anchor 
6. Stage 4—Derivation of a rule for determining clinical improvement for an individual on the RMDQ 
7. Stage 5—Application of the rule to a more severe population 
8. Discussion 
9. Conclusions 
Acknowledgements 
References

1. Introduction
Self-reported generic and disease-specific health profile instruments are commonly used in clinical trials and in longitudinal observational studies. However, a statistically significant change in group scores on a health profile tool does not necessarily equate to a change in an individual's score that either the patient or the clinician would identify as being an important change in the patient's health. 
Methods for establishing the smallest meaningful or important change for the individual on health profile instruments have recently been reviewed [1]. This minimal important difference (MID) is derived based on one of two approaches. MIDs from anchor-based methods (MID-A) compare changes in scores on the instrument with an anchor. The anchor is often a single question on global health status change—whether the patient believes they are better than at baseline. This anchor has been suggested to be the best for measuring change from the patient's perspective but may be affected by recall bias [1]. The anchor-based approach has several other limitations [1] and [2]. Anchors may come from different perspectives (patient, clinician, family) and may, therefore, lead to different MID-As. It relies on the validity and reliability of the anchor chosen. Finally, it does not take into account the variation within the sample nor the measurement precision of the instrument. This last limitation implies that the minimal difference obtained may not lie outside the range of the instrument's random variation, that is, may not exceed the measurement error of the instrument. 
Due to the above limitations of anchor-based methods, distribution-based methods (MID-D) are seen as preferable. Distribution-based methods evaluate the minimal difference that is in excess of that expected by either the random variation of the sample or the measurement error of the instrument. Methods based on sample variation include the effect size [based on the baseline standard deviation (SD) of the sample], standardized response mean (SD of change), and the responsiveness statistic (SD of change of stable patients). The derived MID-D will vary across samples if the variability within each sample differs between samples [1] and [3]. Therefore, MID-Ds based on the measurement error of the instrument are recommended and these are described later. 
The terms MID and minimal clinically important difference (MCID) tend to be used interchangeably. However, it may be difficult for a clinician to interpret what a change of the magnitude of the MID-D means in terms of clinical significance. To qualify as a MCID, the MID-D needs to be shown to relate to associated measures; for example, in back pain sufferers, these might include severity of pain or changes in healthcare use. This implies that both anchor-based and distribution-based methods are needed to establish a MCID for an instrument. 
The aim of this study was to derive a rule for determining a MCID for the low back pain-specific Roland-Morris Disability Questionnaire (RMDQ) through a series of related objectives. The objectives were: (1) to compare the MIDs for the RMDQ derived from a range of methods, (2) to establish how the MIDs obtained from the theoretically preferred distribution-based methods relate to other measures of back pain severity, (3) to use the results from objectives (1) and (2) to develop a MCID for the RMDQ by defining a rule for classifying individual patients as clinically improved or not. 
2. Study population and questionnaires
The objectives were addressed using a prospective cohort study of low back pain sufferers in primary care. The study population consisted of 447 consecutive patients (Table 1) consulting primary care for back pain at five general practices in North Staffordshire, and who completed a questionnaire at baseline and at 6 months. Two hundred sixty (58%) subjects were female, with a mean age of 46.8 (SD 8.12, range 30–59). The questionnaire included the RMDQ, a 24-item back pain-specific disability scale recommended for use in primary care and community studies [4]. The RMDQ has shown good validity and been recommended for use without further validation [5]. The RMDQ has also shown good test–retest reliability with reported intraclass correlation coefficients of 0.8 or more [6], [7] and [8]. The scale score ranges from 0 (no disability) to 24 (severe disability). No patient indicated limitation on all items of the RMDQ at either baseline or 6 months. At baseline the mean RMDQ score was 9.1 (SD 6.37, median 8, interquartile range 4, 14). Scores at 6 months were lower (less disability) than at baseline (mean difference ?2.5; 95% CI ?3.0, ?2.0). 
Table 1. 
Baseline and 6-month characteristics of sample 
Also included were questions on current working status (“working,” “not working due to back pain,” “not working for other reasons”) and bothersomeness of back pain (five categories ranging from “not at all” to “extremely”) [9]. Responses on a 0–10 visual analog scale relating to current, least, and usual pain over the last 2 weeks were combined by calculating their mean to give a score for intensity of pain with 0 indicating no pain and 10 most intense pain. The generic health profile tool, the Short Form-36 version 2 (SF-36), was included in both questionnaires [10]. This has eight scales relating to different dimensions of health. For the analyses presented here the SF-36 scores were inverted so that 0 represented best health and 100 worst health so that the SF-36 scores were in the same direction as the RMDQ and pain intensity scale. 
The 6-month questionnaire included a global question on the patient's perception of how their back pain had improved or deteriorated over the 6 months from baseline. 
The 6-month questionnaire also asked respondents whether they had seen their GP about their back pain in the previous four weeks. 
3. Stage 1—Comparison of methods to determine a MID for improvement
Stage 1 addresses the first objective of a comparison of MIDs obtained from commonly used anchor-based and distribution-based methods. 
3.1. Anchor-based methods (MID-A)
The global rating used as the anchor was the patient's subjective measure of change in back pain health over 6 months. Patients were grouped into: better (completely recovered, much better, better), no change and worse (worse, much worse). Two hundred fourteen (48%) patients reported their back pain was better at 6 months. Only 64 (14%) rated it as worse. Patients reporting better health at 6 months had improved a mean of 5.1 (SD 4.88) points on the RMDQ while those reporting no change had improved a mean of 0.2 (SD 4.14) points. 
Two receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, which plot sensitivity against one minus the specificity, were constructed. The first ROC curve compared those rating their back pain as better at 6 months to those reporting no change by examining raw score change on the RMDQ from baseline to 6 months. The sensitivity was defined as the number of patients identified by a particular score change on the RMDQ as having improved and with a global rating of better divided by all patients stating their back pain was better. The curves were developed using the sensitivities of different values of RMDQ change and their corresponding specificities. The point where sensitivity was closest to specificity was taken as the optimal raw score change on the RMDQ. The second ROC curve replaced raw score change with change on the RMDQ as a percentage of baseline score (percentage change score). 
3.2. Distribution-based methods (MID-D) based on measurement error
The standard error of measurement (SEM) method is based on the measurement error inherent in the instrument as well as the variation within the sample. The SEM incorporates a measure of the reliability of the instrument and is calculated as the SD at baseline multiplied by the square root of one minus the reliability of the instrument. The MID-D derived from the SEM should not be sample specific as the relationship between SD and reliability should be consistent across samples; increases in the standard deviation should be matched by increasing reliability [1] and [3]. However, the MID-D will depend upon the statistic used to summarize the reliability [e.g. the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) from test–retest studies, or Cronbach's alpha]. Further, a low reliability can lead to large MID-Ds although health profile instruments should have high levels of reliability if they are to assess change. There is also no consensus on the cutoff of the SEM used to determine the MID-D. Values of 1 SEM and 1.96 SEM have been recommended for determining the MID-D [11]. It is assumed that in two-thirds of cases the true score on the RMDQ should be within 1 SEM of the observed score [11]. In our study, the MID-Ds based on 1 SEM and 1.96 SEM were calculated using a reliability value (ICC) of 0.83 obtained from a 2-week test–retest study of a similar population of back pain patients [8]. 
The other two methods considered were the reliability change index (RCI) and a modified version of the RCI, the RCindiv. The RCI [12] and [13] represents the difference in two scores on an individual that would be expected to be due to measurement error, and is a more conservative estimate of this difference than the SEM. It is equivalent to ?(2SEM2). A cutoff value of 1.96 RCI is recommended as indicating that change is not just due to measurement error [12] and [13]. 
The RCindiv has been suggested to distinguish better between individual and group level analyses and to be less conservative than the RCI [14]. It is based on calculation of the reliability of baseline, 6 months, and change scores as well as the correlation between baseline and 6-month scores, with a recommended level of MID-D of 1.65RCindiv. An alternative method of estimating the true percentage of patients who have improved than that based on counting the individuals who have exceeded the RCindiv MID-D has been suggested to give a higher and more accurate figure [14]. 
3.3. Stage 1 results
ROC curve analysis using the raw score change gave a MID-A of two points (sensitivity 73%, specificity 67%). ROC curve analysis using the percentage change score suggested that a reduction of 30% on baseline score was the optimal cutoff point (sensitivity 75%, specificity 76%). 

