The principal aim of this study is to evaluate the immediate and
long-term effects of art therapy for older people with dementia,
specifically to test the premise that participation in art therapy
groups effects significant positive changes in mood and cognition
both immediately within sessions and later outside the sessions to
impact behaviour in the day care/residential care setting. The
broader aim is to provide an evidence-based evaluation about the
use of art therapy for older people with dementia. In order to isolate
the impact of art therapy we compared art therapy groups with
activity groups that do not have emotional expression as a central
purpose.
Key words: dementia, randomized control trial, art therapy, groups,
older people
Introduction
In the last decade there has been a growing awareness of the need
to address the issue of improving quality of life for people with
dementia. Significant individual differences in the way that dementia
manifests itself has complicated the development of a
comprehensive care strategy for clients using residential or day
centre services. In addition to the cognitive and neurobiological
deficits associated with dementia (impaired memory, language and
reasoning) the concomitant emergence of depression, anxiety, and
personality changes may further erode quality of life (Burns et al.
2002; Landes et al., 2000). Impaired cognitive resources for people
with dementia underpin difficulties in preserving a sense of personal
identity and self-esteem. Impaired memories, communication and
social skills make inter-personal relationships difficult to sustain.
Social isolation and compromised social networks are sometimes
regarded as an inevitable consequence of disease expression
(Kitwood, 1997; Woods, 2001).
In general, approaches to dementia care are widening to include
psychosocial interventions in an attempt to improve quality of life
for adults with dementia (Ballard et al., 2001; Marshall and
Hutchinson, 2001; Pini, 1996). Specifically, psychotherapists who
use primarily art, music and drama are increasingly required to
work with this client group (Doric-Henry, 1997; Saunders and
Saunders, 2000; Waller, 2002). Case study reports of art or music
therapy with this client group have noted a positive impact on
emotional adaptation and sociability (Kamar, 1997; Kydd, 2001;
Wald, 1993), and on specific areas of cognitive functioning, e.g.
language (Brotons and Koger, 2000). Related research also indicates
that sensory stimulation may effect short-term benefits for
people with dementia (Baker et al., 2001) on measures of mood,
behaviour and speech skills during and after sessions (both in day
centre units and at home). However, these improvements were not
maintained at one-month follow-up. In general there is little
adequately controlled, systematic, evidenced based research conducted
on the use of art, drama or music therapy with this particular
client group. The choice of art therapy as the focus of this research
is both opportunistic and timely. To date there are no reported
longitudinal, control group studies on the value of group participation
in art therapy for people with dementia.
Study Outline
A total of 45 patients with diagnosis of mild to severe dementia were
randomly assigned to art therapy or activity groups (with a maximum
of six participants per group). Groups met for one hour each week for
40 successive weeks. Standardized measures of cognition, depression,
behaviour, sociability, well-being and mood were taken at six
assessment points (at baseline, ten, 20 and 40 weeks into group work,
with one and three months follow-up). The immediate impact of
group involvement on mental acuity, physical involvement, calmness,
sociability, cooperative and anti-social behaviour were also
systematically recorded at the end of each session. Qualitative data
was also collected but is only referred to briefly in this article in the
form of two vignettes. The aim is to indicate the interactions between
patient and art work as an example of the art psychotherapy process.
This qualitative analysis will be reported in a separate publication.
Over 40 weeks significant positive effects were observed withinsession
for participants in art therapy groups on measures of mental
acuity, physical involvement, calmness and sociability. For the recreational
activity groups, positive group changes were also found, but
improvements were limited to the first 15/20 weeks of attendance. On
cessation of sessions, increased depression scores were reported for
art therapy clients, which dissipated by three-month follow-up. No
similar changes were observed for activity groups.
The results of this study imply that art therapy and recreational
activity group work are beneficial and appropriate interventions for
older people with dementia. However, the indications are that art
therapy has a subtle, more pronounced and durable positive effect
across time.
Method
1) Participants
Eighty-four volunteers were invited to participate and assessed for
eligibility in this multi-centre, randomized, control group design
study. Thirty-nine did not meet the inclusion criteria. Forty-five
people with dementia who met inclusion criteria were included.
Inclusion criteria were diagnosis of dementia (mixed origin),
attendance at day care or residential facility, previous diagnosis by
consultant psychogeriatrician, confirmatory diagnosis from medical
records. Exclusion criteria were additional psychiatric disorders.
The diagnostic profile of the group was probable dementia of the
Alzheimer type (N = 18; 11 females), multi-infarct dementia
(N = 19; 13 females,) and unspecified dementia (N = 8; 7 females).
The average age of women was 84.05 years (range 74–92), men
80.33 years (range 67 = 92).
Baseline cognitive assessment of participants reported a range of
cognitive ability using the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE)
(Folstein et al., 1975). Scores on this assessment range from 0–30,
where lower scores indicate higher level of cognitive impairment.
Cut-off scores (Tombaugh and McIntyre, 1992) are: 18–26 mild
(N = 4), moderate 10–17 (N = 8) and severe 0–16 (N = 33). The
National Adult Reading Test (Nelson and Willison, 1991) was
administered at baseline as a pre-morbid measure of IQ. The mean
IQ score for people able to complete the NART (N = 20) was 83.08
(range 79–108).
All participation was voluntary and all participants (patients,
relatives or management personnel) had the right to withdraw at any
time. Written consent was obtained from the next of kin or where
there was no designated next of kin, an advocacy worker from the
local branch of MIND. The guidelines of the Medical Research
Council (1993) regarding consent to participate were followed by
monitoring clients' words or actions before, during and after group
activity. The Local Area Health Authority and Sussex University
Ethics Committees gave ethical approval for the project.
Procedure
Centres to host the research programme were selected on specific
criteria: openness to research with this client group and willingness
to commit staff and resources for an extended time period. Other
considerations were the number of clients with dementia available
to participate and an adequate, safe space to conduct an art or
activity group. Centres represented a cross section of the type of
local facilities available for people with dementia. They included a
day resource unit within a local hospital, a privately owned rest
home, a rest home run by a company contracted under social
services and a resource centre funded by social services. Clients
were either day users or in long term care.
Art therapy and activity groups took place in parallel in each
centre, on the same day at the same time each week. Each group
comprised an art therapist (AT) or occupational therapist (OT), an
assistant, and up to six clients. All therapists and assistants attended
induction meetings where the research protocol was outlined.
Handbooks outlining the research protocol were prepared and
distributed. Following standard practice, art therapists were given
minimum of fortnightly supervision sessions with the senior AT
(DW). Similar supervisory sessions with the Research Psychologist
(LS) were offered to the OTs but were not taken up. All assistants
worked under the guidance of the therapists and attended regular
supervision sessions with the psychologist.
For the art therapy groups, a group-interactive, psychodynamic
approach was employed (Waller, 1996). A variety of art materials
were presented for use within the sessions. For the activity groups,
a selection of recreational activities was made from a range
currently in use in different centres in the locality. OTs were
instructed not to use any formal occupational therapeutic methods
or any form of art and craft work in the activity groups.
Participants were randomly assigned to art therapy (experimental)
or activity (control) groups with a maximum of six per group.
Random allocation was based on participants' ID numbers being
drawn by chance. Groups met for one hour per week over 40 weeks.
Standardized measures of memory and cognition were conducted by
the psychologist with patients on an individual basis. Measures of
depression, mood, sociability and physical involvement as rated by
patients' key workers under interview with the psychologist were
taken at six assessment points: baseline (prior to group work); then
at ten; 20; and 40 weeks into group work, with two follow-up
assessments at one and three months. Within-session changes in
mood, mental acuity, physical competence, sociability, anti-social,
cooperative and agitated behaviour were completed by therapists at
the end of each session and were not referred to again. No
comparison scores were made between sessions.
Measures
Outside session measures
Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia (CSDD) The CSDD
(Alexopolous et al., 1988) is a 19 item observational scale based on
each participant's behaviour in the week prior to completion. High
scores indicate increased depressive symptomology.
The Multi Observational Scale for the Elderly (MOSES) The
MOSES (Helmes, 1988) is a 40 item scale based on behaviour in
the week prior to completion and scores five separate factors – (1)
self-care functioning (grooming, mobility etc.); (2) disoriented
behaviour; (3) depressed/anxious mood; (4) irritable behaviour; and
(5) sociability and withdrawn behaviour. Increased scores indicate
decreased competence.
The Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) The MMSE (Folstein et al.,
1975) was used as a brief indicator of cognitive status. Scores range
from 0–30; lower scores indicate higher impairment.
The Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test (RBMT)
Two sub-tests of the RBMT (Wilson et al., 1985) were used to
assess short-term memory – confrontation naming, delayed recognition
for simple line drawings and prospective memory – the
appointment task.
Tests of Everyday Attention (TEA) Two sub-tests from the TEA
(Robertson et al., 1994) were used to assess sustained auditory
attention (the elevator counting task) and sustained visual attention
(the map task).
Benton Fluency Task This test of verbal fluency requires subjects to
generate as many words as possible beginning with a particular
letter of the alphabet (letters F, A or S) within a time limit of 60
seconds. (Benton and Hamsher, 1989)
Within Session Measures
Bond-Lader Mood Scale The original visual analogue scale for
subjective ratings of mood changes (Bond and Lader, 1974), involves
16 bi-polar scales (for example, alert – drowsy). Four behaviours,
mental acuity, physical involvement, calmness and sociability are
assessed. Therapists were asked to rate client mood changes within
sessions using the midpoint on the bipolar scale to indicate no
change.
Cooperative, agitated behaviour or anti-social within sessions
were assessed using subsets of questions from: Skill Builders (Mulvey,
1999), Clifton Assessment Procedures for the Elderley (CAPE)
(Pattie and Gilleard, 1979) and the Rating Scale for Aggressive
Behaviour in the Elderly (RAGE) (Patel and Hope, 1992).
Time Spent in Group
The time of entry and exit of each participant for each session was
recorded and the total time spent in sessions calculated.
Statistical Analysis
Data from each of the dependent measures were subjected to
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with group (art therapy/recreational
activity) as a between-group measure and time of assessment
(0, 10, 20, 40, 44, 56 weeks) as a within subject variable. Where
interactions were significant, one-way analyses by group were
completed, using ANOVA and matched sample t-tests to explore
effects of time.
Role of Funding Source
The study sponsor had no role in study design, data collection,
analysis, interpretation or write-up.
Results
Out of the 45 participants recruited, 21 completed the project
through nine months of group work, one and three-month followup.
Ten participants died, five participants moved away and nine
had incomplete data. Remaining participants were assessed at all six
assessment points and attended the majority of their allocated group
sessions. Only data from this group are reported here.

