 
The welfare habitus is one that reflects a set of experiences and cultural understandings more akin to social security and citizenship than "Third Way' social policy with its emphasis on individualism and contractualism (Harris 1999). In summary, while the conflict between charity and welfare has been a constant feature of social policy directed at older people for many decades, the present circumstances make it more acute for those being asked to operate within a new paradigm for which they are unprepared.
The empirical work upon which this article is based describes a qualitative study which set out to examine the impact of a welfare rights service specifically aimed at facilitating access to the range of welfare benefits available to older citizens of the UK. The article concentrates on the barriers to uptake by exploring the views of older people who did and did not qualify for additional benefits and examines how their views of entitlement have been conditioned by their age and the circumstances of North-east England.
The qualitative study took place concurrently with a pilot randomized controlled trial (RCT) to assess the health impact of welfare rights advice (White et al. 2006). A random sample of 100 patients aged 60 years or over from four general practices in Newcastle upon Tyne (North-east England) was invited to take part. Three of the practices were located in the top 10 per cent of most deprived electoral wards in England using the Index of Multiple Deprivation (two in the top 1 per cent – ranked 30th and 36th most deprived); the other practice was ranked 3,774 (out of a total of 8,414 in England) (Department for the Environment, Transport and Regions 2000). The RCT recruited 126 participants who gave written informed consent. At the baseline interview for the RCT, all participants were asked whether they would be willing to take part in a more in-depth interview, and 96 (76 per cent) agreed to do so.
Following the baseline interview participants received a home visit from a qualified welfare rights officer from Newcastle City Council Welfare Rights Service. The visit involved a structured assessment of current welfare status and benefits entitlement, together with active assistance in making claims where appropriate over the following six months, together with necessary follow-up for unresolved claims. 
The qualitative study sample was made up of respondents purposively selected to include those eligible for: financial benefit only; non-financial only; both types; and no additional benefits. Sampling continued until no new themes emerged from the interviews – until data "saturation' was reached (Denzin 1978).
Initial interviews took place between April and December 2003 in participants' homes after their welfare rights assessment; follow-up interviews were undertaken in January and February 2005. The semi-structured interview schedule covered a range of issues including perceptions of: impact of material and/or financial benefits; impact on mental and/or physical health; impact on health-related behaviours; social benefits; and views about the link between material resources and health, described elsewhere (White et al. 2006; Mackintosh et al. 2006; Moffatt et al. 2006). Participants were also asked to detail their experiences of the welfare system and their views about claiming benefits, the topic of this article. All participants agreed to the interview being audio-recorded. Immediately afterwards, observational field notes were made. Interviews were transcribed in full. 
Data analysis largely followed the framework approach (Ritchie and Lewis 2003). Data were coded, indexed and charted systematically, and resulting typologies discussed with other members of the research team, "a pragmatic version of double coding' (Barbour 2003). Constant comparison (Silverman 2000) and deviant case analysis (Clayman and Maynard 1994) were used, since both methods enhance internal validation (Barbour 2001, 2003). Finally, sets of categories at a higher level of abstraction were derived. 
Results
 
Participants
Some 25 interviews were completed during the first round, at which time 10 participants were interviewed with partners who made active contributions. Twenty-two follow-up interviews were undertaken between 12 and 18 months later (three individuals were too ill to take part). Table 1 summarizes demographic and socio-economic data for the study sample. No couples or single people had weekly incomes below 60 per cent median income, the UK government and European Union's measure of poverty. The majority of participants were in the second- or third-bottom income quintiles and were below average income. 
Household savings ranged considerably, from zero to £122,000, although most participants had below £10,000. Those in the sample ranged, therefore, from single pensioners, with no occupational pension, little or no savings, living in rented accommodation, to couples with substantial occupational pensions and savings who owned their homes outright. But the sample contained more people living on or below average incomes with few savings. Most participants were in poor health, with at least one, but usually more, chronic health conditions, or were caring for a chronically ill relative.
Some 18 participants received some type of award and 14 participants received a financial award.1 The median weekly income gain was £57 (range £10–£100) representing a 4–55 per cent increase in weekly income. Seven participants did not receive a financial award as a result of the welfare rights service examined in this study. However, it was found that four participants had received awards as a result of assisted claims prior to the study, a further two had received them for partners subsequently deceased and another had received benefit but returned it after health had improved. 
Barriers to entitlement uptake
Most participants had only a vague idea about the welfare benefits system and very little idea about what they were entitled to. Even those who were in receipt of benefit prior to the study appeared to have accessed this with some help from other advice services, and only one participant had made a successful claim entirely by themselves. Many respondents referred to welfare benefits as "the system', and regarded it as fairly impenetrable. There were three main barriers to obtaining benefit entitlements. The first of these was lack of knowledge. Participants simply did not know what was available, nor did they know the entitlement criteria:
"Without her knowledge I would never have known nothing . . . I didn't know what I was entitled to, I just accepted what I got and that was it . . . I bet there is a lot of people out there that doesn't know what they're entitled to by a long way.' (Case 4, male, aged 74)
The term "entitlement' was used often by participants. This was generally linked to the idea of "earning' entitlement as a result of contributions made throughout their working lives:
"I've worked 51 years . . . you know, you've paid your dues and never claimed nothing.'  (Case 5, male, aged 75)
Only one participant talked at length about the founding principles of the welfare state and held the view that it was there for everyone, irrespective of income: 
"We pay, you and I and everybody else actually pays direct or indirect taxes and it's there for everybody's benefit not one or two . . . if you are entitled to it you really ought to accept that money . . . there's no charity in any shape or form. It's the system we've devised to live by in this country.'  (Case 20, male, aged 72, previously claimed Disability Living Allowance for partner, but returned it when partner's health improved)
This more articulate view of the principles behind the system invoked both the importance of contributions as well as the notion of entitlement as desert rather than the often-mentioned perception that such help constitutes charity.
Participants who had accessed benefits prior to the study had generally found out about them via another service or "word of mouth' among their friends and neighbours and at community centres and social clubs:
"There was a man came from Social Services . . . and he said, do you know you've been living below the poverty line for God knows how long. Well I had no idea, I said, well I don't know . . . Nobody seems to tell you, nobody sort of official like . . . I've heard other people saying that they don't really know anything until somebody says, well why don't you do this. And that's the only way, by word of mouth . . . I nursed my husband for four years and when he died they wanted to know where his Attendance Allowance was. I didn't even know you could get one, I never had a penny.'  (Case 19, female, aged 82) 
Lack of knowledge concerning every aspect of the welfare system was the greatest barrier to accessing the system. This was linked to the fact that many participants thought that anything they were entitled to would be given automatically, in the same way that the state pension was delivered. Similarly, a National Audit Office (2002) study indicated many older people assume that they will be informed about any benefit to which they are entitled, thus negating the need for any action on their part.
The second barrier was associated with the idea of means-testing, but also reflected a lack of knowledge about what benefits were available. Being in receipt of an occupational pension, owning a home or having savings were regarded by those who had them as automatically ruling them out of any help, whether financial or non-financial, and there was very little awareness of non-means-tested benefits: 
"I was fairly confident from my own social services experience about what we were entitled to and the limitation . . . as soon as you were means-tested . . . you just shrugged your shoulders and said, we're not getting that. My sister didn't realize that she could get extra money because of her age and disabilities, she always said to me, "we'll never get it, it's a waste of time" . . . it proves there's a need for people to be informed, not for people to go out and find out, but to be informed.'  (Case 8, male, aged 77, two siblings received Attendance Allowance)
Finally, some people mentioned certain attitudes and emotions which impacted on their propensity to claim. In only one case was there a specific example of someone not claiming a health-related benefit because of a reluctance to acknowledge the severity of a progressive condition. More commonly, participants described feeling demeaned by the system, which prevented people seeking help, since asking was associated with begging: 
Mrs Z: "He's one of these people that won't go for anything unless he's informed about it . . . he thinks he's sponging on the system . . . as [the welfare advice officer] told us about it [benefit], I went for it.'
Mr Z: "I always said there's always somebody can do with it more than us . . . we get by, shall I say.'
Mrs Z: "He reckons that if we can get by there's always somebody else that's worse off that can do with the money, so he won't go for anything . . . I have to sort of force him into doing things.'  (Case 11, male, aged 77, gained Pension Credit, plus Attendance Allowance from an assisted claim prior to this study)
These feelings were particularly acute if the application was turned down and went to an appeal tribunal:
"It [the tribunal] makes you feel as though you are trying to get something for nothing, and I hate that. You know, as though you are cap in hand . . . I've always worked, you know, my husband was the same . . . he'd say, you don't go cap in hand for anything . . . we've worked for it and made do . . . and when they said they wanted this, more medical . . . I said don't bother, I'll not bother any more . . . and she [Welfare Advice Officer] said you are. She says if you're not, I am . . . and everybody's saying, oh you've got to keep going . . . I thought, oh, no way, I'm not going to beat my head against a brick wall.'  (Case 19, female, aged 82, received Attendance Allowance from an assisted claim prior to the study)

