General findings
Table 1 shows that seven of the 17 studies found significant results where religious coping, measured in one form or another, proved advantageous in terms of reducing distress or increasing illness adjustment. Acklin, Brown, and Mauger (1983) found a higher frequency of church attendance to be associated with decreased feelings of anger-hostility and social isolation. Church attendance was also positively correlated with transcendent meaning. Gall, Miguez de Renart, and Boonstra (2000) found that religious resources accounted for 14% of the variance in emotional well-being and 16% of the variance in life satisfaction above that attributed to non-religious coping strategies. Nairn and Merluzzi (2003) found that religious problem-solving (deferring-collaborative strategies) was positively correlated with illness adjustment but found a non-significant relationship between religious coping and quality of life. Finally, Yates, Chalmers, St. James, Follansbee, and McKegney (1981) found religious activities to be positively correlated with life satisfaction, happiness and positive affect and negatively correlated with pain levels. 
Three of the above seven studies had significant results for sub-groups of their sample only. Alferi, Culver, Carver, Arena, and Antoni (1999) found that church attendance and seeking support from a priest/minister proved advantageous for Evangelical women but detrimental for Catholics. In addition, obtaining emotional support from church members predicted less distress in Evangelical women only. Musick, Koenig, Hays, and Cohen (1998) found that service attendance was associated with lower levels of depressed symptomatology for Black participants only. Stanton, Danoff-Burgh, and Huggins (2002) did not find an overall effect of "turning to religion' in coping with illness adjustment or fear of recurrence. However, "turning to religion' in less hopeful women predicted adjustment whereas low religious coping predicted better adjustment in high hopeful women. Their study was longitudinal in design and treated hope as a dispositional variable (i.e. not subject to change over time). 
Four studies found religious coping to be harmful. Although Alferi et al. (1999) found aspects of religious coping to be beneficial for Evangelical patients (see above), they found aspects of religious coping to increase distress in Catholics. Ben-Zur, Gilbar, and Lev (2001) found "turning to religion' to be positively correlated with psychological distress and negatively correlated with psychosocial adjustment. Harcourt, Rumsey, and Ambler (1999) found the use of religion in coping increased levels of anxiety in patients with breast cancer. Finally, after controlling for disease and demographic variables, Sherman, Simonton, Plante, Reed Moody, and Wells (2001) found negative religious coping (e.g. questioning, challenging and turning away), to be associated with raised levels of distress, increased cancer-related stress, reduced life satisfaction, diminished emotional well-being and lower social/family well-being. 
Seven studies, using various approaches to religious/spiritual coping, found no effects. Carver et al. (1993), Culver, Arena, Antoni, and Carver (2002), Sherliker and Steptoe (2000) and Sherman, Simonton, Camp Adams, Vural, and Hanna (2000) using items from the COPE (Carver et al., 1989) labelled "turning to religion' found no effect between these and distress/adjustment or cancer-related symptoms. Filipp, Klauer, Freudenberg, and Ferring (1990) failed to achieve a significant effect between "searching for meaning in religion' and well-being across time and Ell, Mantell, Hamovitch, and Nishimoto (1989) found a non-significant relationship between religious coping (active reliance on religion) and psychological distress. Finally, Wasteson, Nordin, Hoffman, Glimelius, and Sjödén (2002) did not find religious coping ("seeking spiritual support') to be associated with daily stressful events or levels of distress. 
Cancer site
Seven studies examined mixed cancer groups (Acklin et al., 1983; Ell et al., 1989; Filipp et al., 1990; Musick et al., 1998; Nairn &amp; Merluzzi, 2003; Sherliker &amp; Steptoe, 2000; Yates et al., 1981). This raises potential problems as cancer encompasses a diverse array of illnesses, and the particular treatments, difficulties and mortality risks that patients face varies with the site of illness. For example, a malignancy which involves disfiguring surgery, or affects the patient's sexuality or self-esteem, may be more likely to lead to the use of religious or spiritual resources (e.g. Cella &amp; Tross, 1986). It is therefore possible that the use of religious coping may vary with the type of cancer. Of the ten studies that examined specific types or sites of cancers, the majority examined breast cancer (Alferi et al., 1999; Ben-Zur et al., 2001; Carver et al., 1993; Culver et al., 2002; Gall et al., 2000; Harcourt et al., 1999; Stanton et al., 2002). The three remaining studies examined myeloma (Sherman et al., 2001), head and neck (Sherman et al., 2000) and gastrointestinal cancers (Wasteson et al., 2002). 
Cancer stage and treatment
The use of religion or spirituality as coping resources may also vary with specific factors that influence the possibility of mortality, such as severe or advanced disease (Jenkins &amp; Pargament, 1995). Vincour, Threatt, Caplan, and Zimmerman, (1989) suggested that such factors often compromise adjustment and well-being. It may be expected that at crucial times in their illness, patients may rely more on their religion/spirituality, which may change over time as they adapt to their diagnosis and different treatments. Many studies assessed and combined patients at different stages of their cancer and treatment, making it difficult to discern the impact of the relationship between religious coping and these variables (e.g. Acklin et al., 1983; Ben-Zur et al., 2001; Carver et al., 2002; Ell et al., 1989; Filipp et al., 1990; Gall et al., 2000; Nairn &amp; Merluzzi 2003; Sherliker &amp; Steptoe, 2000). Gall et al. (2000) recruited patients diagnosed within the previous five years and found no significant association between cancer stage, number of positive nodes, time since diagnosis and outcome variables. 
Other studies used a point in the course of treatment to control for potential heterogeneity in their samples. Some recruited patients prior to diagnosis (Harcourt et al., 1999), newly diagnosed patients prior to surgery (Alferi et al., 1999; Culver et al., 2002; Stanton et al., 2002), during diagnosis (Carver et al., 1993) or recruited terminally ill/advanced patients only (Sherliker &amp; Steptoe, 2000; Sherman et al., 2000; Yates et al., 1981). Although Ell et al. (1989) recruited patients they considered newly diagnosed, it is unclear how long patients had been ill. Of the prospective studies, only two reported variation in religious coping over time. Using the "turning to religion' sub-scale from the COPE, Carver et al. (1993) and Culver et al. (2002) found that religious coping decreased over time. 
Religious affiliation
Religious affiliation may provide information about differences in the use of religious coping and their impact across religious groups and denominations (e.g. Tix &amp; Fraser, 1998). Religious membership may, for example, predict different types of religious coping strategies (Pargament, 1997) and denominations may differ in the extent to which they foster the emotional well-being of their members, their focus on the expiation of guilt and the preparation for the here-after (Alferi et al., 1999). 
Eleven of the studies did not report people's religious affiliations and only Alferi et al. (1999) demonstrated that some religious groups may show different outcomes. They found differences between a mixed group of evangelical patients who showed more positive illness adjustment from religious coping than Catholics. However, relying on religious affiliation is problematic in that many individuals may report membership of a denomination simply because they attended as a child, and not because they follow that particular faith/denomination. 
Measurements of religious coping
Religious/spiritual practices refer to attendance at a place of worship or frequency of prayer. It is important to differentiate between public and private activities as the former may offer a community and the social support of members of that community. Four studies (Acklin et al., 1983; Alferi et al., 1999; Musick et al., 1998; Yates et al., 1981) measured patient's public religious practices (i.e. attending religious services) in relation to outcome, either among other religious items or on their own. Only Musick et al. (1998) controlled for the potential effects of social support. It is therefore unclear if the results from these studies are caused by religious coping alone or whether they mirror work showing social support to be an important stress buffer (e.g. Dunkel-Schetter, 1992; Maunsell, Brisson, &amp; Deschênes, 1995). It is also unclear whether patients actually applied the religious practice to the stressful situation or rather attended and practiced their religion as usual (Pargament, 1999). People may follow religious or spiritual practices habitually and also for a variety of other reasons. These include social reasons, where religious services are attended for social approval or to gain social status. This is often referred to as extrinsic religiousness. Measuring public religious activities may therefore not necessarily explain much about the use of faith in coping. The need to go beyond public practice in studies on religious coping is further emphasised by the finding that an increase in church attendance during illness is less common than increased levels of faith or private practices such as prayer (Moschella et al., 1997). For example, when people are very ill, they may not be able to attend a place of worship and may therefore be more likely to resort to private prayer. 
The COPE (Carver et al., 1989) was used by eight studies (Alferi et al., 1999; Ben-Zur et al., 2001; Carver et al., 1993; Culver et al., 2002; Harcourt et al., 1999; Sherliker &amp; Steptoe, 2000; Sherman et al., 2000; Stanton et al., 2002) to measure the extent to which people turn to religion when coping with cancer. Only Stanton et al. (2002) found religious coping to be advantageous, and then only for women low in hope. Two studies (Ben-Zur et al., 2001; Harcourt et al., 1999) found "turning to religion' to be associated with poorer outcome. 
General coping measures provide little information regarding the content of prayers or the actual cognitions that are used. Different forms of prayer may be associated with different outcomes. For example, it is conceivable that praying for forgiveness (if cancer is viewed as a punishment from God) may be associated with more distress than praying for strength, support and guidance. One study (Sherman et al., 2001) examined positive and negative religious coping strategies using a specific religious coping questionnaire (Brief RCOPE; Pargament, Smith, Koenig, &amp; Perez, 1998). This measure examines specific clusters or patterns of items that are divided into positive (adaptive) and negative (maladaptive) religious coping strategies. Positive religious coping is considered to be more spiritually based and an expression of a secure relationship with a supportive God. Negative religious coping is viewed as an expression from a less secure relationship with God who is distant and punishing, or as a religious struggle in the search for significance (Pargament et al., 1998). One difficulty with this approach is that it makes a priori assumptions of which religious coping strategies are adaptive and which are maladaptive rather than treating this as an empirical question. There is also evidence that not all forms of religious coping fall easily into negative and positive categories. For example, religious rituals, self-directing (i.e. dealing with a situation without relying on God), deferring (giving over control to God) and pleading (i.e. pleading and bargaining with God or praying for a miracle) religious coping strategies have been associated with both positive and negative outcomes (Pargament, 1997). 
Two studies examined use of different religious coping strategies. The Religious Coping Activities Scale (Pargament et al., 1990) employed by Gall et al. (2000) measures the specific content of various potentially adaptive or maladaptive coping strategies such as spiritually based, good deeds, religious discontent, religious support, pleading and religious avoidance. The Religious Problem Solving Scale (Pargament et al., 1988) used by Nairn and Merluzzi (2003) consists of three sub-scales measuring collaborative, self-directing and deferring religious coping strategies. 
Methodological issues in studies
Design
Most studies were cross-sectional in design (Acklin et al., 1983; Ben-Zur et al., 2001; Ell et al., 1989; Gall et al., 2000; Musick et al., 1998; Nairn &amp; Merluzzi, 2003; Sherman, Simonton, Camp Adams, Vural, &amp; Hanna (2000) and Sherman, Simonton, Plante, Reed Moody, &amp; Wells (2001); Yates et al., 1981) limiting any determination of causal direction between religious coping and distress. 
). 

