In the WR model the past tense suffix is added to the stem whatever the phonology of that stem (Kim et al., 1991 and Prasada and Pinker, 1993). Although the issue of phonotactics has not been addressed by WR theorists, the model would logically predict no effect of verb-end cluster phonotactics on the acquisition of regular past tense inflection. SM models, while stressing the role of phonology in past tense formation, have likewise not articulated specific predictions regarding the impact of cluster phonotactics. Bybee (1995), for example, adopts an SM model whereby the regular past tense is a schema, just as irregular past tenses are. Schemas are generalisations about the shape of the past tense form. Unlike irregular schemas, however, the regular schema is entirely open in the way it defines the items to which it may apply, and so is equally likely to apply to forms of any shape. Such a model would presumably be like a WR model in proposing no difference between MLCs and MICs. For most SM models, the emphasis on the effects of lexical frequency and the phonological attributes of the verb and its neighbours (e.g. Marchman, 1997 and Rumelhart and McClelland, 1986) leads to the logical prediction that performance will be better for past tense forms ending in MLCs. This is because MLCs, appearing as they do at the end of both monomorphemic words and regular past tense forms, have higher frequencies than MICs, which occur at the end only of past tense forms.
The aim of this paper is to investigate whether past tense production is better modelled by a Single Mechanism or a Words and Rules model of cognition. To this end, we test the impact of verb-end cluster phonotactics on the past tense performance of three populations. In Experiments 1 and 2 we test the hypotheses against different groups of children with Grammatical-Specific Language Impairment (G-SLI) and children with typically-developing language skills. In Experiment 3 we test typically developing children and children and adults with Williams Syndrome (WS). We argue that comparing the performance of different populations allows us to tease apart the hypotheses in a way that focusing on just a single population cannot.
2. Experiments 1 And 2: past tense morphology in typically developing and G-SLI children
Children with G-SLI are a sub-group of the SLI population characterised by a persistent (they are aged nine years and over) and primary deficit in grammar, but by otherwise normal development (van der Lely, 2005 and van der Lely et al., 1998). These children perform particularly poorly on tests designed to probe core aspects of morphosyntax, such as the Test of Active and Passive Sentences (van der Lely, 1996) and the Verb Agreement and Tense Test (van der Lely, 2000), making more than 20% errors at an age when typically developing children very rarely make any. Many have difficulties with complex syllable structure, which result in the simplification of clusters (Gallon et al. and Marshall et al., 2003). However, none of these children have articulation difficulties of the sort manifest in children with verbal dyspraxia—their speech for known words is clear.
Van der Lely and Ullman (2001) presented a past tense elicitation task to a group of eleven G-SLI children (mean age 11;03) and three groups of typically developing children matched on standardised measures of morphosyntax and vocabulary (‘language ability’, LA, controls). Children were presented with a lead-in sentence, e.g. ‘Everyday I rob a bank’, and then the elicitation sentence ‘Yesterday, just like everyday, I …’. 60 verbs were used, divided between irregular and regular, high and low frequency, and existing and nonsense verbs.
The G-SLI children's production of irregulars was lower than that of the two groups matched for vocabulary, but not significantly different from the group matched on morphosyntax. However, their performance on regular past tense forms was significantly lower than that of all three LA groups. The main error type for all groups was the bare stem version of the verb (e.g. rob for robbed).
Van der Lely and Ullman interpreted their findings within the WR model. That G-SLI children lack the regularity advantage seen in the LA controls and show consistent frequency effects for both regulars and irregulars, whereas the LA controls do so only for irregulars, led the authors to conclude that (i) both groups retrieve irregular past tense forms from the lexicon and (ii) G-SLI children preferentially retrieve stored regular forms from the lexicon, whereas typically-developing children compose regular forms de novo. According to this interpretation, an impairment in building morphologically complex forms targets the morphological rule for regulars but leaves the selection of irregulars from the lexicon relatively spared (see also van der Lely, 2005 and van der Lely and Christian, 2000). Thus G-SLI children preferentially store regulars as inflected whole forms, just as they do irregulars.
The WR interpretation has been criticised by proponents of SM models, who claim that a phonological impairment underlies the difficulty with regular morphology. One influential hypothesis claims that the deficit in SLI lies in the processing of rapidly-presented sequential information, which affects the processing of acoustic stimuli (Tallal and Piercy, 1973 and Tallal and Piercy, 1973). This deficit is proposed to impact on the acoustically non-salient /t/ and /d/ inflections, resulting in poor phonological representations of past tense forms (Joanisse and Seidenberg, 1998, Joanisse and Seidenberg, 1999, Joanisse and Seidenberg, 2003 and McClelland and Patterson, 2002). Importantly, it is the phonological properties of regular past tense forms that are proposed to place the suffix at risk of omission, not an impairment in a suffixation rule per se.
Studies by van der Lely, Rosen, and Adlard (2004) demonstrate that G-SLI children have no consistent auditory deficit, and that performance on tasks involving auditory discrimination does not correlate with phonological or other language abilities. These findings militate against an auditory deficit causing the morphological impairment in G-SLI (see also Manis and Keating and Rosen, 2003). This of course does not rule out the possibility that auditory deficits existed at some earlier stage of development, but this hypothesis can only be tested through longitudinal studies, which have yet to be carried out.
In Experiment 1 we present a reanalysis of past tense production data collected by van der Lely and Ullman (2001) from children with G-SLI and typically developing children. The predictions are as follows. The logical prediction of the Words and Rules model is that if typically developing children do indeed form regular past tense forms by affixing ‘-ed’ to a verb stem, then phonological factors such as frequency should not have an effect, and no advantage for MLCs is expected. In contrast, an SM model predicts that phonological factors such as frequency are relevant, and that typically developing children will therefore show an advantage for MLCs. Both models predict that the G-SLI group will be less impaired for MLCs. If, as van der Lely and Ullman claim, G-SLI children have an impaired morphological rule and preferentially store regular past tense forms as they do irregulars, then phonological factors such as cluster frequency are predicted to affect performance in this group, with better performance on verbs with MLCs. This is because the G-SLI children are in effect using a ‘single mechanism’ to produce past tense forms.
It is therefore the pattern of performance of the typically developing versus the G-SLI children with respect to phonotactics that distinguishes the two models. Whereas the WR model predicts qualitatively different performance for the typically developing and G-SLI groups, the SM model predicts that G-SLI children will behave similarly to typically developing children.
3. Experiment 1—Method
The verb stimuli selected by van der Lely and Ullman included 16 regular verbs, 10 of which are included in the subset analysed here (see also Ullman, 1999 and Ullman and Gopnik, 1999). The procedure used to elicit past tense forms was of the form: ‘Everyday I rob a bank. Yesterday, just like everyday, I …’. The G-SLI group comprised 11 children between the ages of 9;03 and 12;10, mean age 11;03. Three groups of typically developing children (N=35) provided language ability matched (LA) control groups. The youngest group (LA1 controls, mean age 5;09) were matched on tasks that tapped morphosyntactic abilities, and the LA2 and LA3 groups (mean age 6;11 and 7;11 respectively) were matched on tasks of vocabulary comprehension and expression. For further details of the methodology and of participant selection, see van der Lely and Ullman (2001).
A subset of the regular verbs was chosen that were identical with respect to phonological structural complexity in that their inflected forms all ended in a 2-consonant cluster. This subset of verbs was analysed with respect to phonotactic legality. The verbs were divided into two groups: 5 ending in MLCs, and 5 ending in MICs. The number of verbs is small because only 5 of the verbs used in the task contained MICs, and these were matched to verbs with MLCs whose mean past tense frequency was equivalent according to the 17.9 million word COBUILD corpus of the University of Birmingham, by the Centre for Lexical Information (CELEX) at the University of Nijmegen1. To ensure that the participants' familiarity with the verbs did indeed reflect the frequencies provided by the COBUILD frequency counts, van der Lely and Ullman (2001) carried out a stem familiarity task. This showed a high and significant correlation between the frequency counts and children's familiarity ratings for all groups, indicating that the COBUILD frequencies are an appropriate estimate for these children. Table 2 provides details of the past tense and lemma frequency counts. All frequencies are calculated by taking the natural log (ln) of 1+ the raw frequency (i.e. out of a total of 17.9 million).
Table 2. 
Frequency of past tense forms and verb-end clusters
a Counts are drawn from the COBUILD corpus in the CELEX database (Baayen, Piepenbrock, &amp; van Rijn, 1993). 

In addition, we calculated the frequencies of verb-end clusters over the total number of tokens which end in that particular cluster. For example, in calculating the cluster frequency of /md/, we added up the number of tokens ending in med, e.g. named+seemed+screamed etc., and mbed (where the /b/ is silent), e.g. climbed+combed etc. In calculating the frequency of legal clusters we summed all the inflected and uninflected tokens, e.g. for /st/ we added just+raced+guessed etc. This method is in line with Bernhardt and Stemberger (1998), who argue that it is the frequency of phonological sequences in the language as a whole that predict which regular forms are marked for tense, not frequency within the past tense domain.
Independent samples t-tests reveal that both conditions are well-matched for both past tense frequency and lemma frequency, t(8)=0.081, p=0.937, and t(8)=0.249, p=0.809, respectively. This matching is important because both past tense and lemma frequency could potentially influence inflection rates. In contrast, there are frequency differences for MLCs and MICs: MLCs are significantly more frequent than MICs, t(8)=4.422, p=0.002.
4. Experiment 1—Results And Discussion
Table 3 presents the mean percentage of correct responses from the phonotactic analysis for the G-SLI group and all the control children grouped together. The mean percentage of correct responses for each of the control groups is also presented.
Table 3. 
Mean percentage of correct responses for the G-SLI group, and the control groups (altogether, and individually)

Because the data are not normally distributed we used non-parametric tests. First we investigated whether G-SLI and control children's responses were similarly affected by phonotactics. A Kruskal–Wallis test was used to investigate the group (G-SLI, LA controls)×difference between the MIC and MLC scores for each subject (MIC score minus MLC score). The interaction was significant (&#x03c7;2(1)=5.461, p=0.019).
