Increasing concern has been expressed about mortality, morbidity and the
behavioural determinants of health among people with intellectual disabilities
(Prasher and Janicki, 2002; Sutherland et al., 2002; Walsh and
Heller, 2002). Smoking and the abuse of alcohol have been identified as
two of the most significant behavioural risks to health (World Health
Organization, 2002). To date, however, relatively little is known about
either the prevalence of smoking or alcohol use or the personal and
environmental risk factors associated with these behaviours among people
with intellectual disabilities.

Much of the available evidence suggests that the prevalence of
smoking among adults with intellectual disability is lower than in the
general population (Beange et al., 1995; Cooper, 1997; Minihan, 1999; Pack
et al., 1998; Patja et al., 2001; Rimmer et al., 1994; 1995; Robertson et al.,
2000; Wells et al., 1997; Whitaker and Hughes, 2003). There is evidence
that increased prevalence is associated with less severe intellectual disability
(O'Brien et al., 1991; Robertson et al., 2000), male gender (Rimmer et
al., 1994; 1995; Robertson et al., 2000), living with someone who smokes
(Whitaker and Hughes, 2003) and less restrictive residential setting
(Minihan, 1999; Rimmer et al., 1994; 1995; Robertson et al., 2000),
although the last finding may reflect between-setting differences in severity
of intellectual disability. In this context, it is interesting to note that the one
study that reported elevated prevalence rates of smoking among people
with intellectual disability was conducted among a community-based
sample of people with mild intellectual disabilities (Tracy and Hosken,
1997).
Alcohol use among people with intellectual disabilities has attracted
slightly greater attention (Burgard et al., 2000; Delaney and Poling, 1990).
Again, the available evidence suggests that the prevalence of alcohol use
among adults with intellectual disability is lower than that reported in the
general population (Beange et al., 1995; Edgerton, 1986; Lawrenson et al.,
1995; McGillicuddy and Blane, 1999; Pack et al., 1998; Rimmer et al., 1995;
Robertson et al., 2000; Wells et al., 1997). However, one of these studies
did report elevated prevalence rates of binge drinking among a community-
based sample of African American adolescents with mild intellectual
disabilities (Pack et al., 1998). There is also some tentative evidence to
suggest that the rate of alcohol abuse among users may be higher among
adults with intellectual disabilities than in the general population
(McGillicuddy and Blane, 1999). Risk factors reported to be associated with
alcohol use are male gender (Krishef and DiNitto, 1981) and nature of
living arrangememnts (Rimmer et al., 1995; Robertson et al., 2000).
While overall rates of exposure to these behavioural risk factors may be
less among people with intellectual disabilities, the reported levels of
substance use do still represent a source for concern, particularly among
adults with less severe intellectual disability. Thus, for example, rates of
lung cancer among adults with mild intellectual disability are similar to
those reported in the general population (Patja et al., 2001) and there is
some evidence to suggest a link between alcohol use and offending among
people with intellectual disability (McGillivray and Moore, 2001).
However, the majority of these studies may be criticized on the grounds
of small and/or unrepresentative samples (for exception see Beange et al.,
1995; Patja et al., 2001). This issue is particularly relevant given the apparent
association between severity of intellectual disability and substance use. It
is also notable that very few studies have investigated smoking and alcohol
use among adolescents with intellectual disability. Reliable information on
use among this group is required to judge the likely impact of preventive
public health interventions targeted at children and adolescents with intellectual
disability or the inclusion of intellectually disabled children in
generic health promotion activities. As noted by Tracy and Hosken (1997),
85 percent of smokers with mild intellectual disabilities reported starting
smoking before 18 years of age.
In 1999 the Social Survey Division of the UK's Office for National
Statistics (ONS) undertook a major study of the mental health of children
and adolescents in Great Britain (Meltzer et al., 2000). It also collected brief
information on self-reported smoking and alcohol use among participants
11–15 years old. The aim of the present article is to present data derived
from this study on smoking and alcohol use among adolescents with and
without intellectual disabilities.
Method
Secondary analysis was undertaken on the 1999 ONS survey of the Mental
Health of Children and Adolescents in Great Britain (Meltzer et al., 2000). Relevant
data files (Office for National Statistics Social Survey Division, 1999) were
obtained from the ESRC Data Archive. Full details of the design, instrumentation
and sampling procedure are presented in Meltzer et al. (2000).
Sampling and procedure
The ONS survey collected information on a multistage random sample,
stratified by age and sex within 475 postal code sectors in England, Scotland
and Wales, of 4526 children aged 11–15 years (83 percent of the target
sample). All participants were living with either natural or substitute
parents in private households.
Information was collected by highly structured face-to-face interview
for all children with the child's primary carer (a natural or substitute
parent, e.g. foster parent, adoptive parent, grandparent). In 95 percent of
cases the primary carer was the child's mother. Information was also
collected by highly structured face-to-face interview with the child themselves
for 4164 children (92 percent of children). Both carer and child
interviews were conducted in private in a room in the child's home with
just the interviewer and interviewee present.
The interview schedule was programmed onto a laptop computer.
Information was recorded direct onto the laptop at the time of interview.
Lay interviewers were recruited to the project and provided with detailed
instructions and training materials (for full details see Office for National
Statistics Social Survey Division, 1998).
Measures
The interview schedule contained a number of simple self-report items
concerned with: (1) whether the child had ever smoked or drunk alcohol
(e.g. "Do you smoke cigarettes at all these days?'); (2) current patterns of
smoking and alcohol use (e.g. "Have you ever had a proper alcoholic drink
– a whole drink, not just a sip?'). A number of measures of family functioning
were also included within the ONS survey. These included: the
GHQ–12 (Goldberg and Williams, 1988) to estimate psychiatric morbidity
among parental informants; the general functioning scale of the
MacMaster Family Activity Device (Byles et al., 1988; Miller et al., 1985) to
identify "unhealthy' patterns of family functioning; a nine-item scale
exploring parental reward strategies and punishment regimes (Meltzer et
al., 2000); and a 10-item measure of potentially stressful life events experienced
by the child (Meltzer et al., 2000). The complete interview schedule
is presented in Meltzer et al. (2000).
Definition of intellectual disabilities
The ONS survey did not measure whether children had an intellectual disability.
As a result, it was necessary to combine survey items to operationally
identify children who were likely to have intellectual disabilities.
A child was defined as having intellectual disabilities if either (1) their
parents reported that their child had "learning difficulties' (the UK term
for intellectual disabilities) and that they had been seriously concerned
about their child's language development during the first 3 years of their
life; or (2) the child attended a school for children with "learning difficulties'.
Children were subsequently excluded from this group if information
collected from teachers indicated that any of the following three
conditions were met: (1) the child was attending a mainstream school
and their class teacher reported them to be of average ability in any one
of the three areas of reading, mathematics or spelling; (2) their developmental
age (as estimated by their class teacher) was greater than 80
percent of their chronological age; (3) they were at least 7 years of age and
had not progressed beyond stage 2 in the process of the identification of
special educational needs (Department for Education, 1994).
The operational definition employed in the study led to the identification
of 124 children aged 11–15 as having intellectual disabilities. This is
equivalent to an overall prevalence of intellectual disabilities in the 11- to
15-year-old sample of 2.8 percent. Of these children, 97 (78 percent) were
attending schools or units for children with intellectual disabilities. The
prevalence of intellectual disabilities in the sample varied as a function of
gender, age and social deprivation in a manner consistent with that
reported by epidemiological studies of the prevalence of intellectual
disabilities (Emerson, 2003).
Participants
Face-to-face interviews on smoking and alcohol use were conducted with
95 children with intellectual disabilities (77 percent of the target sample).
The sample of interviewed children with intellectual disability (ID)
differed from the non-intellectually disabled sample (n-ID) in two
potentially relevant aspects. First, the sample of children with intellectual
disability contained a greater proportion of boys (ID 79 percent, n-ID 50
percent; OR = 3.79, 95 percent CL 2.30–6.22). Second, the sample of
children with intellectual disability contained a greater proportion of
children living in poverty (defined as living in a household with equivalized
household income less than 60 percent of sample median: ID 47
percent, n-ID 28 percent; OR = 2.27, 95 percent CL 1.49–3.45).
Data analysis
Data analysis proceeded in three stages. First, simple measures of effect size
were used to explore associations between membership of the intellectual
disability and non-intellectual disability subsamples and self-reported
smoking and alcohol use. Second, when evidence of an association between
subsample membership and a dependent variable was observed, multivariate
analyses (logistic regression) were used to explore whether this
difference may be due to the between-subsample differences in gender and
poverty. Finally, multivariate analyses were employed to identify variables
associated with smoking and alcohol use within the intellectual disability
subsample. In general, the results of analyses are presented in terms of
effect size rather than null hypothesis significance testing (Wilkinson and
Task Force on Statistical Inference, 1999).
Results
Smoking
Self-report of current and past smoking behaviour is presented in Table 1.
The results suggest that self-reported rates of being a current smoker are
elevated among children with intellectual disabilities (95 percent CL for
OR &gt; 1.0). However, self-reported rates of smoking seven or more
cigarettes a day or having ever smoked more than once are similar for the
two groups (95 percent CL for OR includes 1.0).
Due to the potentially salient between-sample differences (see above)
the elevated rates of self-report of being a current smoker were further
examined controlling for the effects of poverty and gender in a series of
logistic regression analyses. Controlling for the effects of between-sample
differences in poverty reduced the OR for intellectual disability from 1.80
to 1.65 (95 percent CL 0.88–3.08). Controlling for the effects of betweensample
differences in gender increased the OR for intellectual disability
from 1.80 to 2.03 (95 percent CL 1.11–3.68).
Predictors of being a current smoker were examined for the subsample
of children with intellectual disability. In order to control for the effects of
confounds, between-variables analyses were undertaken using multivariate
analysis (binary logistic regression, conditional variable entry, entry
p &lt; 0.05, exit p &lt; 0.1). Candidate predictor variables were: child gender,
child physical disability, child mental health, poverty, being brought up by
a lone parent, being brought up by a parent with mental health problems,
patterns of unhealthy family functioning, the educational attainments of
the child's primary carer, home ownership, housing type, punitive and
rewarding child management practices, exposure to potentially stressful life
events or the number of children living in the household. The results of
these analyses are presented in Table 2. As can be seen, among the subsample
of children with intellectual disability, being a current smoker was
EMERSON &amp; TURNBULL: SELF-REPORTED SMOKING AND ALCOHOL USE
63
Table 1 Self-reported smoking
Item Children with Children without Odds 95% CL for
intellectual disabilities intellectual disabilities ratio odds ratio
the cutoff point on the GHQ–12 (indicating possible psychiatric
disorder).
Discussion
The present study is the first undertaken in this field to employ a rigorous
approach to population-based sampling at a national level. As such, it
avoids the significant problems associated with previous studies that have
primarily relied on local administratively defined samples of people with
intellectual disabilities. Such samples are likely to significantly underrepresent
people with less severe intellectual disabilities.

