first encounter with another human being (Montagu, 1986). In addition, touch
is one element of the bonding and attachment process between mother and child
and, although it has been widely researched, the majority of studies have focused
on parents and their healthy newborn babies and young children and attachment
disorders in adults. There is less research on the bonding and attachment process
between parents and children with autistic spectrum disorder. This may be
because autism is rarely diagnosed before the age of three years.
Vanmeter (1996) found that, compared to children with learning difficulties,
children with autism displayed a number of deficits in attachment behaviours
including imitation, joint attention, recognizing others emotions, and peer play.
In contrast, Ozonoff and South (2001) report no impairment in attachment in
children with autism when compared to children with typical development.
Earlier studies (Dissanayake and Crossley, 1997; Sigman et al., 1986) also found
no differences in behavioural responses at either separation or reunion among
children with autism, compared to children with typical development. Thus, the
findings are somewhat mixed and are based on small sample sizes. However,
these studies do demonstrate the complexity of the bonding and attachment
process in this group of parents and children.
Anecdotally, children with autism avoid physical contact and appear to show
no desire for affection. Consequently, the very nature of autism many hinder or
prevent the reciprocation of cues and responses between mother and baby which
are necessary for the bonding process to take place. Children may arch their
backs away from parents to avoid being touched and may become floppy or rigid
to avoid being picked up. Some children may cling uncontrollably to the parent.
In this sense, touch becomes instrumental. For example, the parent provides a
safe haven for the child rather than a source of affection. Thus, the familiarity of
the parent may be less arousing than, for example, a stranger. Tactile defensiveness
or the avoidance of physical contact may be a coping strategy used by
children with autism to control the amount of stimulation that they receive.
There is scant literature exploring the experience of touch for people with
autism. However, autobiographical accounts about the experience of touch suggest
that it can be a painful, overwhelming experience (Grandin and Scariano,
1986). Whatever the scenario, the parents of children with autism are faced
with a unique challenge in their attempts to initiate physical closeness with their
children. The bonding and attachment process between the parent and child with
autism may be impaired, absent or not follow the "normal' or expected patterns
of behaviour.
However, research shows that children with autism show little resistance to
touch in the form of massage (e.g. Escalona et al., 2001; Field et al., 1996). Touch
in the form of massage was shown to decrease touch aversion, increase attentiveness
in a classroom situation and reduce stereotypic behaviours such as rocking.
In addition, the children initiated positive touch more frequently when playing
with their peers and showed lower fussing, crying and self-stimulating behaviour.
It is suggested that, due to the predictable movements of massage, this type
of touch may be more acceptable than the very unpredictable social stimulation
that is frequently resisted. Interventions using massage have been shown to facilitate
the bonding and attachment process and to enhance communication
between parents and their newborn babies (Adamson, 1996; Scholz and Samuels,
1992). However, there is no documented evidence exploring the value of providing
instruction for the parents of children with autism in positive touch in the
form of massage and for use in the home environment. The majority of interventions
for parents of children with autism focus on behaviour management,
social skills training and communication development. This study aimed to
examine two questions:
1 What does touch mean between parents and their children before and on
completion of a massage intervention?
2 Do parents feel that their relationship with their children has changed on
completion of a massage intervention?
Sample
The study reported here was part of a wider research and development project to
determine the value of providing parents of children with disabilities with a practical
skill (i.e. massage) that they could use on their children at home. Approval
for the study reported here was received from the Ethics Committee, Coventry
University.
Initially, parents were recruited from a variety of sources, including contact
with organizations and health professionals working with and for parents of
children with autism, to determine their interest in the massage intervention.
These organizations in turn agreed to distribute to relevant parents a leaflet with
a brief description of the massage intervention. Finally, the parents who had
completed the massage intervention passed on information about it to other
parents of children with autism. The entry criteria were: child with a diagnosis of
autism spectrum disorder; and parent or main carer able to attend eight training
sessions with the child.
The study used a sample of convenience. This method of sampling is commonly
used within qualitative research and particularly for exploratory research
(Bowling, 1997). Initially, 14 parents (one father and 13 mothers) with children
(13 male and two female) within the autistic spectrum gave their consent to be
interviewed and participate in the massage intervention. One parent brought
both of her children to the massage intervention.
Of the parents, 13 were white/European and one was Asian. They had a
median age of 37 years (range 28–48). Twelve parents were married, one parent
was living with a partner and one parent was separated. All but one parent had a
formal educational qualification at GCSE level. Seven parents worked part-time
and of these, five had reduced their working hours in order to care for their
children; five remained at home; one was unable to work due to health reasons
and one was unable to work due to the child's health. Four parents reported
health problems including diabetes, asthma, myxedema and attention deficit
disorder.
Five parents did not complete the full eight-week programme and nine
parents completed all eight weeks. Reasons for withdrawal included: child's illness
(2); personal reasons (2); parent's poor health (1). Two parents were unable
to be contacted at the 16-week follow-up.
The children were aged between two and 13 years (median 6.5 years), with a
median age at diagnosis of three years (range 1–9 years). Four children had comorbidity
(e.g. learning disability, attention deficit disorder and hyperactivity,
hearing impairment, semantic pragmatic disorder and epilepsy).
Method
The study was exploratory, with data collected by semi-structured telephone
interviews before the massage intervention (14 interviews), immediately after the
massage intervention (10 interviews) and 16-week follow-up (eight interviews).
Interviews lasted between 35 minutes and one hour. Questions included:
Pre-intervention:
_ What do parents perceive to be the most difficult aspect of caring for
children with autism?
_ What is the current experience of touch between parents and children with
autism and how does this make them feel?
Post-intervention:
_ What are parents' experiences of the massage intervention?
_ What does touch mean between parents and their children, and how does
this make them feel?
_ Do parents feel that their relationship with their children has changed?
The interviews at the 16-week follow-up allowed clarification of the issues
reported at pre- and post-intervention and further exploration of the experiences
and meaning of touch between parents and children.
Analyses of the transcripts followed the stages of analysis for interpretative
phenomenological analysis (IPA) (Smith et al., 1999). IPA was chosen for two
reasons. First, the theoretical underpinning, namely phenomenology and symbolic
interactionism, accommodates the research aims. That is, phenomenology
is concerned with an individual's perception of an event and symbolic interactionism
is concerned with the meaning assigned to an event (Smith et al.,
1999). Second, IPA acknowledges the researcher's role in the research process as
much as the participants'. That is, to ascertain people's feelings, thoughts and
beliefs involves a dynamic research process (e.g. between participant and
researcher) and the interpretive activity (e.g. between researcher and data).
Each transcript was transcribed verbatim by an independent person and read
several times by the lead author to obtain thorough familiarity with the data.
After the initial reading of the first interview transcript, any interesting or significant
points were noted in the left margin. Following a second reading, emerging
theme titles were noted in the right margin. The second stage of analysis involved
grouping all emerging themes. Two transcripts were randomly selected and
examined independently by a fellow researcher. Inter-rater agreement on
transcript data was 85 percent. Finally, the themes were translated into a narrative
summary.
As with all research, there were a number of ethical considerations. The
sensitive topic (touch) and personal experiences are at risk of exposure. Thus all
participants were informed about the purpose and format of the interview and
their consent to be audiotaped was obtained. The quotes used in the results
section have been selected to exemplify key points. All names have been changed
to preserve anonymity.
The massage intervention
The massage intervention comprised eight one-hour weekly sessions of one-toone
instruction (i.e. therapist–parent with child) in simple massage techniques.
The primary massage technique used was effleurage: a gentle stroking movement.
In addition to the sessions, each parent received a training pack and a 50ml
bottle of sweet almond oil. The training pack included:
_ an introduction to the massage intervention;
_ a list of contraindications and instructions on massage movements to
accompany the instruction provided in each session;
_ diagrams; and
_ photographs of parents and their children to help illustrate specific massage
movements.
Therapists already qualified in massage were trained in the delivery of the
massage intervention.
Results
Interviews with parents before the massage intervention
Before attending the massage intervention, 14 parents were interviewed. It was
evident that invariably the experience of touch between the parents and their
children was on the children's terms. That is, parents were unable to offer their
child spontaneous affection or comfort even when they could see that their child
was in pain. Rather, they had to wait until their child came to them for a hug or
attention, as the following quote illustrates.
If he is hurt, the natural instinct would be to comfort him and cuddle him and you
can't touch him. No, if he hurts himself he explodes. He becomes very aggressive
and you literally have to let him come out of it himself. Or the favourite is to hide
under a blanket and shut the world out. Or he'll shove his fingers in his ears and
block his ears and close his eyes tight. He won't let us cuddle him.
For four parents the experience of not being able to comfort their child had
been a distressing experience. One parent was left feeling out of control of the
whole situation, which in turn resulted in feelings of despair. One parent had
grown to accept this situation over time:
I suppose I have got used to it, I mean when he was three and four, it could be very
very distressing, you know. I would give my other son a cuddle and I would go and
give Casey a cuddle, but he would just turn his back on me. But again I have had
this, well he was diagnosed at two years, so I have had this for 10 years.
The one overriding motivation to participate in massage intervention
was the possibility that it could facilitate getting "closer' to their children, both
physically and emotionally.
Interviews with parents immediately after the massage intervention
Five parents withdrew from the massage intervention. One of these parents was
ill but agreed to be interviewed. Therefore, interviews were conducted with 10
parents immediately on completion of a massage intervention. Overall, the
parents were surprised at their children's positive response to receiving massage
and at the children's requests for massage at home. In fact, one of these parents
did not expect to get past the first session. Of interest were parents' perceptions
of the children's reaction during and immediately after receiving massage. These
were described as the children being more relaxed, lucid, talkative, happy
and energetic.
