An important factor influencing duration of breastfeeding is mother's employment status. The main aim of this study was to determine the experience and views of employees (n = 46) in four large public sector organizations concerning breastfeeding support at work. Participants were recruited if they were employed by one of four public service employers and if they were planning to go on maternity leave in the next 6 months, on maternity leave or within 6 months of return from maternity leave. They completed a questionnaire anonymously. Almost 80% of women wanted to continue breastfeeding after returning to work. However, 90% of all respondents were not aware of any employer policy nor offered any information concerning support to enable breastfeeding after returning to work, despite two organizations having a range of maternity- and breastfeeding-related policies in development and some facilities in place. Almost 90% of respondents stated the employers should do more to support breastfeeding. This should include providing pregnant staff with information about breastfeeding support that they should expect and could therefore plan to use, including access to facilities to express and to store breast milk, to enable them to work flexible hours and to take rest breaks during working hours. Recommendations are made for employers. 
Keywords: breastfeeding, emploment, infant feeding, infamt nutrition, maternal health 



   Introduction 
  
The nutritional, immunological, psychological and economic benefits of breastfeeding are well documented.1 Both UNICEF and The World Health Organization2,3 recommend mothers should breastfeed exclusively for at least 6 months. However, the full benefits of breastfeeding will not be realized if breastfeeding is curtailed by unsupportive employment practices. We report on a survey of the employees of four public sector organizations in England and the recommendations made to address the deficiencies which may have benefits to mothers and babies and to their employers. 
There are important differences in health outcomes between those mothers and babies who breastfeed and those who artificially feed.4 Babies who are breastfed are less likely than formula-fed babies to suffer from constipation or diarrhoea5 and also are less prone to childhood diseases including juvenile diabetes, allergies, asthma, eczema, gastrointestinal, urinary and respiratory tract infections. They are less likely to be obese and have high blood pressure later in life.5 Breastfeeding also confers health advantages on the mother by helping her regain her figure and long-term reduction of risks of developing ovarian cancer, premenopausal breast cancer and osteoporosis.6 
The early introduction of other foods is of public health concern because it exposes infants to increased infection, particularly diarrhoeal diseases. In some cultures, it may lead to poorer infant nutrition and adversely affect growth rates.7 As work can be essential to economic survival for some families, it is likely that work will take precedence over breastfeeding, leading to early introduction of artificial food and early weaning. Of interest to employers, however, is likely to be the impact on staff absence resulting from higher rates of respiratory, ear and gastrointestinal infections, often a cause of childhood illness and maternal work absence.8 Potentially, enabling female employees to breastfeed when they return to work could impact on absenteeism. Employers may also benefit from retaining skilled female employees, who may consider returning to work rather than leaving, if they are enabled to continue breastfeeding when they work.9 Therefore, it is in the interest of mothers, babies and employers that mothers are enabled to continue to breastfeed when they return to work. 
Yet, there is evidence from surveys of breastfeeding duration that employment status and associated employment practices may adversely impact on breastfeeding duration. The UK national infant feeding survey10 found that 19% of those who stopped breastfeeding by 4 months attributed this to the need to return to work, and it was the most often cited reason for cessation (19%) by those who breastfed but ceased between 4 and 6 months (39%). A Scottish Infant Feeding Survey in 2002 found that 28% of new mothers stopped breastfeeding because of returning to work.11 In a Spanish study by Escriba and colleagues, 32% of mothers attributed "occupational reasons' as the cause of stopping breastfeeding.12 Similar results were obtained by Ong and colleagues in a study conducted in Singapore. Working mothers were significantly more likely to stop breastfeeding than non-working mothers, and they most often attributed this to the need to work.13 In a survey conducted in Turkey by Ylmaz and colleagues, the two most important influences on duration of breastfeeding were conditions at work and maternal leave period.14 Results from a study in Brazil show that duration of exclusive breastfeeding was longer among women with support for breastfeeding at work and shorter for those working weekends or shifts.15 A recent study of female military personnel in the United States showed that similar rates of initiation were achieved by active and non-active duty personnel, but significantly more active duty mothers stopped breastfeeding at 4 months.16 However, a cross-sectional study in Kenya showed that among the lowest socioeconomic group of working women, nearly all breastfed (99%), and 89% of the higher socioeconomic group breastfed, but shift patterns compared with fixed hours influenced exclusivity of breastfeeding.17 These results show that the issue of continuing breastfeeding after returning to work is important in different countries. See Table 1. 


Table 1 The review of research regarding the relationship between duration of breastfeeding and support for breastfeeding at workplace 

 
A national survey of family growth conducted in the United States in 1988 showed that one-quarter of women employed post-partum made attempts to breastfeed; however, most gave it up about a month after their return to work.18 Another influential factor is the availability of maternity leave. Several studies show that women who breastfed also had longer maternity leave in comparison with women who formula fed from the beginning.19–21 For examp1e, mothers who breastfed had averaged 3.4 months of maternity leave, whereas those who formu1a fed averaged 2.3 months.19 The duration of breastfeeding is also influenced by the duration and flexibility of employment.14,15 Women who were employed part-time achieved longer duration rates than those who worked full-time.19,20 In Nairobi, Kenya, mothers surveyed between 4 and 12 months postpartum achieved 94.1% breastfeeding, supported by opportunities to feed their child in breaks or while at work.17 Such flexible work practices are generally not available in developed countries. 
While allowing more flexibility in organizing the total hours worked and shortening the hours worked in the immediate period after return to work are obvious remedies open to most employers, there are studies that describe the active health promotion efforts of employers. It is suggested that women are more likely to continue to breastfeed after entering employment when lactation rooms and breast pumps are available in their workplace.8,21 Job-related stress may limit women's ability to express breast milk for an infant feeding.1 Cohen and Mrtek describe the positive impact on breastfeeding of an employer providing lactation rooms and breast pumps as a part of support programme, such that breastfeeding duration among employees matched women who do not work.8 Approximately 75% of mothers who took part in their survey were able to maintain breastfeeding for at least 6 months after returning to work. A more intensive prenatal, perinatal and postnatal programme is described by Cohen and Mrtek, as summarized in Table 1.22 Five Californian companies provided lactation support including a preparatory class about breastfeeding, information to supervisors, access to a lactation consultant and access to rooms and equipment for pumping and storage of breast milk. Results showed that 97.5% of those enrolled initiated breastfeeding and 57.8% continued for at least 6 months, whereas maternity leave was on average 2.8 months. A programme to support fathers is described by Cohen and others.23 Ortiz and colleagues describe a lactation programme offered to five corporations, which shows the positive impact of lactation support and the provision of equipment and facilities.24 However, in none of these workplace intervention studies are there baseline data nor were there control groups, limiting the conclusions that can be drawn (see Table 1). 
The regulatory framework of each country provides a context for employers' duties towards the health of pregnant and lactating workers and employees rights. See Table 2 for a description of legislation in countries comparable to the United Kingdom. In the United States, breastfeeding legislation has been enacted in over a half of the states.25 In three states (Connecticut, Illinois and Minnesota), it is mandatory for employers to provide reasonable work time breaks for expressing milk, and they must provide a suitable room in proximity to the employee's work area. By contrast, in the United Kingdom, there is less legislative support to protect women's right to breastfeed after returning to work. Women have the right to facilities to express at work, to reasonable work time breaks, facilities to express and store breast milk and to rest to maintain breast milk production. More recently, direct benefits to breastfeeding may be enabled through longer maternity leave. The Parental Rights Act 200326 guarantees that all pregnant employees are able to take 26 weeks of paid ordinary leave followed by 26 weeks of unpaid additional maternity leave (but only for employees who worked for the employer for 26 weeks by the 15th week before the baby is due). Fathers are entitled to 2 weeks of paid paternity leave. This legislation also states that parents of children aged under 6 can apply for flexible working hours that can be refused only if there is a clear business reason. 


  
Table 2 The comparison of US, Australia, Europe and UK legislation regarding support for breastfeeding after returning to work 

 
However, it is unlikely these measures will impact on breastfeeding if employees are unaware of their rights, and employers do not publicize policies to support breastfeeding. Within a health scrutiny review of health services to support breastfeeding undertaken by two local government authorities in England,27 a survey was undertaken of four large public sector organizations to determine the awareness, experience and views of relevant female employees and their partners. 
The aims of the study were to determine (i) the awareness of employees of their legal rights, (ii) the awareness of employees of their employer's policies, where these existed, (iii) the views and experiences of employees in relation to the breastfeeding support provided by their employers, and (iv) to make recommendations for changes in the policy and practice of the four large public sector organizations surveyed to support the public health goals of the health services of Coventry and Warwickshire. 
Two of these organizations provide hospital and community health care to mothers and infants, one was one of the two local authorities conducting the health scrutiny, the fourth was a local University. It was ascertained before the study that all the four organizations were developing practices to support breastfeeding, but that explicit statements of employees' rights and the availability of facilities were not yet enshrined in formally adopted policies at the time of the survey. The results of the survey would therefore inform the adoption of such policies. 



   Procedure 
 
Permission for access to staff was sought from each organization. A senior member of staff in each organization undertook to distribute the survey to eligible staff. These were employees in the Coventry City Council who expressed an interest and staff in the other organizations (Coventry University, South Warwickshire Primary Care National Health Service Trust and South Warwickshire General Hospitals National Health Service Trust) who were planning to go on maternity leave in the next 6 months, on maternity leave or within 6 months of return from maternity leave. Those on paternity leave were included on a similar basis. 


Results 
 
Characteristics of the sample
Forty-six employees completed the questionnaire. They were employed by four organizations: Coventry Council (n = 19), South Warwickshire PCT (n = 11), Coventry University (n = 9) and South Warwickshire General Hospitals NHS Trust (n = 7). Two-thirds of the sample (n = 30) were part-time employed and so may have been benefiting from some flexibility in employed hours to suit family circumstances. 
