introduction

This article examine s some of the issues encountered by first-year
undergraduate students at Coventry University while engaging in "the
Grammar Project' – an assessment task in the module Academic and Professional
Skills for Language Learning – and illustrates how collaborative use of the
Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) WebCT was instrumental in supporting
their learning. The module is compulsory for all Year 1 undergraduates
studying a foreign language as a "major' degree subject, either in the Bachelor
of Arts Honours Degree in Modern Languages or a Joint Honours Degree
in which a language constitutes half the programme of studies (e.g. BA in
French and History/Politics/International Relations/Business and so on). The
two student cohorts in academic years 2003–2004 and 2004–2005, whose
work is discussed here, included a number of non-native English speakers
studying English as a Foreign Language and/or another foreign language.
We will maintain that designing an assessment task which actively involves
learners in the learning process can help increase their level of motivation
and, as a consequence, their level of understanding of "troublesome
knowledge', as defined by Meyer and Land (2003, 2005) after Perkins (1999):
that is to say, enhance students' understanding of fundamental subject-related
concepts that they struggle with and can become "stuck' on. Furthermore, we
will argue that use of the VLE can help students to overcome a certain
reluctance to engage with meta-reflection on their learning experience, as
documented in a previous, related study (Orsini-Jones, 2004). This outcome
is in line with the existing literature on assessment tasks that aim to foster in
students an intrinsic approach to learning, rather than an extrinsic one, by
encouraging them to take ownership of their learning experience and to
become more involved in decision-making processes related to assessment
tasks (Boud, 1995; Race, 1995; Elton, 1996; Biggs, 1999; McDowell and
Sambell, 1999). In addition, the article will argue that students' perceptions of
their understanding of a concept can be misleading. Some students believe
that they have understood a particular concept but then produce work which
shows evidence to the contrary. Others demonstrate, via their assessed work,
that they have mastered some troublesome knowledge while believing that
the knowledge in question is still problematic to them.

the grammar project task

The target languages in Academic and Professional Skills for Language Learning
were French, German, Italian, Spanish and English (as a Foreign Language).
The students were all taking one or two of the languages as a major subject,
and possibly a second or third as a minor subject. In the United Kingdom
higher education sector there is a requirement for each programme of study
to comply with quality assurance guidelines, set by the Quality Assurance
Agency (QAA) in a "Subject Benchmark Statement' document. The
document for Languages and Related Studies states, under the heading "4.2
Language related skills', that by the end of their course:
Students of Languages and Related Studies (LRS) will have developed appropriate
linguistic tools and metalanguage to describe and analyse the main features of the
language(s) studied. They will thus be able to make effective use of language reference
materials, such as grammars, standard and specialised dictionaries and corpora, to refine
knowledge and understanding of register, nuances of meaning and language use. Students
of LRS will be effective and self-aware independent language learners. (QAA, 2002: 9)
In order to foster the development of such skills, a team of linguists and
educational developers designed an Information and Communication
Technology-based (ICT-based) collaborative Grammar Project. This task was
the major assessment component for the module – 60 per cent of the final
module mark. The aim of the task was to provide students with some
elementary tools, and a basic framework for analysis, which could be applied
to any of the five languages mentioned, while encouraging them to reflect
both as a team and individually on the meta-cognitive aspects of their
learning experience. It was decided to adopt the Hallidayan rank scale
(Halliday, 1985) to explain the basic structure of these languages.
Students were taught how to perform two basic levels of analysis. Firstly
they were asked to divide "sentences' into "clauses', "clauses' into "phrases',
"phrases' into "words' and "words' into "morphemes'. Secondly, they were asked
to distinguish between different types of "clause', "phrase', "word' and
"morpheme'. For "words' the traditional parts of speech or "word classes' were
used (i.e. nouns, verbs, adjectives and so on). "Phrases' were classified in the
same way, with the most important, or "head' word of each phrase determining
its class (e.g "noun phrase, "verb phrase', "adjective phrase'). Basic elements
of "clause' structure, such as "subject' and "direct object' were also identified.
Students were provided with examples in class, and an example on paper of
the type of analysis required (see the Appendix). The grammatical analysis was
considerably simplified, because the time available was limited and because
the main aim was to provide some basic analytical tools which teachers of
the individual languages could then develop as they saw fit and in line with
the characteristics of each language. All the examples used were of formal
written language; some were invented by the teaching staff in the relevant
languages, others taken from authentic sources though often adapted to
remove difficulties that went beyond the scope of this particular exercise.
Working in groups, students were to create a website containing linked web
pages (minimum of three/maximum of five). In each page they had to analyse
a sentence. At least one of the sentences had to be in one of the target
languages studied, and the other(s) in English. Students chose three sentences
from a list given to them, and each group had to create the relevant analysis
and website. The latter had to be uploaded into the VLE's collaborative group
area, and was available for all students and staff to view and use. Each website
had to be presented to the rest of the class by the group that had created it,
with the support of a PowerPoint slide presentation to highlight the major
issues encountered while completing the project. Both the websites and the
PowerPoint slides were available in WebCT for all students until the end of
the academic year following the completion of the project.WebCT was also
used to enable students to exchange files and ideas in dedicated discussion
forums created for each group. After the presentation had taken place, students
had to write an individual reflective report on the project. Subsequently, each
element of the presentation project had to be included in an end-of-year
reflective portfolio of evidence, adapted from the European Language
Portfolio (CILT, 2005 [2001]).
The task required students to develop a variety of skills, both academic and
professional:
• ICT (PowerPoint, web management, file management,WebCT discussion
tools, importing pictures, word processing)
• Language (grammar analysis)
• Team work
• Problem solving
• Time management/coping under pressure
• Learning to learn (weekly progress logs on the project; written individual
reflective report after the presentation; oral group reflective report on the
day of the presentation; individual portfolio entries on this experience in
the end-of-year portfolio)
• Information retrieval.
The administration of the task was managed by a team of two language
lecturers (the module leader and a specialist in linguistics), one educational
technologist from the Centre for Higher Education Development (CHED),
and two student mentors. The mentors were experienced students from
previous years who assisted the lecturer in supporting the students, both
during the face-to-face hands-on sessions in the computer laboratory and
outside classroom hours (e.g. one-to-one portfolio counselling and/or online
support via discussion forum and private mail).

preparing for the task

Students received the following lectures, always followed by a one-hour
workshop/practical.
• Two grammar lectures, increased to four in the second year of the project
in view of student feedback (i.e. in 2004–2005: "What is grammar?';
"Grammar classification 1:Words and morphemes'; "Grammar classification
2: Words and phrases'; "Grammar classification 3: Phrases, clauses and
sentences').
• Two presentation skills lectures ("Effective presentation skills'; "PowerPoint
and effective presentation skills').
• Four web-management/file-management lectures.
• One academic writing lecture on how to write a reflective report.
The students then had two project workshop sessions in which all the experts
were at hand, but they had to work amongst themselves to finalize their
projects. Figures 1 and 2 illustrate two of the projects presented in 2004–2005.
The Figure 1 screen-shot shows an extract from the analysis of a German
sentence, while Figure 2 is an extract from the analysis of an English sentence
(unedited by the tutors, so there are some mistakes).

research methodology

In order to evaluate the students' learning experience, both quantitative and
qualitative research methods were used. Informed consent to participate in
the research was sought from each participant. WebCT tracking data, the
marks received by each student for their project and their feedback on individual
reports and portfolios were analysed. Feedback was elicited from the
students during semi-structured group interview sessions in both academic
years, 2003–2004 and 2004–2005. Roughly 30 per cent of all students (selfselected)
participated in the interviews in both years. The transcripts of the
semi-structured interviews were analysed using the software package
ATLAS.ti (Muhr, 1997), a workbench suitable for the processing of qualitative
data.
In 2003–2004 the interviews were conducted by a researcher from the
Centre for Higher Education Development, while in 2004–2005 they were
conducted by the module leader, who was also one of the four module tutors,
as it was felt that to conduct the interviews effectively a depth of disciplinespecific
knowledge was required coupled with in-depth background
knowledge of the module design. In 2003–2004 students were asked what
they had perceived to be the most challenging aspects of the project in
general, while in 2004–2005 the questions were more focused on the
"stumbling blocks' they had come across while working on the Grammar
Project: how they had tackled them and overcome them (or not), and what
perception they had of their understanding of the basic grammar concepts
taught to them. A comparison between the students' personal assessment of
their level of proficiency in grammar analysis and their actual marks for the
grammar component of the project was made in both years.

the action research/action learning cycle

The syllabus of the module is revised regularly according to a cycle of action
research similar to the one illustrated by Hopkins (1993: 48), reproducing the
"action research spiral' by Kemmis and McTaggart (1988: 14) – see Figure 3.
A phase of "reconnaissance' (or identification of a problematic issue or
issues) normally precedes the start of the cycle, followed by planning, implementation/
action(s), observation, reflection and re-planning (Orsini-Jones,
2004: 192). That is:
• a problematic issue is identified;
• change is planned collaboratively (staff and students) to address the issue;
• the change process is implemented – "acted out';
• all agents involved in the change process reflect upon its outcomes, both
while it is happening and at the end of the first phase of implementation;
• actions are taken to re-plan the changes and the second phase of the
action-research cycle starts (Carr and Kemmis, 1986; McNiff, 1988;
McKernan, 1992; Kember, 2000).
In 2004–2005 more time was dedicated to explaining the concept of the
"morpheme', as this had proved a troublesome matter for the students in the
2003–2004 cohort. Subsequently, most students stated that they were
confident they had understood this concept despite their initial difficulties
with it, and their marks confirmed their confidence. Ten grammar projects
were completed in 2004–2005: in seven of the groups students had made
some mistakes – mostly minor ones – in identifying morphemes correctly,
but they had at least demonstrated an understanding of the basic concept.
This was pleasing to the lecturers involved, as these results compared favourably
with those from the previous year and showed that a change in the
syllabus can help students to understand a "troublesome concept'. The major
changes implemented to achieve this result from 2003–2004 to 2004–2005
were:
1. doubling of the time allocated to explaining grammar in general (increased
from two to four face-to-face sessions) and morphemes in particular, and
changing the assessment of the module to better reflect this increased
grammar input;

