ABSTRACT 
 
Background There is little geographical variation in the prevalence of the common mental disorders. However, there is little longitudinal research. 
Aims To estimate variance in rates of common mental disorders at individual, household and electoral ward levels prospectively. 
Method A 12-month cohort study of 7659 adults aged 16-74 years in 4338 private households, in 626 electoral wards. Data were collected as part of the British Household Panel Survey. Common mental disorders were assessed using the 12-item General Health Questionnaire (GHQ). Ward-level socio-economic deprivation was measured using the Carstairs index. 
Results Less than 1% of total variance, in onset and maintenance of common mental disorders and change in GHQ score between waves, occurred at ward level. However, 12% of variance, which is a statistically significant difference, was found at household level (a much smaller geographical unit) and this difference remained after further analyses. 
Conclusions Ward level socio-economic deprivation does not influence the onset and maintenance of common mental disorders in Britain but local factors at the household level do. Reasons for this remain unclear. 



   INTRODUCTION 
 
Cross-sectional studies suggest little geographical variation in the prevalence of the most common mental disorders of anxiety and depression after adjusting for individual characteristics (McCulloch, 2001; Pickett &amp; Pearl, 2001; Wainwright &amp; Surtees, 2003; Weich et al, 2003a). However, concluding that 'place doesn't matter' runs counter to the intuitive importance of location (Dorling, 2001; MacIntyre et al, 2002). Differential effects of place on the onset and outcome of common mental disorders may not be apparent in cross-sectional studies. Evidence that socio-economic adversity is associated with episode maintenance (Lorant et al, 2003; Hauck &amp; Rice, 2004) suggests a longer episode duration in socio-economically deprived areas. Place effects also may vary with individual circumstances (Weich et al, 2003b). We aimed to estimate the variance in onset and maintenance of common mental disorders at individual, household and electoral ward levels, and also to test the hypothesis that ward-level socio-economic deprivation is associated with episode maintenance, after controlling for individual and household characteristics. 



   METHOD 
 
Data were gathered during the first two waves of the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS), which was initially undertaken in 1991. The BHPS is an annual survey of individuals aged 16 years and over in a representative sample of private households in England, Wales and Scotland. First-wave members were selected via a two-stage, stratified clustered probability sample. Efforts are made to re-interview all original sample members in each subsequent year. Individuals aged 16-74 years at wave 1 who completed the 12-item General Health Questionnaire (GHQ; Goldberg &amp; Williams, 1988) at both waves 1 and 2 were included in this analysis. The BHPS coordinators provided permission and facilitated the linkage of BHPS data to other geographically referenced datasets via each individual's electoral ward of residence at wave 1. This process did not threaten the anonymity of sample members. 
Onset and maintenance of episodes of common mental disorders
Information on common mental disorders was gathered using the GHQ (Goldberg &amp; Williams, 1988). Designed for case finding in community settings, with a sensitivity and specificity of about 80%, it has been widely validated against standardised clinical interviews. We followed evidence that common mental disorders may be represented validly as a single dimension encompassing comorbid anxiety and depression (Stansfeld &amp; Marmot, 1992; Krueger, 1999; Vollebergh et al, 2001; Kendell &amp; Jablensky, 2003). 
We used the `GHQ method' to identify the cases (Goldberg &amp; Williams, 1988). Each GHQ item has four response categories. For example, responses to the question, `Have you recently been unhappy and depressed?' are `not at all', `no more than usual', `rather more than usual' and `much more than usual'. The GHQ is scored in two ways, scoring each item either by the `GHQ method' as present or absent (one point for either of the latter two responses, and zero otherwise), or by the Likert method (responses coded in order as 0, 1, 2 or 3; Goldberg &amp; Williams, 1988). Those scoring 3 or more (out of 12) by the GHQ method were classified as cases (Goldberg &amp; Williams, 1988; Weich &amp; Lewis, 1998). Likert scores (range 0-36) more closely approximated a normal distribution and were used when the GHQ score was treated as a continuous outcome. `Episode onset' describes non-cases at wave 1 on the GHQ who met the case criteria for common mental disorders at wave 2. `Episode maintenance' describes individuals who met the case criteria at both waves. 
Individual- and household-level risk factors
Age, gender, marital status, ethnicity, education, employment status, financial strain and number of current physical health problems were included as potential individual-level confounders of associations between area-level exposures and common mental disorders. 
There is significant variation in rates of common mental disorders between households, even after taking into account individual-level confounders (Weich et al, 2003a). Some exposures can be assigned only to households, such as overcrowding, household type, housing tenure and structural housing problems. This is not so for others, particularly income, for which data are commonly aggregated at household level (Weich et al, 2001). For occupational social class, stronger associations with rates of common mental disorders have been found between the social class of the head of the household than with individual social class, particularly among women (Weich &amp; Lewis, 1998; Weich et al, 2003b). Household characteristics were assessed at wave 1, and included structural housing problems, household income, car access, tenure, social class (by head of household), overcrowding (more than two household members per bedroom) and household type (based on household composition). Structural housing problems were defined as any major problem or two or more minor problems from a list comprising damp, condensation, leaking roof and/or rot in wood. The BHPS data-set includes net income data that have been validated against official UK income distribution figures (Jarvis &amp; Jenkins, 1995). Low income was defined as household income below half the median income for the sample. 
Spatial scale
There were three potential `area' levels above household level within this data-set: electoral ward, postcode sector (the primary sampling unit for the BHPS) and region. Electoral wards (2400 addresses on average, with mean population=222, s.d.=3899) are currently the smallest geographical area at which BHPS data are available. Sensitivity analyses were undertaken by substituting each of the other two geographical levels for wards. The BHPS investigators and authors therefore agreed a method for matching respondents and characteristics of electoral wards, without disclosure of information that might permit identification of respondents. 
Area-level socio-economic deprivation
The assessment of area-level exposures was limited by the absence of validated contextual measures and a dearth of evidence about which of the large number of compositional measures were likely to be associated with the prevalence of common mental disorders. We therefore chose, a priori, to use the Carstairs index of socio-economic deprivation (Morris &amp; Carstairs, 1991), based on data collected in the 1991 census. The Carstairs index is based on Z scores of four person-level (compositional) variables for each ward: male unemployment, households with no car, overcrowding (more than one person per room) and head of household in Registrar General's social class IV or V. The BHPS investigators rounded Z scores to integer values and truncated the tails of the resulting distribution to protect respondents' identities. 
Statistical analysis
Multi-level models were developed using MLwiN software (Goldstein et al, 1998). Null, random effects models were derived for persons nested in households, with households nested within wards (Snijders &amp; Bosker, 1999). Individual-, household- and ward-level exposures were added subsequently. We analysed the onset of episodes separate from episode maintenance, using multi-level logistic regression. For binomial distributions, variance in the intercept term is neither constant across groups nor independent of mean values within the groups. A number of alternative approaches to ascertaining variance of the intercept term at higher levels can be used, including model linearisation using first-order Taylor expansion or simulation methods (Goldstein et al, 2002). We used a logit model based on the notion of a continuous latent variable in which a threshold defines the binary outcome (see Snijders &amp; Bosker, 1999, p. 223). We assumed an underlying standard logistic distribution for the binary outcome (onset or not and maintenance or not, across two waves) at the individual level (level 1). This is justified by the threshold nature of the GHQ scoring method, but might be less suitable for discrete outcomes such as mortality. 
Level 1 variance on this latent variable was the standardised logistic variance of 2/3=3.29. When unexplained random variance at level 2 was indicated as r02, the proportion of the total unexplained variance at this level was estimated (from a two-level null random intercept model) as r 20/(r 20+3.29). In each of the logistic models, the constant term is the logit (loge of the odds) of a person in the base (reference) category being either an individual experiencing episode `onset' or episode `maintenance'. The proportion of each onset or maintenance group was estimated from the constant term in the null model, which is equal to ln[p/(l7p)]. Parameters were estimated using second-order Taylor expansion with predictive quasi-likelihood. Markov chain Monte-Carlo methods may improve the accuracy of such estimates but the method is computationally intensive and was used here only in the discussion of higher level variation. Statistical significance of individual fixed estimates was tested using a Wald test against a 2 distribution. Because difficulties are encountered when variances are close to zero, 95% interval estimates (the `credible interval') derived from Markov chain Monte-Carlo procedures are reported for random model parameters. 
The GHQ scores at wave 2 were also analysed as a continuous outcome, using hierarchical linear regression and controlling for GHQ score at wave 1. Finally, the stability of GHQ scores across waves was assessed using the intra-class correlation coefficient. 



   RESULTS 
 
A total of 9518 individuals aged 16-74 years participated in the BHPS at wave 1. Of these, 8980 (94%) completed the GHQ at wave 1 and 7659 also did so at wave 2 (85% of those who completed the GHQ at wave 1, and 80% of the total baseline sample). The baseline prevalence of common mental disorders in the study sample was 24.6%. For episode onset analyses, 5809 individuals were nested within 3679 households, within 615 wards. For episode maintenance analyses, 1850 individuals were nested within 1566 households, within 511 wards. 
Onset and maintenance of episodes of common mental disorders
In the null model, the rate of episode onset was 14.3% (95% CI 13.3-15.3) across all households and wards. As Table 1 shows, the estimated variance at the household level (13.9%) was statistically significant, but that at ward level (0.2%) was not. These variances were largely unchanged after adjusting for characteristics of individuals, households and wards (Table 1), or for GHQ score at baseline. 


Table 1 Variance (standard error), credible interval and percentage of total unexplained variance in the onset and maintenance of episodes of common mental disorders at the individual, household and electoral ward levels, for null and adjusted models 

 
A different pattern was observed for episode maintenance, the rate of which was 54.3% (95% CI 51.8-56.8) over 1 year. In the null model, neither variance at the household (12.0%) nor ward level (0.5%) was statistically significant. However, adjusting for individual and household characteristics resulted in an almost fourfold increase in the variance in episode maintenance at the household level (estimated variance=1.73, credible interval =0.38-2.92). Most of this increase in variance occurred on adjusting for individual-level variables (estimated variance 1.15, s.e.=0.56, credible interval=0.36-2.20), before household characteristics were introduced into the model. The adjusted variance at household level was statistically significant and was not altered on further adjusting for ward characteristics. None of these findings differed substantially when postcode sectors were substituted for wards, or when wards with five or fewer respondents were excluded. 

