Extract: Nina Todd Has Gone
By Lesley Glaister

The memories of her birth mother are rare and faint. The first is of sitting close to the bars of an electric fire, the hot orange burning her face as they shared a bag of chips. One for you and one for me and licking the vinegary grease from the paper. When the chips were gone she chewed the paper into a gummy wad. She went to sleep still chewing and in the morning the paper came out grey and printed with ridges from the roof of her mouth.

She slept under Mum's coat, hard scratchy material, and woke with a button pressed into her cheek. Nothing to see in the night but a dot of orange growing and shrinking. It was Mum's cigarette in the dark and she liked to watch it and sniff the mothery smell.

Once they were thrown off a train, but this may have been when she was older, on a visit. When the ticket-man came round, Mum's face was blank as an egg as she searched her pockets, but he didn't believe she ever had a ticket and they had to get off at the next stop.

'Fuck you,' Mum said and made a V-sign. Her face was red but when they got off she laughed and they swung hands and sang the yellow-taxi song.
One cold day they sat on a park bench. She was cosy in jeans and a warm coat but Mum's legs were bare and grey as porridge and the skin on her heels stuck over the backs of her sandals like old cheese. A man came up and sat down with them. He made Mum laugh and they smoked a cigarette and he came back to Mum's room.

Lots of men loved Mum and cuddled her and bumped her against walls and on the floor like that. She would draw pictures and try not to look at their faces and sometimes she would put her fingers in her ears.

Afterwards it was good and always chips.

Then one day a lady with cold hands came and took her away.
Chapter One
Listen. You should always trust your gut feelings. They are a gift from your subconscious to your conscious mind. If only I had trusted mine.

I was sitting in the lobby of the Hotel Astoria staring into a coffee-spoon. Not mine. I was drinking wine. The convex side of a spoon reflects you the right way up but flip it over and you're upside down. Did you ever notice that?

I picked up my glass. A girl in a nylon overall cleared away the cup and spoon, emptied an ashtray into a plastic sack. She gave me a pitying look. Soon I'd go up in the lift, back to my room and lock the door. But not till Charlie called. My phone sat on the low glass table in front of me, silent.

The girl came back to polish the table, squirting it with lemony spray. She snapped her bubble-gum and gave me that look again, All on your own? I swigged back my drink. Now I'd have to get up and walk through the bar where everyone else was partying. Or I could just sit there clutching my empty glass.
I should have followed the advice of my gut and gone back to my room. It was only meanness that made me stay. There was a free drink on offer. I checked my phone again — and saw that someone had stopped beside me. I ignored him for as long from the empty glass. Such beauty was superfluous and almost aggravating. There was no call for it. Not on a wet Tuesday night in Blackpool.
'May I?' He gestured to the space beside me on the sofa. I shrugged. He sat down, crossed one leg over the other and sank back, the leather exhaling beneath him. 'Long day,' he said. I winced an agreement.

I picked up a brochure about local attractions and pretended to read. I thought he'd take the hint but then he spoke again.

'Drink?' I looked up sharply. Did he mean me? Was this a pick-up? He leant forward and tapped my empty glass. 'Refill? I've got half an hour to kill and I hate to drink alone.' Maybe it was the surprise, or maybe the wine I'd already had that made me nod.

I watched him walk through to the bar. Long, long limbs — he must have been six foot three or four - in a black moleskin suit, perfectly cut, just a little creased. I glanced around the lobby and met the eyes of the cleaner, who was polishing the reception desk. She raised her eyebrows at me and blew a pink bubble. I looked away. He came back with a glass of white wine, much better than the free stuff, and a Scotch for himself.

'Business or pleasure?' He relaxed back into the sofa.

'A course,' I said.

'Yes?'

'A load of rubbish,' I said. 'It's about self-esteem.'

'Is that something you lack?'

It seemed almost dangerous to look directly into his face. When I did he smiled, and with the gleam of his bright brown eyes I was dazzled. I sipped the wine and looked down.

'Nervous?' he said, nodding at my jiggling foot. I can't help it. Charlie puts his hand on my knee to stop it if we're in the cinema or watching TV. I uncrossed my legs and pressed hot feet flat on the floor.

'I'm on Marketing Strategics,' he said, 'and ditto.'

'Ditto?'

'Load of rubbish.'

A laugh crawled out of me and I told him about the getting to-know-you exercise. Standing in a circle, tossing a beanba between us, whoever caught it had to shout out their name and something wonderful about themselves.

'Like what?'

'Like, I'm Sally and I'm very punctual.'

'Sally.' He extended his hand.

'No, no,' I said, 'that was someone else. I'm Nina. Nina Todd.'

'Nina.' His fingers closed round mine. 'Nice. Are you?'

'Nice?'

He laughed and I looked away, blushing right down to my toes. I focused on a waitress carrying a platter of chicken wing towards the bar.

'I meant punctual!' he said. 'What did you say . . . when the beanbag came to you?'

I shook my head.

'Go on.'

'OK then. "I'm Nina and I'm good at spelling."'

He snorted. 'Well anyway it sounds more fun than Marketing Strategics. All pie charts and jargon. Have you eaten, Nina?

'No.'

'Not joining the party?' In the bar the laughter had been replaced by a buzz of conversation and the chink of cutlery on plates.

'I'm not a party person.' I got up to go. 'Thanks for the drink.'
'Nina,' he said. 'Would you have dinner with me? Looks like I've been stood up.'

'But I don't even know your name!'

'I can soon put that right. Promise not to laugh?' He bit his lip and pulled a face. 'It's Rupert - and no bear jokes, please.'

I looked down at him and I didn't laugh. 'Rupert's OK,' I said.

'I've grown into it,' he said. And then wrinkled his nose and growled. It was stupid but it made me laugh again.

'You said you had to wait half an hour,' I pointed out. 'It can't have been that long.'
He shrugged. 'Quiet dinner. Two strangers away from home. No strings.' He opened his palms.

'I've got to make a call,' I said.

I took my phone and went to stand by the big revolving doors. As people swished through I caught a whiff of raw sea air. If Charlie had answered I'd have said no to Rupert but he didn't answer, neither on the landline or his mobile. I knew where he'd be - round at his brother Dave's, who was depressed.

Suddenly I felt reckless; what the hell, I thought. Why not? What harm could it do? Two strangers away from home. It would be a consolation. That was when I got the gut feeling that told me Don't, that told me Walk away and don't look back. I went over to Rupert and said, 'All right. Thank you. Yes.'

I thought he meant that we'd eat in the hotel restaurant but he knew a good place ten minutes away, he said, and how about some sea air to give us an appetite? My jacket was too flimsy for the rain and wind. My thin shoe soles picked up the chill of the promenade as we walked along under the coloured lights. Red and yellow smeared and glittered the wet concrete. The sea was invisible except for a breaking edge of white but it moaned and swooshed and I felt it in my stomach. A gust of wind rattled the lights above us and Rupert took my arm.

'Don't want you blowing away, do we?' he said.

The restaurant was warm and dark with candles flickering on thick white linen cloths. A serious grown-up restaurant. Charlie would have walked straight past and headed for an Indian or Chinese. I wanted to check the prices on the menu. But before I had a chance to look, while a waiter was still helping me out of my jacket, Rupert ordered a bottle of champagne.

'I'm sorry,' he said, as we were shown to our seats, 'I should have asked, do you like champagne?'

'Who doesn't? But—'

'If you're worrying about the cost, please, this is on me.'

'I can't.'

'No strings. I can afford it. Let me treat you.'

I breathed in the rich foody scents and wavered like the flames of the candles. 

'OK then, ta.' People were looking at him, and looking at me with envy because I was with him and no one else looked half so good for miles and miles around. I told myself to relax. What would be the point of not enjoying it now?

During the blue-cheese souffle and the monkfish skewers, between the glasses of champagne and then Chablis, I did relax and gabbled on about the other people on the course, like the woman who'd said, 'I am wonderful because my breasts are still pert after feeding two babies.'

'That is wonderful,' he said, a little quirk to his lips. He leant forward and looked at my eyes.

'What?' I said.

'Eyes are the windows of the soul,' he said.

I shrank back when he said that rubbish. Eyes are just balls of muscle filled with water, nothing to do with souls at all. I felt like getting up and walking out on him, but then he changed the subject and I forgave him his cliche.
He drained the wine bottle into my glass and returned it upside down to the ice bucket. I sneaked a look at myself in a polished spoon.

'What are you doing?' he said.

I told him about the reflections and he tried it for himself and then ... I don't remember more of the conversation, or leaving the restaurant, though I do recall floating through the wind tethered like a balloon to his arm. And I do remember a kiss, under a lamp-post, the taste of the inside of his mouth, the smoothness of his tongue.

His room was bigger than mine, with a wider bed and a window that in daylight would have shown the chilly acres of the sea. He pulled the cord and drew the curtains against the dark. He opened the mini-bar and poured us each a cognac. Inside the fridge was a toy bear with white plush fur. It had a sign round its neck beginning, 'Missing a Loved One?'

I remembered then. I should have gone back to my own room then and locked the door. But instead I watched myself be kissed and though I knew that this was cheap behaviour, cheats' behaviour, the moment when I could have called a halt had already passed. Maybe it was the drink. Maybe it was . . . I don't know. I don't think I even want to know.

As he undid the buttons on his linen shirt, I saw that they were the skinniest mother-of-pearl. His chest was neatly furred with ferns of black hair, his belly was taut, a trail of tendrils leading down. He pulled me up against him and I could feel hardness through the soft black moleskin of his trousers. And once we'd gone that far there seemed no point in stopping.



