
"Don't dramatise, darling, it's only an appliance.' 

"An appliance that's begging to be put out of its misery.' 

"You know our views on needless waste,' he said, crumpling the plastic bottle with one hand and chucking it across the room towards the bin. "Landfill sites are clogged up with perfectly serviceable white goods, we don't want to make any further contribution to the death of the planet.' 

"Sod the planet, I've got work to do. Gus has brought forward my deadline and the kitchen's flooded.' 

Will observed a brief silence. 

"On a brighter note,' he went on, "I've invited Chas over tonight. I thought you might like to do your mushroom risotto. You could stop off at Fresh and Wild on your way to school.' 

"Or you could stop off on your way home.' 

"I'd love to,' he said regretfully, as if nothing would have given him more pleasure, "only they'll be closed by then. We're not all part-timers.' 

"Part-time cleaner, chief cook and bottle-washer.' 

"And talented translator. You are an extraordinary woman, I realise that.' 

She softened at the flattery. "All right then. What time will you be here?' 

"Dinner time. Have you got proper stock? You can't make risotto without it.' 

"In the freezer.' 

"Good girl. Love you.' 

"Mmm.' 

He was right, she thought as she put the phone down. It was only an appliance, there was no point getting hysterical about it. Will was good at putting things in perspective, he never lost his cool and often made her feel like a petulant child. Though, in truth, it was easy to be cool when you weren't the one who had to deal with things. 

She threw some towels down on the floor and shuffled them round with her feet to dry it, then sat down at her computer. She'd call Zanussi later, better not to interrupt her concentration. So Chas was coming to dinner. Chas was Will's agent, and therefore worth courting. He also liked his food, and was always complimentary about Jane's cooking. She'd need to get in some more parmesan, too, for tonight. Will would be pleased with her for making the effort, and she did like it when he was pleased with her. 

Sighing, she forced her mind back from the evening ahead and concentrated on her work. Double speed now, no time to waste. The phone rang again. Damn, she'd forgotten to plug in the answer phone. Maybe she should just let it ring? But what if it was Liberty's school to say she'd had an accident? 

"Hallo darling.' 

Lydia. Her old friend. Or to be more accurate, the daughter of her mother's friend. 

"Lydia! What a surprise!' 

Which it was, in one way, since Jane had no idea why Lydia still bothered to keep in touch with her. On the other hand, Lydia called her so often at this time in the morning that it was hardly surprising at all. They had been at school together, then on to Oxford, followed by parallel lowly jobs that involved a lot of photocopying. But whereas Lydia's career had gathered momentum and was steaming along a high-speed track, Jane's had ended up shunted into a cul-de-sac right here in her kitchen. 

"How are things, Jane?' asked Lydia. "What have you been up to?' 

"Coping with an enormous flood. The dishwasher broke, my deadline's been cut short and Will's just rung to say he's invited his agent to dinner . . .' 

But Lydia wasn't listening. It was always like this, she popped the question, ignored the answer, then roared in with a full account of her own glamorous life. "God, I can't tell you how busy I've been, it's been wall-to-wall hectic here.' 

So if she was that busy, thought Jane, why waste time – especially my time – making unnecessary phone calls? 

"Really?' 

"Yes, really. I had to go down to Highgrove last weekend, we're doing a thing on Charles's organic stuff. He's fantastic, by the way, couldn't have been more welcoming.' 

"Did you curtsey?' 

"Did I curtsey! This was a professional meeting, I wasn't there presenting him with a bunch of flowers!' 

"Were his hands softened by luxury or calloused by honest toil?' 

But Lydia was already off on a full account of what he said and what she wore and calf lactation cycles. It was disingenuous of Jane to kid herself that she didn't know why Lydia bothered with her. Beneath that high-gloss exterior, she was constantly seeking validation for her achievements and Jane's drab life at home was the perfect foil to her own giddy existence. Busy, busy me and dear old steady you. 

"But that's enough about me,' said Lydia, "let's talk about you. What do you think about me?' 

"Ha ha,' Jane replied. 

"No, really, how are you?' said Lydia. "Still busy with the old translation?' 

Jane ran her finger across her computer screen and examined the line of dust which it had accumulated. Dust was supposed to be made up largely of skin cells, so why did it look so grey and fluffy? 

"Frantic, can I call you back? I've got to get on before school finishes . . .' 

"Ah yes, that child. You're a saint, Jane, you know that?' 

"Mmm.' 

"But good for you, you've managed to keep some kind of career going.' 

"Nice of you to say so. Must go . . .' 

"No honestly, Jane, I take my hat off to you. It can't be easy working all by yourself, with no-one to bounce ideas off. It would drive me mad, I know that.' Lydia fell silent in a moment of true, shuddering pity. "Anyway, the reason I called,' she went on, "was to ask if you were going to Miss Lancaster's memorial service.' 

"Who?' 

"Miss Lancaster, you know, our old tutor.' 

Jane cast her mind back to a woman with Margaret Drabble hair and large flat feet, pouring out three glasses of Stones ginger wine before their midday tutorial. "Of course, I remember, she was nice enough but I think I'll give it a miss. No point in wallowing in the past.' 

Lydia's motives were neither sentimental nor nostalgic. "It's a great networking opportunity. All those people you haven't seen for ages, some of them really worth knowing. I've made some great contacts at memorial services.' 

Jane was not convinced. The last thing she wanted was to run the gauntlet of polite enquiries from her peers. Holding up the unremarkable achievements of her life for general inspection, while Lydia glittered and whirled around her. 

"No, I think I'm busy that day,' she said, "I don't think Miss Lancaster will miss me.' 

"Obviously she won't. I'm just thinking of you. It would do you good to get out more. Finger on the pulse and all that. Hang on, there's my other line, I'll call you back.' 

And with a dismissive click Jane was dropped back into her fusty old life. Self-chosen, and therefore not pitiful. The life of the home worker. Independent, flexible, the mistress of her destiny. Or underpaid, lonely and unrewarded? Discuss. 

Goodness me, it was nearly lunchtime and the place was still a pigsty. She'd better just take ten minutes out to tidy up, they couldn't have Chas sitting down to dinner surrounded by mountains of trash. She took a stray plastic bag and started to fill it with bits of Barbie outfits that were strewn across the counter: a tiny boucle jacket, a handbag the size of a thumbnail and minuscule stilettoes for deformedly small feet. 

The best thing about working at home was being able to move around freely since you weren't stuck behind the same desk all day, though the benefits were debatable when you were constantly reminded of your household chores and other family commitments. She sighed, picked up the rest of the toys littering the floor and decided to relocate to the bedroom to escape the demands of her kitchen. Picking up the laptop, she stepped over the piles of clean sheets sitting on the stairs. Her sister-in-law had noticed her laundry-pile habit and last Christmas had given her a rectangular basket specially designed to fit on a bottom stair. The idea being that on your way up you would gaily seize it by the handle and swing it behind you, tra la la, all the way to the linen closet, that well-ordered place so loved by women with its crisply pressed Egyptian-cotton sheets interleaved with lavender nosegays. 

Upstairs, she slipped under the bedcovers, placing the computer on her knees. It was cold up here – Will didn't believe in heating too many unnecessary rooms – and the computer generated a reassuring surge of warmth through the goose down. This is the life, she thought, tapping happily at the keys. Tucked up in bed in her pyjamas and the womb-like security of her very own sleep/workplace. You couldn't really ask for more. Lydia was welcome to her hectic schedule of royal encounters, jumping into cars in a flurry of pashminas and spiky heels. It made Jane feel exhausted just thinking about it. Though sometimes she wouldn't mind slamming the front door and clipping off to the office in a pair of noisy look-at-me shoes. But Will was right, it made more sense for her to be at home. As he pointed out, it was one thing going out to work if you were a top dog with a fat salary to pay for nannies and cleaners. But when you were a middle-ranking nobody, you were lucky to break even once you'd paid for a childminder, and tube fares and lunch and decent clothes. 

When she finally reached the end of the chapter, Jane leaped out of bed and ran a bath. While waiting for it to fill, she walked across to the window and looked out at the rainy street where two men in hooded sweatshirts were shouting at each other. It was funny how she'd ended up in this dodgy bit of London where, bizarrely, houses were twice as expensive as in the leafy suburbs of her upbringing. Her dream had always been to move to the country, but she knew it wouldn't ever happen. Will didn't do the country. Or at least he might do the country for a weekend provided he was staying in a stonking great house with no ribbon developments to spoil the view. His fantasy, as he liked to reiterate in his newspaper column, was to live in London for the rest of his life. Dear old dirty London: her clothes may be ragged but beneath them beats a heart of gold. Or words to that effect. 

She quickly bathed and changed then went downstairs to call Zanussi. Two more chapters, then she'd have to rush off to Ikea to get those shelves for Liberty's bedroom. Will had been chasing her to get them for weeks now and she didn't want to tell him yet again that she hadn't had time, it sounded so feeble. She finished her work in silence, then picked up her coat and the Ikea catalogue, marked up in Will's neat handwriting. On the North Circular she stopped for petrol and bought a family-sized box of Maltesers, which she ate from her lap as the traffic stopped and started its way through the drizzling rain. 

In the downstairs bar of the French House, Will caught sight of himself in the mirror. With the benefit of low lighting and three gin and tonics, he had to admit he liked what he saw. He turned his head to get the best angle of his cheekbones, and found it incredible to think that he was pushing fifty. That was no age, though, these days. Fifty was the new forty, or more like thirty-five in his case. He smoothed some rogue hairs back into his ponytail and turned to his companion.
