  





Hendry had second thoughts about the brandy. He took a tube and drank. The liquid burned a path down his gullet. He fell into a sunken bunker and said, "Something... it looked like some kind of insect, armed with... I don't know, swords of some kind. It came at us faster than-"
Olembe interrupted. "Lisa approached the thing. She actually moved towards its and said..." He stopped.
Hendry finished, in a whisper, "She said that we were from Earth, and we came in peace."
"And then the fucker," Olembe said, "tore her to pieces."
Hendry looked from Carrelli to Kaluchek. Their faces were masks of shock, blood-drained and open-mouthed. "If it wasn't for Friday we'd both be dead."
The African shook his head. "I acted on instinct. Grabbed a piece of wreckage and hit the bastard. It gave us time to get back inside."
Dazed, as if she hadn't fully taken in what the men had told her, Kaluchek said, "It killed Lisa? Where is she? Maybe Gina could-"
"Sissy," Olembe said with pained precision, "imagine a samurai on speed, armed with a dozen scimitars. Lisa didn't stand a chance." Olembe paused, then said, "That isn't all."
Hendry's throat was sore with the effort of clamping back a sob.
Carrelli said, "What? What is it, Joe?"
He shook his head, words impossible.
With a gentleness Hendry found surprising, Olembe said, "The colonists in hangar Three... Joe found them. Chrissie was in Three."
"They're all...?" Carrelli said.
"The remaining three thousand are okay," Olembe said.
Carrelli moved quickly to his side. "Joe, I can give you something. A sedative, something to take the pain away for a while..."
Hendry stared at his brandy and shook his head.
She glanced around at the others. "If you need to be alone, Joe..."
"No." It came out faster than he'd intended, but he meant it. Right now, the last thing he wanted was to be left in the chamber by himself, prey to visions of the past.
He took another long drink, felt himself drifting. The conversation went on around him. He heard the words as if at a great distance.
At one point, Sissy Kaluchek said, "So... what now? What do we do?"
Olembe snorted, "There's precious fucking little we can do, sweetheart. The planet out there isn't exactly paradise, and the natives are hostile."
Kaluchek stared at him. "You don't think those things can get in here?"
Olembe looked across at Hendry. "Fuck knows. We'd better arm ourselves."
"And then what?" Kaluchek said.
"Well," Olembe grunted, "we can't get the ship up and running and fly out of here. We gotta face the fact, we're stranded, and there won't be no more starships coming thisaway, at least not human starships."
Carrelli said, "So we give in. Sit here and drink ourselves into oblivion. Is that what you're saying?"
The African turned and stared at her. "You got a better idea?"
Hendry found himself saying, "We could always go back into cold-sleep, set to wake in a thousand years..." The prospect was appealing.
Olembe laughed. "And what good would that do, Joe? We'd wake up, and what would have changed?"
Hendry shook his head and took another mouthful of brandy.
"We haven't explored the place," Carrelli said. "We have arms, technology. If this place has daylight..." she shrugged. "You never know, we might make a go of it yet."
"Strike up a pact with the friendly aboriginals," Olembe sneered. "Come on, Gina."
Carrelli faced down his stare. "I find your attitude very unhelpful," she said, her Italian accent suddenly very hard. "We're facing a bad situation, okay, and all you can do is give in."
"Hey, sweetheart, I ain't giving in."
"It sounds like it to me, Olembe," Kaluchek said.
Olembe shrugged. "Look, all this hot airing ain't gonna solve a thing. Right now it doesn't look too good. I'm a realist."
"So you're giving in," Kaluchek pressed. "You can't see a way out of this trap, right?"
Olembe stood and took a tube of brandy from the wall unit. "As of now, I can't see a way out." He moved up the incline to the far end of the lounge and slumped into a work-station, frowning at the screen.
Kaluchek watched him go, shaking her head. "Jerk," she said under her breath.
Hendry said, "Go easy on him, Sissy."
"Why the hell should I?"
Hendry shrugged. "He says what he thinks. He doesn't hold anything back." He looked from Kaluchek to Carrelli. "Admit it, he said what we were all thinking, but we didn't want to come out with it."
Kaluchek shook her head, staring into her brandy. "I don't give in. No matter what. No matter how bad things seems. There's always a way out, an answer."
Carrelli backed her up. "We'll survive. I know we will. All we need is knowledge. We can do anything if we have a full understanding of the situation we're in."
"I hope you're right."
The medic stood and moved to a vacant work-station. "I'll try to find out what we have left in the way of medical supplies."
Kaluchek watched her, then looked across at Hendry. "You should really have taken something from Gina, you know. Alcohol isn't the answer."
He ignored her. They drank in silence and stared out through the viewscreens at the dark night, the occasional star twinkling through the frigid atmosphere.
Hendry saw Chrissie lying in the catafalque, beautiful in death. Then the image was overlayed by the vision of Lisa Xiang, stepping forward, hand raised in peaceful greeting. He could not banish from his mind's eye her bloody and futile death.
His thoughts drifted, back to Earth, Chrissie.
He said, at last, "It's strange..." and stopped there.
"What?"
He shrugged. "I was reasonably content, back on Earth. I lived alone." He told her about the Mars shuttle and the starship graveyard. "I talked to Chrissie every month or so, saw her every couple of years." He smiled. "It was enough to know that she was there, that sooner or later I'd see her again. Then she came and told me about the mission. She was going to the stars, leaving me for good. The painful thing wasn't so much being on my own, or even the knowledge that I'd never see her again -- though that was bad enough -- but not knowing what would happen to her. She'd live out her life among the stars, thousands of years after I was dead... and I wouldn't know a thing about it." He smiled. "Maybe I was a typical father. I wanted some control over her life."
Sissy smiled and shrugged.
"And now she's dead. It seems so damned pointless, so random. Why her? You know something, I was so looking forward to when she woke up and found me here."
"I'm sorry, Joe."
He stared at his brandy. "She was so fired up about the mission. She believed in the project. She wanted to build a world out here that worked, that didn't repeat the mistakes we made on Earth."
Sissy said, "We'll do it, Joe. Somehow, we'll..."
He said, bitterly, "Perhaps it's just as well she didn't survive. I mean, what are our chances-?"
"That's grief talking, Joe. We'll pull though."
A while later he said, "Did you leave anyone on Earth?"
She shrugged, looked uncomfortable. "Not really. I split up with a guy a year before I was selected for the mission."
"Parents?"
"Mom left wen I was ten, ran off with some guy. Dad did a few years later. I had a sister I never saw. My kid brother... we did get along. He was killed in the cholera epidemic that swept through Canada a few years ago." She laughed, unexpectedly.
"What?"
"Listen to me. 'A Few years ago'! All that happened hundreds of years ago!" She stopped, then said, "Wonder what happened to Earth? Do you think anyone survived?"
He thought about Old Smith, the people he'd lived with on the commune, Bruckner and all the other admin staff at the ESO... long dead and forgotten. Well, almost forgotten.
"If humanity did survive... five hundred years is a long time... who knows what might have happened. Maybe some groups did struggle though, build a better place."
She looked at him. "But you doubt it, right?"
He grunted. "Yes, I doubt it. We'd wrecked the planet. Left a nice mess for the generations who followed, if any did."
He looked across at her, her brown eyes reminding him so much of Chrissie. "Who do you blame, Joe?"
"Blame? You mean the politicians of the twentieth, early twenty-first century? The industrialists?" He shook his head. "They were just human, and greedy. They'd inherited systems and infrastructures it was almost impossible to change and break out of. I don't blame anyone."
"Human, and greedy? We're human and greedy, Joe. Does that mean there's no hope?"
"I had the same conversation with Chrissie. Do we carry with us the seeds of our own destruction? She had faith in the ultimate success of the project. We were starting from scratch, we'd learn from our mistakes."
"I think I would have liked Chrissie," Kaluchek said. She sipped her drink, staring across the room. Hendry took another tube of brandy. He lay back in the bunker and thought about his last meeting with Chrissie, the pain he'd felt when he'd said goodbye.
He slept eventually, and dreamed, and in his dreams Chrissie was five again, and they were playing snakes and ladders, Chrissie bewailing her luck when she landed on a snake... 
He woke up suddenly, cut to the core by the realisation of his daughter's death. He sat up. Sissy was comatose across the bunker from him, sprawled out with a brandy tube clutched possessively to her chest. Carrelli was curled in a far bunker, quietly sleeping. At the far end of the lounge, Olembe sat hunched over a screen.
Chrissie was dead: all his time with her was in the past, now. The future he'd envisioned, with his daughter a major part in it, would remain nothing but a dream.
He looked up, and only then did he realise that it was no longer night-time beyond the viewscreen. While he'd slept, daylight had come to the planet. A weak, watery daylight, granted, but nevertheless a light that perhaps betokened some small measure of hope.
He stood and crossed to the viewscreen, realising as he did so that he would be the first human being to witness sunrise on an alien world. He looked out across a vast white-blue ice plain, as smooth a regular as the surface of a mirror. He scanned the horizon, looking for the sun - then lifted his gaze.
Zeta Ophiuchi was a small point high in the sky, almost directly overhead. He tried to work out the physics of so rapid a sunrise, and then gave up.
Then he saw something, but couldn't quite work out what he was looking at. He had never seen anything like it before, and it was as if his brain were having difficulty processing the unfamiliar data relayed by his staring eyes.
He leaned forward, gripped the rail, and tried to make sense of the celestial display above him.
Weakly he called out, "Sissy. Sis, look at this."
He heard a tired, "What?"
He said, "Get yourself over here."
He heard her climb from the bunker and pad towards him. He glanced at her, not wanting to miss the look of wonder that spread across her face.
"Gina!" Sissy almost screamed.
Olembe looked up from his workstation, then hurried over. Across the lounge, Carrelli woke up and stretched. She joined them and said, "What is it, Sissy?"
Olembe could only stare, eyes wide, before he began to laugh.
Carrelli smiled quietly to herself, her optimism vindicated.
Hendry gazed through the viewscreen. "Salvation?" he said to himself.

