The Ice-cream Van of the Apocalypse 

OK, so you've probably been told that there's nothing to be scared of about dying. And as for being dead, well who the Hell cares? In school you either get some happy-clappy, failed priest of an RE teacher with moist hands and greasy trousers who tells you that everyone gets to go to Heaven; or there's Mr Hep Cat Sociology with a wisp of Rizla stuck to his lip, who thinks he's shocking the kids when he says that when we go we go, no God, no Devil, no bullshit about punishment or reward - not even the hippie stuff about joining the stars or becoming one with the universe, just a big black nothing, for ever. 

Well, they only say that because they don't know. But let me tell you something. Let me tell you right now. I do. Dying hurts. And being dead hurts. 

Hurts like Hell. 

I know. 

So how do I know? 

Let me go back a bit. Back to The Fart. The Fart of Ill Omen. The Fart of Doom. 

I sit behind Phil Gilroy in biology. I say 'sit', but I mean 'sat'. Phil's a fat boy. A proper fat boy. Fat from his toes to his ears. In some places his fat is soft and doughy; in some places solid as a melon. But everywhere his fat is fat. He talks about his 'glands', but the reason Phil is fat is because he eats too much, and what he eats is fat. Phil's a pie man: steak and kidney, mince and potato, cheese and onion, whale and bacon, lemur - put it in a pie and Phil eats it - toying with it first perhaps, as if it was a mouth organ or a fine cigar, but then down she goes. No one's ever seen Phil eat anything except pies. His favourite is a pork pie heated in a microwave until the filling liquefies to the consistency of warm snot. He then nibbles a hole in the crust, throws back his head and drinks the jellied slime like a South Sea islander gulping fresh coconut milk. Nothing green, nothing hinting at goodness, vitamins, minerals or roughage, has ever, to anyone's direct knowledge, passed those glistening, greasy lips. You don't need an A-level in biology to realize that the delicate coils and intricate curlicues of the human digestive system aren't made to take that kind of punishment. 

Hence The Fart. 

Well, I'm all for farts but there are limits. Sadly there are also limits to how many Tangerine Tossheads with cider chasers you can drink. My limit is one, but the night before, me and Johnny Hall, heavy mascara thickening our bumfluff into an entirely unconvincing imitation of maturity, had conned ourselves into a pocket-money-draining three and a half down at the Spleen and Marrow. It was great. I wasn't even sick. Then. 

So the next day I'm feeling a might squiffy, but milking it for whatever kudos I can. I've spent all morning bragging about my hangover, which impresses the boys and, whatever they say, the girls too - perhaps even the pure and lovely Melissa Curtain, delicate as a snowdrop, gentle as a fawn and with the largest breasts not only in 4J, but also in the whole of Year 10. I'm feeling a bit rough, as I say, but it's all under control. Mr Akroyd's droning on about the formation of cartilage, or photosynthesis, or Charles Darwin's favourite finch, or something equally fascinating, and I'm sketching out an elaborate chariot drawn by a team of harnessed sperm when I realize that something is happening in front of me. 

One of Phil's enormous buttocks is beginning to rise, like some grotesque Zeppelin. The cheek itself seems to expand: a great black sail slowly filling in a freshening breeze. A black sail as fatal to me as the black sail of the returning Theseus was to his father Aegeus. (Get used to it, I'm full of that kind of shit, as you'll find out.) 

Everything slows down. I want to shout 'No, Phil, no!' but all that comes out is a whimper, a mneu, mneu, mneu. And then it begins. 

This was not the usual fat-boy's fart, that familiar piping piccolo, a strangulated whine that has the local dogs running in circles. At first there comes a low murmur - a rumble from the double basses. Then the cellos join in, and the violas. This was going to be big. And then comes a great, crashing crescendo from the brass, a bellowing, braying dissonance, and a hammering from the timpani, booming like the End of Everything. And then she dies away, the roaring tempest now a gentle lapping of waves on the shore, the sucking and sighing of passion spent. 

Another time I would have led the applause, called out 'Encore, maestro', carried the bouquet, offered to manage him: together we'd break America, tour Japan. But for my hangover and, as I feared, the stench. The air became hazy; eyes began to water. There was a palpable wave of heat just before the stink reached us. A connoisseur would have found cabbage, egg and possibly asparagus underneath the too-brash, mouth-puckering tang of shite, but I smelled only death, decay and madness. I was losing control. It was coming. It was here. 

Yaaaargh chggh chggh yaaaargh. 

I puked on Phil Gilroy. 

St Lucia's is a dump. We all know that: kids, parents, teachers, the rats in the beck that runs along the side of the school, the pigeons that shit on the roof. Built for the massive council estate that surrounds it like a foetid womb, St Lucia's gets the kids nobody else wants: the thugs, spacks, drongos, bozos, dildos, queers, Cnuts and killers. And that's just the girls. It also happens to be the only Catholic school in the town, so it also gets a few relatively normal kids whose parents were stupid enough to put RE lessons and saints' days above such fripperies and foibles as GCSEs. I suppose I'm one of those: aberrantly normal, brutally unaggressive and idiotically unstupid. My friends are the same and we live in the top set. It's all relative, of course. Our top set, 4J, would have any other school calling in the riot squad with tear gas and rubber bullets. 

St Lucia looks like a Bulgarian nuclear reprocessing plant. The bits that aren't stained concrete are asbestos. It lies alongside the beck like a squalid drunk, breathing in the stinking air that drifts off the brown foamy water. But it was my school, and I carried for it the sort of fondness that you can develop for a trusted and faithful verruca of long acquaintance. And it had, of course, the advantage of not being home.
