Endless goodbyes then ensued until at last she
was rescued by Marcello who, having instructed Chiara to offer her
sweet-toothed great grandmother another helping of dolce, steered
Lydia away.
"I hope that wasn't too awful for you,' he said when they were
standing outside in the courtyard garden, the cool night air making
her realize how warm she'd been inside and how much Prosecco
she'd drunk. She could feel the heat radiating from her cheeks.
"I had a lovely time,' she said truthfully, thinking how much she
really had enjoyed herself.
"It wasn't too overwhelming?'
"Not at all. It was good to see Chiara so happy. She's a delightful
child; you must be extremely proud of her.'
"She is and I am. I don't know if you're aware of it, but she's
grown very close to you.'
"The feeling is mutual. She's charming company.'
"Are you busy tomorrow evening?'
"I don't think so. Why?'
"Will you have dinner with me?'
And that, six months after losing her heart to his daughter, was
the start of her relationship with Marcello. A man who, ten years
older than her, in no way fitted her idea of a typical Italian. He
wasn't one of those rumbustious Italian men who constantly argue
about politics and corruption in high places and claim they could
change everything overnight if only given the chance. Nor did he
have the infuriating habit of shouting "Ascoltami!' ("Listen to me!')
every other sentence. And not once did he grab her arm to make
sure he had her full attention during a conversation. Instead there
was a quiet and intelligent reserve about him. He was courteous to
a fault and very astute. He realized and accepted that there was a
part of her he would never know or understand. "Your life is like
a photograph album with occasional blank spaces where some of
the pictures have been removed,' he said on the day he asked her to
be his wife.
"Does it matter to you?' she replied.
"No,' he answered. "I think it's those mysterious gaps I love most
about you.'
Perhaps if he had pressed her, she might have shared more of
herself with him.
The sound of Chiara's happy laughter, as she continued talking to
whoever it was on the phone, broke through Lydia's thoughts and,
not for the first time, she wondered how the painfully shy child she
had met fifteen years ago had grown into this confident, carefree
young woman, a young woman who had had to cope with the loss
of both her parents before she'd turned twenty-one. Lydia liked to
think that she'd played a part in Chiara's recovery from the death of
her mother – Marcello always believed she had – but all she'd done
was give the child what she had never experienced when she was
that age: love and stability.
Having children had never been something Lydia had particularly
craved. However, having Chiara in her life had felt exactly the right
thing to do.
That night she slept badly, her sleep disturbed by a host of fragmented
dreams. In one dream the siren sounded, signalling acqua
alta. Venice was sinking. The water was lapping at her feet as she
tried desperately to make it home to Chiara. But she was lost; every
calle she ran into was a dead end. The siren continued to ring out.
The ancient wooden supports creaked and groaned and finally they
gave way and the buildings crumbled and slid slowly but surely into
the lagoon.
She woke with a start and lay in the dark remembering a Bible
story from her childhood, about the man who built his house upon
the sand. Pastor Digby had his long, bony finger raised accusingly
to her; he was asking if she understood what the story was teaching
her.
Once she'd allowed one memory to enter her thinking, others
began flooding in too. Her next mistake was to attach too much
meaning to the dream. Was her life disintegrating? Had she built her
life on foundations that were about to give way?
She pulled the duvet up over her head, blaming that wretched face
in the crowd. Who was he? A ghost?
Chapter Two
The following morning the promised pair of crutches arrived, as did
a succession of visitors throughout the day, all of whom had been
despatched by Chiara to entertain Lydia.
"Another one who's been sent to keep me company, I presume,'
Lydia said tiredly after she'd buzzed up Marcello's brother, Fabio.
His wet, bedraggled appearance was a clear indicator of the kind of
day it was outside. The lower edges of his overcoat were drenched,
his furled umbrella was dripping onto the marble floor, and his
trousers were tucked into a pair of black, knee-high rubber boots.
"Would you rather I left you to rest?' he asked. From his coat
pockets he retrieved a bag of biscotti and a bottle of Vin Santo.
Smiling, he dangled them in front of her. "I could always keep these
for myself.'
"Well, seeing as you've gone to so much trouble, perhaps I'll let
you stay.' She watched him take off his coat and boots, then set off
awkwardly down the length of the hallway on the crutches, negotiating
the rugs with care. Fabio followed behind in his stockinged
feet. "What dear, well-meaning Chiara forgot,' Lydia said, conscious
that she was sounding less than gracious, "in her attempt to keep me
occupied for the day, was that I would have to be up and down like
a yo-yo to let you all in.'
"In that case, I'd better stay until she returns so you won't be
further inconvenienced.'
"Now you're just making me feel like an ungrateful bitch.'
He laughed. "And with so little effort, cara.' He put his gifts down
on the coffee table and helped her to get comfortable on the sofa.
"So why aren't you hard at work?' she asked.
"I'm the boss; I can take time off whenever I want.'
"I'll tell Paolo you said that.'
He laughed again. "It was Paolo who insisted I drop everything
and come and see you after Chiara called.'
"Hah, so he's to blame.'

"I think you need a drink to sweeten that sour tongue of yours.'
He fetched a pair of glasses from the kitchen and poured out two
generous measures of Vin Santo. He opened the packet of biscotti
and passed it to Lydia. Of all her visitors that day, Fabio was probably
the most welcome. As Marcello's younger brother, there had
only ever been a vague physical resemblance between the two men,
but the bond between them had been a strong one, had marked
them out as being cut from the same cloth.
"So how did you hurt yourself?' Fabio asked after he'd chinked his
glass against Lydia's and sat down.
"Too silly to say.'
"Oh, come on, I could do with a good laugh.'
"I thought you were here to make me laugh?'
"I know a lost cause when I see one. What did you do, kick some
poor tourist out of your way and lose your balance?'
She smiled, but didn't say anything. Instead she dunked a biscuit
into her drink then sucked on it, aware that Fabio was watching her
closely. She knew all too well that he could spot the slightest change
in her a mile off.
"What is it, cara?' he said. "You don't seem yourself. You look
distracted.'
She wished that her brother-in-law wasn't so sensitive and perceptive.
After Marcello's death from a heart attack four years ago it
was his shoulder she had cried on, just as it was his hand, along
with Chiara's, that she had held during the funeral service. He had
always been there for her. She had joked once that it was as well he
was gay or people would certainly have got the wrong idea about
them. But right now she would give anything for him not to care so
much for her.
"It's being stuck here,' she said, pointing at her ankle. "I feel so
useless.'
Looking far from convinced by her explanation, Fabio sat back
and crossed one leg over the other. "It's nothing to do with Chiara,
is it?' he asked.
She took a sip of her drink, enjoying its dry, sweet warmth on her
throat. "Chiara's fine,' she said. "And anyway, didn't I just say what's
wrong with me?'
Fabio stared at her doubtfully. "So if it's not Chiara,' he persisted,
"is it work? You've built up quite a business there; it's not becoming
too much for you, is it?'
She shook her head. "Work's fine.' Again, she was telling the
truth. The business she and Marcello had started together had never
looked in better shape. Shortly after he'd proposed to her, Marcello
announced his intention to leave the chemical company where he
was the research director. He had always felt that nature of his work
was at odds with his love for Venice – given the environmental effect
the industrial zone was having on the lagoon – but he had eased his
conscience by saying it was better that someone like him had a say
in how things were done, than someone who didn't care. "I want to
do something new,' he told her. "And it has to be something we can
do together.' They soon came up with the idea of running a lettings
agency, initially acting on behalf of private and individual owners,
but eventually investing in property themselves. Before long, they
had an impressive portfolio of apartments to offer clients, most of
whom were British, American, French and German. After Marcello's
death, and as a direct result of working the worst of her grief out of
her system, the agency became even more successful. She now had a
reliable team of girls working for her in the newly expanded office,
including Chiara who joined the agency when she had finished her
studies in Bologna two years previously. As architects, Fabio and his
partner Paolo had played their part by helping with any restoration
work that was required in the properties. They had also overseen the
work carried out on this very apartment, which she and Marcello
had moved into only eighteen months before his death.
The irony of her line of work was not lost on Lydia. Like so many
Venetians who complained bitterly about the number of visitors to
Venice, she actively encouraged tourists to pour in for the sake of her
livelihood. There was also the more controversial matter of Venice's
dwindling population. Hardly a day went by when there wasn't
a piece written in the Gazzettino about the plight of young locals
being forced to live on the mainland because they couldn't afford
the sky-high prices here in Venice. Prices that had been inflated by
outside investors. It was a problem that had everyone in agreement:
something would have to be done. But meanwhile, life had to carry
on and people made their living the best way they knew how, by
welcoming tourists with open arms and giving them a thorough
fleecing.
"If it's not Chiara or work that's bothering you,' said Fabio, "is
it loneliness?' He paused, and Lydia could see he was choosing his
next words with care. "Do you think it's time to move on?'
For a while now Fabio had been discreetly hinting that she ought
to find someone to take Marcello's place. Lydia smiled. "Oh, Fabio, I
know how you worry about me, and I appreciate it, really I do. But
it's not that. Not that at all.'

"Sei sicura?'
"Yes, I'm sure. To be honest, I'm usually too busy to give it a
thought.'
"That's not healthy.'
"It's the way it is.'
"Then perhaps it's time you changed your ways. When was the
last time you had a holiday?'
"Don't be ridiculous. What would I do with a holiday?'
He shook his head in what she hoped was defeat, but taking her
by surprise, he said, "Sometimes I think you go out of your way to
punish yourself. For the life of me I can't think why.'
You don't know the half of it, she thought grimly.

