Unable to control herself, Hettie plucked the shirt from the hanger and pressed it to her face. It'd been worn, and not only was it scented with the same cologne from the bottle, but also with a fainter, more insidious, more blood-stirring fragrance. The fresh, yet disturbingly musky scent of Starr's warm skin...
Pressing her mouth and nose against the thin black cloth, Hettie felt her desire kick again, hard, and surge for its wearer. Oh, Starr, she thought, inhaling his essence and longing, longing, longing for the feeling of him inside her. Irrationally, she had never wanted him more than at this moment. The longing was so intense that her knees trembled and she swayed on her feet. Stepping shakily, she backed up until she found herself at Starr's narrow, neatly made bed.
Collapsing backwards, she lay down, clutching the black shirt, with its evocative odour, to her face.
Each breath seemed to make him more real to her. Each breath made the craving ache and ache and ache. Closing her eyes tightly, she sank into a world of scent and sensation. The scent of Starr. 
'Oh Starr! Oh Starr!' she groaned, wanting him, and him only. In that moment all other men, even her lost husband, seemed like ghosts, like fiction... 
For a while, she just lay there, clutching the shirt, astonished, and very scared by the tears that had trickled from beneath her tightly close eyelids. Crying for Starr? What was to become of her? 
A long, firm, familiar tread on the landing brought her shooting to her feet, and she flung the black shirt willy-nilly across the bed. The door opened, and she froze like some tiny, terrified prey animal before an unstoppable predator.
'Milady?' 
A mild frown momentarily pleated Starr's broad, tanned brow. He stepped across the threshold, his movements relaxed and economical as ever, but in spite of her own confusion, Hettie could see he was clearly surprised, almost shocked, to find her in his room.
But a second later, his familiar, glass-like mask was back in place, and his voice was a smooth and even as it always was.
'I'm sorry, was there something you wanted?'

Starr fell back against the mat, his breathing heavy and his near-naked body streaming with sweat. How many sit-ups had he done? He couldn't remember. He only knew that no amount of hard physical exercise could purge his mind this time.
He lay there for a moment, centering himself, then rose quickly and reached for the bottle of mineral water on the tallboy. Drinking deep, he attempted to focus on his body and gauge his levels of energy and fitness, but all he could really think about was Hettie and what she might be doing with—and saying to—the Italian.
"You're jealous, man," he whispered to himself, then smiled grimly at the enormity of the understatement. He'd seen the way his adored Hettie had looked at di Angeli. And while he'd told himself ferociously that it was not his place to even have an opinion on the matter, he couldn't suppress the gouging surge of sexual envy he experienced each time he'd seen Hettie cast an interested glance at her new houseguest.
Don't be a bloody fool! 
He took another long drag at the water bottle, then put it aside and peeled off the thin, perspiration-soaked jersey trunks he'd been working out in.
In his tiny bathroom, he spun the showerhead and bared his teeth as he stepped beneath the punishing, brutally ice-cold flow. The water should have dowsed his turbulent emotions and calmed his wayward body, as it so often had before when his longing for Hettie had become unmanageable. But this time the regime was ineffective. His mind and his heart whirled, and despite the confusion of his thoughts and the freezing shower, his cock grew rigid.
"Fuck!" he growled, then spun the dial to a more comfortable temperature. Why suffer when the prescription wasn't working? Why suffer any more than he already was? Than he always did.
In his fantasy, the woman he loved, the woman he would do anything for, endure anything for, give anything for, stepped into the cubicle and drew close to him. The now-warm water streamed over her lush but slender body and plastered her lovely mane of gold-brown hair against her skull. Starr groaned like a martyr in torment as a hand closed around his penis. In his dream it was her hand but in reality it was his own.
He had loved Henrietta Miller from the instant he'd first set eyes on her, but if he were to remain an honorable man and worthy of the trust that Piers Miller had placed in him, he could never claim her. He was sworn to protect Hettie and to take care of her—even service her libido when it was required of him—but no more than that. He was her servant and she was his mistress. He knew that his rigid adherence to his role might seem archaic in the twenty-first century, but he'd made a pledge to himself. A pledge in honor of the man who had raised him from the gutter—and from the easy slide into petty, then more serious crime—which he could not break.
The vow was that he would never take advantage of what he and Hettie shared. Never pressure her for more. He wanted and needed her love. It was a glittering prize that shimmered constantly in his imagination. But to pursue it so soon after the death of Piers Miller was to insult his mentor's memory and exploit Hettie's confused emotions and her grief at the loss of her husband. She'd loved Piers deeply, and still loved him. She'd been faithful to him emotionally, even while she'd shared her body with Starr. And that was why he could not claim her.
And yet there was a primitive, territorial part of him that raged to make her his in every way. Heart and soul as well as body. His ancient brain, where instinct held sway, told him that she was his woman and he must imprint himself on every part of her.
I am not a fucking caveman!
He still felt guilt at giving in to his needs the other night. But the urge to show her some physical tenderness after the long months of their mutual celibacy had become too great. And it had finally driven him back to her bed.
His fingers stilled for a moment on his cock at the recollection. He'd barely been able to contain the bittersweet joy he'd experienced when she'd welcomed him. He'd hidden it scrupulously, but as he'd entered her exquisite body, his heart had been singing. 
Yes, he was proud of his iron self-discipline, and it never failed him. He couldn't allow it to. Except at private moments like these, when there was nobody but himself and his aching cock to witness his internal agony.
"Oh Hettie, I love you!" 
His voice was a ragged, falling cry of longing as her phantom hand rode smoothly back and forth along his engorged rod. His heart twisted as he imagined—remembered—her delicate yet intoxicating touch on his flesh and the way she always and unerringly found the sweetest and most responsive spots. Time after time he'd had to pry her warm fingers off him for fear that he might come in selfishness and not pleasure her at the same time. He'd made yet another oath to himself that his agenda in bed would always be to focus solely on her experience, her satisfaction and her orgasms, even at the expense of his own. If he came in the process, it was a treasured by-product, not the object of the exercise.
But here in this secret zone where wishes could be real, he allowed himself what he denied elsewhere. Here in his imagination, his naked, adorable mistress sank to her knees beneath the cascading water and took his heavy flesh between her moist, caressing lips. Here, it was all right to give in to his every desire and urge and grasp her head, fingers digging into her sensuously coiling hair as he thrust unrestrainedly into the welcoming heat and wetness of her mouth. Here, it was all right to fuck that beautiful mouth, possess that loving, accommodating cavern and then empty his silky load of semen right down her throat.
"Oh Hettie," he cried again, the words a sound of worship, of desperation and of resignation as his creamy tribute hit the shower wall and mingled with the water trickling down it.
Later in the darkness, she couldn't sleep. She lay thinking of her body's extreme reaction to Darryl's innocent kiss and of Stevie's advice and everything they'd discussed. Her senses were primed and she longed for Starr's arrival.

Are you even going to turn up?

A glance at the illuminated clock revealed a late, late hour. Surely he'd have come by now if he were going to. Throwing back the covers, Hettie prepared to do something she'd almost done last night—go to Starr's rooms and seek him out—but at that very moment, the door slid almost soundlessly open and a tall figure appeared in her room.

Greetings and questions clamored in her throat yet faced with him Hettie could not utter a word. She simply watched as he moved forward through the shadows and approached her bed. There was a glimmer of moonlight through the partially closed curtains, and it seemed to paint his long, muscular body with silver as he swiftly shed his robe.

If only I could see your eyes.

The plea remained silent though as he lifted the bedcover and took his place beside her.

If only I could see what's in your heart.

But the moonbeams weren't sufficient to reveal him and his face and his amazing blue eyes remained frustratingly shadowed.
I must ask him! I must know how he feels!

The questions tormented her as he efficiently stripped away her nightgown, then ran a long hand down the full length of her torso, lingering at breast and hip. She opened her mouth, not knowing what she was going to say, but before she could utter a word, he covered it with his hand. The same hand that had shaped her curves settled gently but firmly over her lips, sealing her to silence.

In the darkness, he seemed fierce, almost like angry primal man forbidding his woman to speak. And then a second later the hand was gone. Only to be replaced by Starr's mouth, kissing her with a new and unprecedented savagery as if he wanted to expunge any words that might come between them.

Starr, what is it? Do you love me… or hate me?

Her cries remained unuttered as she thrilled to the animal intensity of the kiss. Her jaw ached. She felt as if he were devouring her as his tongue explored and possessed the delicate interior of her mouth. And as he kissed ferociously, his hand slid between her legs, taking possession there too. He caressed her thrillingly, rubbing quite hard and occasionally edging back and forcing her legs wider so he could gain better access.

As she groaned around his tongue, he pushed first one, then two, then three fingers inside her, thrusting and rocking them until her besieged flesh yielded its pleasure to him and she climaxed so intensely it was almost painful.

A second later, he was inside her, his cock as insistent and dominating as his fingers had been. He powered into her, the strokes deep and angry. Instinctively, she rose to him, glorying in his loving ruthlessness and orgasming again quickly and violently.

Her mind was a maelstrom of pure feeling, but at the edge of consciousness, she still heard the desperation in Starr's hoarse cry of release.

Was that true emotion he was expressing? Or simply the physical, as ever, overwhelming him? Exhaustion overcame her before she was able to determine...

