CHAPTER 1
Jobsworths on the front-line
Tales of tax, VAT, the Jobcentre and an army
of bureaucrats who only obey orders
In a side street, not far from the burning Palace of Justice, yet
out of the way, stood a man sharply distinguished from the
crowd, flailing his hands in the air and moaning over and over
again: "The files are burning! All the files.' "Better files than
people!' I told him, but that did not interest him; all he could
think of was the files. ... He was inconsolable. I found him
comical, even in this situation. But I was also annoyed.
"They've been shooting down people!' I said angrily, "and you're
carrying on about files!' He looked at me as if I weren't there
and wailed repeatedly: "The files are burning! All the files!'
The Torch in my Ear, Elias Canetti
Translated from the German by Joachim Neugroschel.
Laurence Peter, co-author of the ground-breaking 1969 study
of hierarchies, The Peter Principle, observed that employers
and managers that are competent assess employees according
to their results – in other words, their output is what is important.
Incompetent bosses, however, take more notice of
inputs and how their employees respond to the job's rules,
procedures and policies.
Despite being written almost 40 years ago, it clearly
explains the success of what we think of as a modern phenomenon
– the jobsworth. A similar, but trans-Atlantic term for
members of an organisation who blindly obey orders, no
matter what the consequences are, is sheepwalkers, but
jobsworth is better in that it is an utterly British concept.
So how did the jobsworth become such a British institution?
Although the word – a contraction of "it's more than my
job's worth – is relatively modern, having been popularised by
the BBC television programme That's Life during the 1980s,
the tradition goes to the very root of the same obedient
British soul that makes us expert at forming queues and
taking orders from anyone in authority, regardless of the
actual uniform they are wearing. The same innate character
traits could perhaps even explain the success of 1950s seaside
prisoner camps like Butlins – it's all there, the discipline of
having a day of activities laid out for you, the oppressive,
chain-link fences and observation towers and a battalion of
redcoats. Like the army, but with lilos.
In Britain, we like our hierarchies, it helps us know where
we stand. It used to be the class system, which was ruled over
by a believed-in-for-the-sake-of-decency God who dispensed
the honour of being the monarch by a divine accident of
birth, but now it is an intricate system of power struggles,
each layer holding sway over the lower order and, in turn,
subjecting itself to a higher bureaucratic power. In our daily
life, most of us have ended up at the bottom of this particular
structure and the layer just above us is the jobsworth.
A rattling good conversation
"A few years ago,' writes Tim, "I was introduced to a friend of
a friend at some kind of function or another. The trouble was
that my new friend was a man who could easily bore for
England. Not only that but after half an hour in his company
I was convinced that, if ever called upon to do so, he could
represent the entire planet at the next Galactic Olympics of
the Tedious Arts.'
"He was an exceedingly warm and pleasant man,' confides
our correspondent, "a fact which just served to make his
crippling dreariness all the more cruel but also, all the more
efficient. Even more unfortunately for all of us, he was also
an expert in the field of Quality Assurance Management,
which turned his everyday acute tediousness into a kind of
short-range tactical weapon.'
Tim goes on to describe the most boring man in all England
as "in possession of a humdrum force field', one which, apparently,
"repelled all exciting topics of conversation and general
thrillingness away from him, while simultaneously sucking all
the joie de vivre from the air'.
"What I learnt was that not only was quality assurance the
buzzword of the moment, it was also the basis of the British
Standards Institute's BS 5750. This was back in 1987 when,
it turns out, the government was desperately trying to export
the standard to the world,' writes Tim. "The problem was that
not only was it a potentially dry subject for conversation, but
it was also a completely flawed concept. It was all about
conforming – or in the double negative parlance favoured by
tedious people, “preventing non-conformance” – and that
was more important than doing things better.'
Tim adds, somewhat disturbingly, that "The BS 5750
was later superseded by the ISO 9000', and while this is
absolutely correct, you cannot help but fear for his mind.
The British Standards Institute (BSI) and its famous "kite'
mark have long been symbols of safety and quality. The kite
mark itself was emblazoned proudly on products that had
passed rigorous tests in design and construction. In my own
childhood, I can distinctly remember how the kite mark
found its way onto everything from an Etch a Sketch to a
lavatory bowl, from a 13 amp plug to a radiator valve.
Without inflicting the same crippling levels of tedium on
the proceedings, I should explain more fully just what a BS
5750 was. Stay with me, if you will, and try to ignore those
feelings of tiredness, those heavy limbs and the desperate need
for slumber. The BS 5750 was a new kind of mark, one which
encouraged firms to write down all their processes in
"manuals', thereby – and this is a genuine criticism of the scheme
– encouraging all employees to work solely "by the book'.
There were arguments at the time that this had the effect of
stifling creativity and also that it made no distinction between
productive and counter-productive methods, just as long as
they were all written down. It was simply a reward for the
otherwise pointless effort of describing everything. It says a
lot that when the BS 5750 went to a vote of the International
Standards Organisation (ISO), the two countries that offered
the most resistance to it are the nations generally regarded as
being leaders of industrial quality and efficiency: Germany
and Japan.
That day in 1979 when the BS 5750 was launched was the
day that the means to an end definitively became an end in
themselves. Without even knowing it, the BSI had bestowed
a kite mark upon the jobsworth and demonstrated that
following rules was just as important as actually making or
doing things well.
If you don't eat your beef, you can't
have any pudding
Tony tells us of a tale of the worst kind of jobsworth – one
who is unaware of their talent for making simple things difficult.
"Back in the mid-Eighties,' he informs us, "I worked as
an agency nurse at Guy's Hospital in London. As an agency
worker, you often got the last dinner break on a back shift,
ending up in the canteen after almost everything had gone.'
"On one occasion,' reports Tony, "the Sunday menu had
been a choice of either roast lamb or roast beef with Yorkshire
pudding.' Tony ordered the beef, only to be told that the beef
was sold out. Not faced with a lot of choice, he had to have
the roast lamb instead but, "Noticing a lot of Yorkshire
puddings still piled up in the trays I asked if I could have
some of this as well.'
"You can't have it with the lamb – it's only sold with the
beef,' the server snapped.
Our correspondent thought the serving lady was pulling his
leg and laughed out loud.
"But you haven't got any beef,' he offered.
"Doesn't matter,' she replied, "we can only sell it with the
beef.'
Our man was so stupefied it took him a minute or two to
move on. Still touched by an unaccountable sadness about
the incident, he still gets "flashes of all that Yorkshire pud
rotting in the bin'.
Bad reception for TV detectives
It is an almost universal experience of living in Britain that
the people who are responsible for enforcing television
licences – the TVLA – are joyless automatons. They, and their
specially equipped vans with rotating roof-mounted
antennae, are as welcome in your street as a polygraph
machine in the Houses of Parliament. One acquaintance of
mine used to bury his TV in the back garden whenever
reports of nearby vans reached him – something of an overreaction,
perhaps, but indicative of how much fear the vans
attempt to spread.
But the worst thing about the TVLA is that not one of them
has the imagination to understand why anyone would choose
a life without video edification. So much so that even when
you repeatedly tell them you do not have a television and are
therefore unlikely to be caught with one, they still feel the
need to underline that it will all end in tears if they catch you
in flagrante with a remote control in your hand.
Two separate accounts follow that highlight the differences
between engaging the forces of bureaucracy and trying to
ignore them. As you will see, the difference is hard to
perceive, except for our second victim who now has a slightly
higher phone bill than the first. This is the mark of a true
bureaucracy – whether or not you engage with it does not
matter, it has satisfied an internal process and just carries on
to its next hapless victim.
The space where the TV was
"Having staunchly declined several opportunities to obtain a
TV licence – I don't actually have a TV and I refuse to phone
them to tell them I don't have one,' writes Howard with an
amount of resolve proportionate to the task in hand. "Who
does one phone to report, I wonder, that one does not possess
a car or a freezer,' continues our man. "I finally replied to one
of their threatening missives. Apparently, licencing vans were
to be patrolling “in your area soon” so I invited them to come
around and have a cup of tea, suggesting that together we
could look at the space where the TV had once stood.'
After several more reminders and a change of address, a
representative then called on Howard. "He barged past me
into the house and then left abruptly, informing me that there
was no TV and that we would be “left alone for three years
or so”.'
TV Cops
"Having not watched the dross belching from my television
screen for many months,' writes our next TV licence
refusenik, Evi, "I figured it was a waste of time hanging on to
the set. This left me with two months to run on my TV
licence, on the reverse of which was a suggestion that I might
be entitled to some kind of refund.'
Evi then wrote to the powers that be and explained his situation,
only to be told that no refund was available as they can
only be given in periods of three months.
"I swallowed that with a little indignation, but hey – I wasn't
going to get all worked up for £20.'
Within a couple of weeks Evi received a red letter. "The letter
told me that my house was registered as having no TV licence
(as if I didn't know) and I had seven days to ring and explain.
Failure to do so would result in my details being passed on to
their Orwellian-sounding “enforcement officers”.
"I was getting annoyed. I had already explained my situation
adequately by mail, so why should I write or ring to explain
again? It would all cost me money and they had already had
£20 out of me for nothing.'
Evi swallowed his annoyance and rang the number. At the
other end of the line was someone who seemed to be briefed
to treat all such calls with extreme scepticism.
"Why are you ringing this number?' the man from the
TVLA asked.

