Welcome
to the
Working Week
Paul Vlitos
Batsard
On Sunday at 18:56 Kate Staple wrote:
Dear Martin the Batsard,
I am sending you this at your work account because I know
your bitch girlfriend reads your hotmail one and unlike some
people I have dignity. I just got your answering phone message.
HOW DARE YOU? I knew you were a coward but I never
knew how much of a coward you were until now (when I got
your message). I am disgusted with you and with myself. Martin
you make me sick.
REPLY TO ME.
Love, Kate
p.s. I think I have a disease and I sincerely hope you (and your
girlfriend) have it too.
p.p.s. By the way, I did assume you were gay when I met you. So
did my friends.
On Monday at 10:07 Kate Staple wrote:
Dear Martin,
Why have you not replied to me? Are you REALLY such a
coward? I haven't slept at all (well one hour). I am very upset
with you. I'm sorry about what I wrote about your girlfriend. I
really need to hear from you. I'm at work now, but I'm checking
my hotmail. Please reply to me.
Love, Kate
On Monday at 10:34 Martin Sargent replied:
Dear Kate
Sorry not to reply to you sooner, I was a little late into work
this morning due to a bomb scare at Baker Street. I've just got
round to reading your messages. I think you meant to send them
to Martin Sergeant, who works in the IT department. His email
is ms23@mediasolutions.com. I am the other Martin Sargent,
ms24@mediasolutions.com. It is a common mistake! Please
don't worry about it. I hope you and Martin reach an amicable
agreement.
Best Wishes
Martin Sargent
P.S. I'm sorry to hear about your disease.
P.P.S. We all assumed Martin was gay at first as well. I think it's
those glasses.
Offer of a Lifetime
On Monday at 13:32 Martin Sargent wrote:
Hello all
Due to an unforeseen domestic rearrangement, there is a room
available to rent if anyone is interested. If you are looking for a
place to live (or know someone who is) please get in touch. This
should not be taken as an excuse to offload your undesirable
flatmate/lover on me. The details are as follows:
The flat: damp, mysterious odour, dark. Close to train line.
Enigmatic boiler provides tepid water almost on demand.
The location: Kensal Green, NW 11 (Zone 2)
Why not take advantage of a limited period offer to experience
this part of London before it's gentrified?
A twenty-minute walk to the tube takes you past the local
amenities: closed public baths, semi-closed library (wide selection
of work-out DVDs and large-print books), over-priced 24-hour
shop, crap video shop, one halal butcher's, two dodgy pubs, one
shiny new curry palace, 4 posters about gun crime, 3 appeals for
witnesses.
Experience the vibrant multiculturalism of contemporary
London at first hand. Listen as the schoolkids banter playfully
with Mr Singh, our local shopkeeper. See them pocket Twix
bars when he isn't looking. Shrug as they stare you out. Hear
domestic disputes in five mellifluous languages. Smile with pride
as our local lads comment appreciatively on your bike. Meet our
fashionably diverse local crew of derelicts. There is also some
brilliant if baffling graffiti: "Love is for Suckers', "I Hate Your
Dog' and "Sit on it' are my personal favourites.
Celebrity local residents include Isambard Kingdom Brunel,
celebrity chef Alexis Soyer and Anthony Trollope. Apart from
the world-famous cemetery, Kensal Green shops also boasts one
of London's few surviving Victorian public toilets, featuring
elegant tiling and a tasteful pseudo-classical portico. Make use of
it now before it is converted into a desirable flat.
Don't delay. Every month the health-food shops and
gastropubs of Queen's Park are creeping west. The first skips of
spring have appeared in the road already. Soon the sights, smells,
and noises of this lively part of London will be transformed for
ever.
The occupant: moody, newly single smoker, 25. Dislikes job.
No hobbies. Casual about housework. But not too casual. . .
Should interest: sociologist looking for area-study; exiled
dictator looking for somewhere quiet to hide out; language
student; trainspotter; graffitologist.
Please do not apply if any of the following words describes
you: zany; bubbly; fussy; spiritual; kleptomaniac.
Rent: extortionate.
I anticipate great demand, so please pass the word around
without delay.
Martin
A Jesus-shaped Hole
On Monday at 13:05 Martin Sargent wrote:
Hi Mum
Writing to say thanks for the parcel. I think the jumper is
actually Dad's, but tell him I'll take good care of it. The book
looks very interesting, and I look forward to getting the chance
to read it. Hope is all well with you. I'm not sure about the
weekend yet.
Lots of Love
Martin
On Monday at 13:10 Martin Sargent wrote:
Hey Sis
Hope term is going OK, and that life in Hall is still treating
you well. I take it you're getting leaned on to go home this
weekend as well? On the subject of which, I got the most
extraordinary parcel from the Mum this morning. She sent me
one of Dad's jumpers (that piece of foolery with the leather
elbow-pads that makes him look like a retired general) under the
insane misapprehension that it belongs to me. I also got a book
titled Is There a Jesus-shaped Hole in Your Life?. I wasn't aware
of it, though I am strongly conscious of a Sally-shaped hole in
my love-life and a TV-and-video-shaped hole in my living room.
On which note, do mention to that next-door neighbour of yours
that I am now single. Speak tonight about weekend?
Love
Martin
P.S. I'm thinking of growing a moustache. Any suggestions for
shape?
On Tuesday at 00:25 Lucy Sargent replied:
Hi, Martin,
In computer room at college, checking messages after night
out. Mmm, chips are good. Very sorry again to hear about you
and Sally (and about your TV). Next-door neighbour is here (her
name is Miriam, by the way) and says Hi, but I think she has a
boyfriend. Also, don't be a perve. Thought you were supposed to
be heartbroken?
So I guess we won't speak tonight about weekend, but I think
I may make an appearance on Sunday. Surprising how fast an
allowance can go, isn't it? Last time I saw that jumper Lady was
sleeping on it, so I would give it a wash if I was you.
Love,
Lucy
PS: I would advise against moustache of any description.
Miriam agrees. How about a Jesus-shaped beard? (Shape of Jesus'
beard, not beard in shape of Messiah obviously.) Will await
further developments, and maybe see you at weekend?
On Thursday at 13:57 Martin Sargent wrote:
Hi Sis
Dad rang last night, so clearly there is a three-line whip as
regards Sunday's family festivities. I'm still not quite clear why
this weekend of all possible weekends we have to gather the clan.
It's not that I have anything better lined up, more that almost
anything else I can think of to do would be more fun than being
at home. Apparently there's a big pile of my old shirts waiting
for me to go through them and decide which ones I want to keep
and which ones can go to the jumble. To be perfectly honest,
since I haven't worn a single one of those shirts for almost a
decade, I probably wouldn't have missed any of them. I'm also
unconvinced that it's a giant parental vote of confidence in me
that they have kept my Sainsbury's uniform "in case I need it
again'.
I told Dad I'll be down Saturday morning, but I'll have to
get away sharpish after lunch on Sunday. Sally's coming round
Sunday evening to return some things she has decided she
doesn't want and to steal some more of my stuff. I hope you've
recovered from Monday night, and I'm sorry to hear that Miriam
has a boyfriend. Is he better-looking than me? Is he taller? Is he
tougher?
Wow, that book Mum gave me has really changed my life.
I will give it to you at the weekend. I have abandoned the
moustache idea and decided to give my life to God. As most of
my worldly possessions are now in Sally's new flat, I'm already
at an advantage as regards renouncing them. I have decided to
forgive everyone. Can't wait to tell Mum the good news.
Love
Martin
On Friday at 16:52 Lucy Sargent replied:
Dear St Martin,
Yeah, right, you gaylord.
By the way, I met Miriam's boyfriend Frank last night (and
over breakfast). As he is a large rugby-playing man, I would
avoid tangling with him. Although, interestingly, he has a beard.
The shape of it defies description somewhat, as it's hard to tell
where the beard ends and the neck acne begins. Rather perverse
I would have thought to have a beard AND shaving rash. Not a
look I recommend you go for.
See you Saturday – presumably this means you'll be
accompanying Mum to church on Sunday?
Love,
Lucy

David
On Monday at 11:35 Martin Sargent wrote:
Hi Lucy
Good to see you at the weekend. Very kind of you to suggest I
wear my "new' jumper to church on Sunday. And I still maintain
the vicar was sniggering at my stupid elbow-pads. Possibly
because I kept slipping off the communion rail.
Well, the plot thickens with Sally. As expected she turned up
to pick up a few (more) things - she rather absurdly accused me
of hoarding some of her underwear (which I hadn't, of course).
Not that she turned up alone. Her friend David gave her a lift
over. Very kind of him. You may remember him from Sally's and
my last party (which I didn't realise at the time would be our
last party). He was ambushing people in the hall and handing
out flyers for his play. As I recall he was outfitted in tapered
combat trousers, a white shirt and a waistcoat Ali Baba would
have rejected as being a bit "busy'. He ends, abruptly, about
five feet from the ground, in an explosion of ginger hair. Like a
rather disappointing firework. I didn't see his car, but I imagine
it looking like the Noddymobile.
This is NOT how it happens. I don't get dumped for David.
David is the guy who gets dumped at the end when Sally realises
who she really loves. He ends up falling in a duck-pond or
getting a ton of manure dumped on him. He could be played by
Tom Hollander in a ginger wig.
Mild revenge: I managed to slip Is There a Jesus-Shaped Hole in
Your Life? into a box of books I was helping pack for Sally.
She sends her love, by the way.
Love
Martin

On Monday at 12:45 Lucy Sargent replied:
Poor Martin!
So sorry to hear about all that. I do recall David. Physically,
he's more how Mackenzie Crook would look playing Malcolm
McLaren. But that's not his fault. We discussed his life and
works at length in the hall while he tried to peer down my top.
Alas for him he was too short and he's not really my type. On
the subject of casting, he told me I had the perfect face to play
Lizzie Bennet in Pride and Prejudice. He'd make a great Mr
Collins. Are you sure Sally and he are a thing? Perhaps he has
hypnotic powers. Or perhaps you really pissed her off . . .
The jumper looked pretty good, actually. We discovered you
had accidentally left it after I dropped you at the station. In fact,
you'd left it right at the back of your cupboard, stuffed behind a
bag full of plastic dinosaurs. It was very lucky for you that Mum
found it. Auntie Jean came round and we were looking for your
school photo.

