BUSY WOMAN
SEEKS WIFE
Annie Sanders
Chapter 1
"In my bed! They were at it in my sodding bed!'
"Never!'
"Yup. Right there. Big hairy bum in the air and Manuela's
legs . . . oh God, I don't even want to think about it.'
"You must have given her the fright of her life!'
"Well, I think I've probably rendered him impotent for life.
Ugly sod. Oh God, Saff . . . I feel so dirty, like I've been violated
or something.'
"Want to come over?'
"Can I? Will Max mind?'
"Course not. He loves ya. Anytime – though I'll have to sort
out the kids.'
"I'll bring a bottle. I need anaesthetic. I'm in shock.'
Saffron laughed. "Stay calm.'
Alex put down the phone and turned back to the chaos in
her room – her cushions strewn everywhere, a bowl of foreign
change smashed on the floor, the blanket from the bed hurled
into the corner. She wanted to throw up.
She'd heard the strange noises the minute she'd shouldered
open the front door, back home earlier than anticipated with an
overnight bag in one hand and a laptop in the other. Dumping
them in the narrow hallway, she'd thought Manuela might be
moving furniture in her bedroom to clean behind it. Though
that would be a first. Her Spanish cleaner didn't move anything
if she could help it and struggled at the best of times to figure
out the workings of a can of Pledge – oh, the irony. Alex had
purposely thumped about the flat a bit so as not to give the
poor woman a fright, and called her name before opening the
bedroom door.
For a moment she hadn't quite been able to work out what
was going on, and had said "sorry' as if two people screwing in
her bed at 2.15 on a Wednesday afternoon was normal. Then
the horror of the situation dawned on her, not to mention the
wobbling nether regions. The man's suit on the floor – tartan
boxers off, shirt and socks still on – and Manuela's red stiletto
shoes were discarded. The woman herself appeared to still be
fully dressed, and not for cleaning.
"What – the – fuck – are – you – doing?' Alex's screech
sounded loud even to Alex and the couple's heads shot round,
their expressions freezing for one blissful moment in total disbelief.
"Get – out – of – my – bed!'
If it hadn't been so disgusting, the scramble that ensued
would have been funny. The man, grey-haired, bearded and
overweight, reversed out of Manuela and off the bed, frantically
searching for his underpants whilst holding his shirt-tails over
his genitals in some ridiculous attempt to preserve his remaining
dignity. Manuela pulled down her dress and tidied her hair
with her hands as she pushed her feet into her shoes. Clearly
knickers were not a consideration.
"So sorry . . .' he puffed as he struggled with his trousers.
"Didn't know, you know . . . we were . . .'
"Get out,' Alex hissed through her teeth.
"Yes, yes of course.' Stuffing his feet into shoes – quite smart
brogues, Alex noticed – he shrugged on his jacket, his face red
and sweaty, his neck thick where it was stuffed into the collar
of his shirt. He appeared to be about fifty, perhaps fifty-five, a
wedding ring on his podgy finger. He made towards the door
and Alex stood back to let him through. Then he stopped suddenly,
putting his hand inside his jacket and fishing out his
wallet. He pulled out some notes and it wasn't until he turned
back towards Manuela that Alex twigged.
"I think I'll have that, thank you.' She snatched the notes
from his hand before Manuela could take them. "It'll go towards
some new sheets. Now get out!'
He bolted like a rabbit, slamming the front door of the flat
behind him. Alex turned to Manuela, so angry now she could
hear the blood pounding in her ears. The little Spanish woman
was straightening the sheets and puffing up the pillow. Lunging
forward Alex grabbed her thin brown arm. "Get out, you bitch.
You whore,' she shrieked. "Get out of my flat. Get out,' and
as Alex wrenched at the bed sheets, Manuela tottered to the
door.
"But señorita.' She turned to Alex, her face outraged as if
it was her who had been wronged. "What about my pay? I've
done the bathroom . . .'
It was all Alex could do not to thump her. "And it looks like
you've well and truly done the bedroom too. How dare you!
Get out. You're fired!'
As if possessed, Alex continued to pull off the sheets. Bundling
them up into a ball, she hurled them with all her might out of
the room, followed by the pillows and duvet, then, opening
the flat door, kicked them down the communal stairs to the
hallway below, narrowly avoiding Manuela as she bolted out
of the front door. Grabbing her overnight bag to prop open
the flat door, Alex turned back to her bedroom and pulled on
the mattress, her hands struggling to find a grip and slipping
painfully. It was heavy and she had to push hard against it to
squeeze it through the door. Her tight jacket didn't help and
she could feel herself sweating. She was aware she was grunting
inelegantly, but eventually she managed it, and pushed it to
join the sheets below. Throwing her jacket back into the hallway,
she followed her bedding downstairs, clambering over it
to open the front door of the building and, in two journeys,
dumped it all in the builders' skip outside the house opposite,
her duvet cover joining brick rubble and broken plasterboard.
It was then that she'd phoned Saff.
What now? She slowly began to straighten the chaos in the
room, picking up the shards from the broken bowl carefully,
before scooping up the coins and dropping them into a drawer
in her dressing table. She must have knocked the bowl as she
struggled with the mattress.
In her room. They'd done it in her room and in her lovely
bed that she'd bought the day she'd completed on the flat.
The lovely bed with its pretty bedding where she and Todd
made love and read the papers together on a Sunday morning.
Well, she read them anyway while he usually did his hundred
press-ups before going on a run. She'd have to call the cleaning
agency, of course, and get Manuela struck off, but as Alex
folded up the bed quilt, piling it up with the cushions on the
bare divan, she realised that wouldn't go any way to ridding her
of the suspicion that today's liaison was probably not the first.
Changing out of her work clothes, crumpled from the horrendously
early start in Stuttgart and the flight, she purposely
turned her back on the denuded bed as she slipped into joggers
and her favourite T-shirt. Comfort clothes. Of course, she'd
have to sell the flat, that was obvious. Heaven only knew how
many sexually frustrated, overweight married men had been
entertained by Manuela over the weeks she'd worked here. No
wonder the place was never very clean. The tart was too busy
turning tricks.
Gathering up her clothes and stuffing them in the washing
machine, Alex could feel her blood pumping loudly again.
She tore open the fridge, knowing full well there wouldn't be
anything in there to eat – there rarely was – but there wasn't
even the measly pint of milk she'd asked Manuela to get. The
request had been written on the same note about putting the
bed sheets through the machine; clearly another thing that
hadn't been done. Alex grabbed her purse, fishing out a few
quid, and, locking the flat door behind her, dashed downstairs
and to the corner shop.
"Hello there, Alex girl.' Rajesh's toothy smile peeked out
from behind the counter piled high with displays of chewing
gum and chocolate bars on special offer. "Where have you been?
Off on your travels again?'
"It's been a bit of a marathon,' she sighed, picking up a
basket. "Geneva, Amsterdam, Frankfurt, Stuttgart. I think.'
She picked up a few things, including a paper which she knew
she wouldn't have time to read, but it was a nodding attempt
to keep up with world affairs, and handed over the money to
Rajesh.
"Oh, it's no good. A lovely girl like you shouldn't be off on a
plane every minute. You should be at home with babies.'
Alex rolled her eyes. "You are as bad as my mother, Rajesh.'
Laughing, she left the shop, as the little shopkeeper shook his
head and went back to reading the local paper.
As she elbowed open her door a few minutes later, a rather
tired bunch of daffs, a warm bottle of Chardonnay and a loaf of
sliced white under her arm, which had been all that was left on
the shelf, she could hear her mobile ringing. By the time she'd
dumped her shopping it had stopped. The office.
"Yup, Camilla? I'm back now.' Alex tucked the phone under
her chin as she leant into a cupboard for a vase. "Sorry I missed
your call. I managed an earlier flight so I'm home.'
"Oh, that's great,' her assistant's soft voice cooed down the
phone. It was as pretty as she was, but Alex was grateful that
despite her petite frame and doe-like blue eyes, she was awesomely
efficient and a rock in Alex's choppy seas. "It's good
to have you back. Just a few things to keep you up to speed.
Tetril's factory are happy with the samples date you suggest, the
twenty-fifth is fine for the ice hockey and the shoe people want
to talk to you about the colour range.'
"OK – can you put something in my diary for a meeting?
But, Camilla, tell them I haven't got long or they'll have me
there all day and I haven't got time.' Their footwear team
put as much dedication into the construction of a trainer as
scientists had into the Stealth Bomber and talked with such
passion about aerodynamics, cushioning and arch supports, it
was almost kinky.
"Oh, and your Yankie dreamboat called by the way. He
couldn't get you on your phone – you must have been on the
plane – but says he'll be landing at Heathrow after his stop-off
in Paris.'
Alex felt a tingle of anticipation at the news of Todd's arrival
in the country until she remembered she'd have no bed for him
to climb into. Not when the mattress was in the skip, and there
certainly wouldn't be room for his muscle-bound body in the
tiny single in the spare bedroom where she'd have to sleep. It
would have to be the Holiday Inn for him. Hanging up the
call, she scanned over her notes quickly. Things were looking
good for the next few weeks. Product launches always got her
excited; massive build-up, even more massive preparation, then
the nail-biting wait to see how the product was received by
press and public.
Bread with some cheese she'd found loitering at the back
of the fridge, in one hand, and laptop on her knee, Alex now
scrolled through the plethora of email messages, chewing
absent-
mindedly. Everything seemed to be going smoothly in
the office. Camilla had held the fort pretty well while she'd
been away and Alex sent her an email saying as much. Then she
turned to the pile of post on the table. All the envelopes had
windows, except for one reminding her of the date of her next
dentist appointment – which would have to be changed. The
only other uncontroversial-looking one turned out to be from
her neighbour in the flat below complaining that unless she
did something about her leaking shower and the water coming
through his ceiling, he'd issue legal proceedings. 

