<text id="A01" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="COUNCIL REJECTS VETO OF ZONING ; MEASURE BENEFITS ONE BIG DEVELOPER.' The Boston Globe, 6 August 2006, p. 1; 'As elections loom, Bush changes his tune' The Boston Globe, 30 October 2006, p. A11; 'Kerry defends Democrats' wartime service ; Strong responses" Author="Stephanie V. Siek; Laura Rozen; Rick Klein" PublicationDate="6 August 2006; 30 October 2006; 30 October 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; End" WebAddress="Factiva">
City councilors scored a victory over the mayor last week, but it's a vote that may come back to haunt them.
The council overrode Mayor Jeannette A. McCarthy's veto of a zoning change that allows more intensive development of two properties in the Totten Pond Road-Route 128 area, to the dismay of more than three- dozen residents who turned out on one of the hottest nights of the summer for the special session.
Supporters of the change say it will spur revitalization of an area dotted with aging office buildings. Opponents see it as a symbol of big business trumping neighborhood interests.
The change paves the way for renovation or replacement of buildings that are at least 35 years old with structures that could rise up to six stories and house offices, shops, and restaurants.
When the council first voted on the proposal on June 26, supporters said it would potentially benefit six properties. As it turns out, only two parcels would be eligible, both owned by real estate giant Boston Properties.
The council voted 10 to 3 to override the veto. Siding with the mayor, Councilor George A. Darcy III of Ward 3, Councilor at Large Patrick J. O'Brien, and Councilor Stephen F. Rourke of Ward 8 voted against the override, echoing votes they made when the proposal came before the council in June. Councilor at Large Kathleen B. McMenimen, who voted against it in June, was out of the country. Councilor Edmund P. Tarallo of Ward 2, as council president, could have voted only if there had been a tie.
Several attendees said the council was ignoring the public.
"My reaction is and has been that the council seemed to be working in a vacuum," said Herbert Henderson, who lives on the south side of Waltham. "There was no effort to gauge the public's will for or against this proposal."
"They should realize that the mayor won by a big landslide, which indicates that the citizens are supportive of the mayor's vision of the city," Henderson said. "I do not think the City Council represents the people that elected them."
"I think it's time to start thinking about term limits again," said Doris Donovan, a longtime neighborhood activist with the Waltham Council of Neighborhood Advocates. "They just get too set in their ways. They vote as a clique."
Bill Fowler, who lost a bid for an at-large council seat last year, objected to piecemeal zoning, saying the city needs to draw up a master plan for development along the entire Route 128 belt. "We've been asking for a master plan for years, and they don't do it," Fowler said.
O'Brien said he might raise the master plan issue when the council resumes its regular sessions next month. "We all should be talking together, all the developers, all the residents, the property owners, not piecemeal, with each developer doing his or her own thing," he said.
O'Brien also echoed concerns expressed by the mayor in her veto statement that the proposal amounted to spot zoning. The ordinance's sponsor, Councilor Robert G. Logan of Ward 9, acknowledged that because of environmental restrictions barring development within 500 feet of the nearby Cambridge Reservoir water shed, the zoning district would affect only parcels owned by Boston Properties.
McCarthy said she would continue to pursue a "global traffic solution" to the Route 128 corridor, arguing that congestion would probably scare away potential tenants. "Traffic is the key component to growth, before zoning," she said after the meeting.
McCarthy said she would like to see more collaboration among property owners. She cited the example of Sam Park and Co., which has offered to finance a connector between Route 117 and Route 128 as part of its development of an office park on Green Street. Sharing the cost would be the Related Cos., which recently purchased the nearby Polaroid campus on Route 117.
The connector would ease one of Waltham's worst bottlenecks. Drivers heading for Route 117 now have to take the Route 20 exit and then wind their way through neighborhood streets. Park plans to extend Green Street and build a bridge over Route 128.
The project would be subsidized by $5 million in federal funds secured by US Representative Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Malden. The road project requires the approval of the City Council
"I am hopeful that the new design proposal satisfies Waltham officials and the neighborhoods impacted, so that everyone who drives to, from, and around Waltham can do so without hassle," Markey said in a statement issued by his office.
Sam Park and Co. goes before the Board of Appeals Tuesday for a hearing about variances in height and setbacks for the office and retail park.
Park and the Opus Group, a Minneapolis-based developer, want to build a 570,000-square-foot complex on Green Street, which is a short, two-lane road that runs south from Route 117, on the west side of Route 128.
The Green Street complex, tentatively named Altira, would consist of two seven-story towers.
Park said the ground floor would contain about 120,000 square feet of retail space, with up to 60,000 square feet more on the second floor.
It would include restaurants and small shops catering to office workers, but no "big box" stores, he said.


FOR A WHILE, the joke was on us. The administration and its minions of advisors had a plan for Iraq. The thing was, they wouldn't tell us what it was before the elections.
For a moment, the tea leaves describing the next epoch in the Bush administration's foreign policy seemed like they could be read on "The Daily Show." Earlier this month, host Jon Stewart chatted with James Baker about his new memoir. Baker, the former secretary of state to the first President Bush, co-chairs a bipartisan commission intended to help the current president chart a course out of the catastrophe in Iraq. On TV, Baker offered an aw-shucks, mock- naive, never-occurred-to-me-you'd-want-an-answer-right-now peek at the direction of the panel's recommendations.
Asked what he thought of staying the course, Baker coyly replied, "Depends on what the end result is, of staying the course." Asked about the prospect of partitioning Iraq, Baker allowed only that "we can't rule anything out." He went on to say that "we are not going to present our recommendations until after the elections."
But even though Baker offered few details, his presence said a lot about changes in the Bush administration's foreign-policy thinking as midterm elections loom.
As the Baker rollout began, polls showed that widespread American public unease with the Iraq war is jeopardizing Republican majorities in the House and possibly the Senate.
Baker's public appearances, whether by design or coincidence, offered a clever, disownable way for the Bush administration to signal that it had a plan for Iraq - one that it would reveal only after the elections, and one that didn't require the White House to give up itscampaign theme: while things might not be going well in Iraq, the problem lies with the cowardly Democrats who were for cutting and running. Even though details were withheld, Baker projected the kind of reassuringly pragmatic, center-of-the-road, experienced stewardship that he had brought to earlier diplomatic endeavors, including cobbling together an international coalition in advance of the 1991 Gulf War.
His media appearances hinted to Republican moderates, realists, and independents that the administration had a responsible plan for Iraq, one that was being worked on in the background by a bipartisan team of experienced foreign-policy hands.
What Baker perhaps unwittingly projected was that the Bush administration was no longer so alarmingly in the grip of self- delusion, with its endless out-of-touch pronouncements that the Iraq insurgency was in its last throes, that the resistance that US-led forces were facing in Iraq consisted of only a few hundred foreign jihadists and Baathist dead-enders, that Iraq was not in a civil war. Chief among the seemingly self-deluded, the president, the vice president, and the secretary of defense.
But what started perhaps as a campaign gimmick has turned into foreign-policy reality: the Bush White House has lost confidence in its ability to win the Iraq war. Acampaign to manage public perception of the White House's handling of the Iraq quagmire in advance of the November polls has led to the administration recognizing the need for a genuine policy shift, even as it sounds increasingly uncertain about what it should do.
"My attitude is: Don't do what you're doing if it's not working - change," Bush told a news conference earlier this month. Sounding suddenly shaky.
And here was Bush speaking to ABC's George Stephanopoulos last week: "Listen, we've never been stay the course, George," he told Stephanopoulos. "We have been - we will complete the mission, we will do our job and help achieve the goal, but we're constantly adjusting the tactics. Constantly."
According to the Los Angeles Times, among the options that Baker's panel is likely to recommend is something that would be almost a genetic reversal of the Bush administration's whole foreign- policy philosophy up until now: talking to Iran and Syria about becoming partners in stabilizing Iraq. This is a far cry from rhetoric about the "axis of evil."
Another option, called Redeploy and Contain, calls for a phased withdrawal of US troops to bases outside Iraq.
Foreign policy is an outgrowth of domestic politics. This administration is governed by the shrewdest, most sophisticated political operatives in history. And what's happening right now is stunning: Amid a difficult midterm election environment, the Bush team's central foreign-policy convictions are being transformed by domestic political realities - right before our very eyes.



"John Kerry's a new guy, a new man, a new candidate," he said. "He's got an agenda, he's got passion. He's an articulate critic of the administration. Their only complaint is, `Why didn't he say these things two years ago?' The response is, `Wow, that's not the John Kerry I remember.' It's a challenge for him to show that he should have a second chance."
Kerry now talks regularly of mistakes he made in the presidential campaign. He was never clear enough in communicating his message on Iraq, he says. He mocks Republican flip-floppers for supporting issues before they were against them, in self-defacing homage to his infamous statement that he voted for a war-funding bill before voting against it.
He said he realizes now that he should have used television advertisements to push back at the Swift boat group, whose claims of Kerry's war-service exaggerations were rebutted by most of those who served alongside him.
"Until they get bitten for doing it, they'll try to do it, and that's why we have to fight back so hard," Kerry said in the interview. "I just am tired of these guys. They're a bunch of frauds. They're bullies."
Candidates, of course, are thrilled to get help from a high- profile Democrat such as Kerry. He endorsed Jim Webb in the Virginia Senate primary long before Senator George Allen seemed vulnerable.
Murphy beamed at Kerry's side in Newtown, calling him "one of America's great leaders."
Murphy saw combat in Iraq as an Army captain. Kerry came to his defense after two Iraq war veterans accused Murphy of exaggerating his combat role, saying he spent more time at headquarters than on the front, a charge the candidate strongly disputes.
After that Newtown event, Kerry stopped by another Philadelphia suburb to appear on behalf of Joseph A. Sestak, the Democrat candidate who is taking on Republican Representative Curt Weldon.
There, Kerry got the kind of advice that he gets all the time these days.
"If you do run for president - and I do hope you do - fight like hell," one person at the fund-raiser told him.
"I'm in a fighting mood," Kerry responded. "We - together - lost to two lies: the lie about the war in Iraq, and the lie about me personally. And if you don't think that puts me in a fighting mood, you don't know John Kerry."

</text>
