<text id="A05" category="" words="1998" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Smaller classes popular in poll' St. Petersburg Times (Florida), April 6, 2006, Pg. 1B; 'Lies, criminal record cast doubts on Bujalski' St. Petersburg Times (Florida), March 21, 2006, Pg. 2; " Author="JEFFREY S. SOLOCHEK; n/a; " PublicationDate="April 6, 2006; March 21, 2006 " SampledFrom="All; Beginning; " WebAddress="Nexis UK">

Floridians love the idea of smaller class sizes.

Seventy percent of Florida residents want to keep the class size reductions approved by Florida voters in 2002, a new St. Petersburg Times poll found. And they aren't budging even though many of them think smaller classes could lead to tax increases and the hiring of mediocre teachers.

"I definitely believe that small class sizes are better. But I also believe that's what is going to happen," said Tony Perez, who lives in eastern Hillsborough County and has two children attending public schools.

But Perez, like almost half of Florida residents, is open to one alternative being considered by state lawmakers: easing strict students-per-classroom caps in exchange for a guarantee that at least 65 percent of education money goes directly to classroom expenses.

Floridians could be asked to vote on that tradeoff if a constitutional amendment makes the ballot in November.

The Times telephone poll of 872 Florida adults was conducted March 14-26 by RSVP Research Services of Tampa. It has a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.

A statewide poll done recently by Mason-Dixon Research also shows majority sentiment in favor of retaining strict class size caps, though not by as wide a margin as the Times survey. Fifty-one percent of Florida voters oppose changing class size requirements, Mason-Dixon found. The amendment was approved by 52 percent of voters in November 2002.

Mason-Dixon interviewed registered voters. The Times poll included nonvoters.

Those in the Times survey who harbor some uncertainty about the so-called "65 percent solution" point to the proposal's failure to define what constitutes a "classroom expense."

"When you have vague bills like that, it's hard to interpret what they really mean," said Dean Berkey, a Sarasota County schoolteacher who has four children in public schools. "Just give us a definition and let us apply it."

The confusion crossed political, economic and racial lines. And it was not limited to the general public. Even educators have confessed to needing more explanation before making up their minds.

"It sounds pretty simple until you start asking the questions, such as what is the definition," said David Mosrie, executive director of the Florida Association of District School Superintendents.

Mosrie noted that one superintendent he knows recently wondered whether utilities might count. Not much education takes place in Florida classrooms without electricity and air conditioning, he said.

It's unclear whether the Florida Senate will back the proposal, which is moving swiftly through the House. Sen. Alex Villalobos, the Republican majority leader from Miami, said he will not support changes without answers to several questions, including how much additional money would go into Florida classrooms.

Lawmakers pushing for class size changes say they would craft a definition for classroom expense if and when the amendment succeeds. They say the poll results indicate a portion of the public is open to compromise.

"Those numbers are good news," said Rep. Joe Pickens, the Palatka Republican who is sponsoring changes to the class size mandate. "We have to get the message out that we are not repealing class size. We never intended to. The class size requirement that we have in perpetuity needs to be a little more flexible."

Many school district officials are counting on it.

Several districts are backing the 65 percent concept because they think it will ease the pain of class size reduction without forcing them to spend any more money in the classroom. The law currently sets class sizes at 18 for kindergarten through third grade, 22 for fourth through eighth grade and 25 for high school.

The 65 percent proposal would allow district averages rather than classroom counts, and cap individual class sizes at five students higher than the district average.

"We believe we need more flexibility, the ability to react to high growth and things going on locally, without having to worry about being in compliance" with strict classroom counts, said Wendy Hosking, a Polk County schools lobbyist.

Few of the Floridians polled seem interested in codifying the status quo. If they are going to give up some of the class size reductions, they said, they want to see more money going into classrooms.

"I feel like if you can put more money into the classroom, that's where it is needed," said Lynn Randall, a Pinellas County nurse with adult children who voted against the 2002 amendment but has since changed her position. "It scares me. I see the schools not putting out the education that I know I had."

Rep. Ralph Arza, chairman of the House PreK-12 Committee, said he thinks the class size changes working through the Legislature would allow school districts to spend their money more judiciously because they won't have to put as much into school construction or transportation.

"We are honoring the voters' desire - that 70 percent that support class size," said Arza, a Hialeah Republican. "We're putting a proposal before them that honors class size reduction but does it in a common sense way."

He said GOP polls have shown about 80 percent of voters back a mandate to put more money into the classroom, even when the details aren't explained.

Why tie the ideas of class size and classroom spending together?

"I'm a former football coach," Arza said. "Why put in one star running back when you can put in two?"

Jeffrey S. Solochek can be reached at (813) 269-5304 or solochek@sptimes.com.

CLASS SIZE SUPPORT

Floridians overwhelmingly support the 2002 voter mandate to reduce public school class sizes, despite protests by Republican lawmakers and Gov. Jeb Bush that the implementation cost is too high. But they indicate a willingness to consider trading class size caps for more money tothe classroom, given adequate definitions.

If you were voting today, would you vote for or against shrinking class size?

For: 70%

Against: 21%

Not sure: 9%

Would you be for or against a constitutional amendment that would ease class size limits but require that 65 percent of school budgets go to classroom expenses, or do you have no opinion on this?

For: 47%

No opinion: 37%

Against: 16%

NOTE: Margin of error+/-3 percentage points.

Source: Florida Education Survey

Times graphic - CHARLOS GARY; 

I received a campaign flier from Dunedin candidate Julie Ward Bujalski that quoted a St. Petersburg Times editorial that said: "Two (candidates) come across as best-informed on current city business. These two are Ron Barnette and Julie Ward Bujalski." These statements are followed by this caption: "St. Petersburg Times Recommends, Feb. 26, 2006."

The implication is that the Times recommended her. In fact, the next line of the actual editorial recommendation says, "We believe Ron Barnette is the better choice."

In that editorial, the Times lays out Ms. Bujalski's criminal record and states, "We are uneasy about some of Bujalski's history" and "the list of offenses is long enough to be worrisome." Does that sound like an endorsement?

On the reverse side of Bujalski's campaign flier, an attempt is made to smear Mr. Barnette.

Why would anyone vote to put someone on the City Commission with a criminal record, who has the propensity to create false impressions in her campaign literature and is the only candidate to wallow in negative campaigning?

Henry Penas, DunedinNew commissioner ran bad campaign

Re: Election of Julie Ward Bujalski.

I am wondering how I may consider the credibility of the new Dunedin commissioner elected March 14.

Her campaign material contained falsehoods about one of her opponents. I checked the allegations and found two were false and I questioned another.

Her opponent did not resort to any dirty tricks in his campaign. It surprises me that now we have elected her to finish the term vacated by the election of Bob Hackworth as mayor.

Mount Burns, DunedinRaces like these deter deserving hopefuls

Re: Candidate's tactics are malicious, letter, March 15.

I am in complete agreement with Bill Coleman's letter to the editor regarding candidate Julie Ward Bujalski's dishonest and malicious campaign tactics against Ron Barnette in Dunedin's recent City Commission race.

But I would like to add that it is this type of unethical behavior that discourages honest, well-qualified, well-meaning people from volunteering to run for office in this day and age.

I have been a resident of Dunedin for more than 30 years and have witnessed and participated in many local election campaigns during that time. Never have I been so angered and disgusted by the process used to gain a seat on the Dunedin City Commission as I have this year.

I respectfully suggest that this "win at all costs" philosophy, even if it involves unfairly smearing a fellow resident's reputation, bears careful scrutiny of Mrs. Bujalski's motives and decisionmaking skills as "Delightful" Dunedin moves into the future.

Who's next?

Paul Toner, DunedinElection proves charter ready for change

Finally, the proof was in the pudding, or I should say in the March 14 election in Dunedin.

Several years ago, I served on the Charter Review Committee with seven other able-bodied volunteers. We worked hard for 10 months on that committee, headed by Gus Cooper, trying to get it right for the citizens of Dunedin.

During that period I took a trip to Tulsa, Okla., and found that 57 people were running for mayor of Tulsa. I began to wonder why we do not have more people running for office here in Dunedin. I visited with the mayor's assistant who chaired the charter review committee at that time in Tulsa.

The answer is simple: No one wants to run against an incumbent and they certainly do not want to run against two incumbents. The present Dunedin system calls for the top vote getters to be declared the winners. If instead candidates run for numbered seats, the voters have a choice of voting for or against each candidate separately. That seems to be more fair for the voter.

In the March 14 election, no one ran against two of the incumbents, Dave Eggers and Julie Scales. Scales served well on that Charter Review Committee 10 years ago. All committee members served well. We discussed the idea of having seats assigned to each commissioner, which would have helped get more people interested in running, but the time was not right and we left the charter like it was on that issue.

When Commissioner Bob Hackworth decided to run for mayor in this election, seven citizens filed to run for the open seat. The citizens of Dunedin had a wide-open opportunity to vote for a candidate of their choice and they did. It was a great day for Dunedin even though there were not 57 people running like in Tulsa, but most of the seven would have made a good commissioner.

Congratulations to Julie Bujalski for winning in a great race. I believe the city is now ready for numbered seats so that we can have more open elections in the future. Let's get the charter changed now.

G. Wayne Dailey, Dunedin

Plans for water system are questionable

Re: Voters back plan for drinking water system, story, March 14.

Here's the deal as I see it. The town of Tarpon Springs hired a consulting company to perform a preliminary assessment of the feasibility of developing an alternate water source (note the use of the words "preliminary assessment").

The consultant appears to have done a very thorough and commendable job within the framework of the budget available and the existing data used for the study.

It would appear from this study that more study is required to reach a conclusion on the feasibility of the reverse osmosis plant.

In essence, our city government said, "Let's buy the thing now and decide later if we have the natural resources to run it." What should have been done is the taxpayers should have been asked to provide money to determine the feasibility of this plant and its potential environmental impacts.

To make my point, let me quote some of what the consulting company said in its report;

</text>
