<text id="A08" category="" words="2008" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Grace Under Pressure; Difficult times call for less-contentious politics' The Wall Street Journal, 1 December 2006, n/a; 'Volkswagen Restructuring Drive Starts to Sputter' The Wall Street Journal, 30 December 2006, Pg. A3; " Author="PEGGY NOONAN ; Stephen Power; " PublicationDate="1 December 2006; 30 December 2006; " SampledFrom="All; Beginning; " WebAddress="Factiva">

We're going to need grace. We are going to need a great outbreak of grace to navigate the next difficult months.
 



TD 
 

America is turning against a war it supported, for the essential reason that no one is able to promise a believable path to a successful outcome, and Americans are a practical people. It is not true that Americans are historical romantics. They are patriots who, once committed, commit on all levels, including emotionally. But they don't wake up in the morning looking for new flags to follow over old cliffs. They want to pay the mortgage, protect their children, and try to be better parents in a jittery time. They are not isolationist. They want to help where they can, and feel called to support the poor and the sick wherever they are. They are also, still, American exceptionalists, meaning they believe the creation of America--the long journey across the sea, the genius cluster that invented the republic, the historic codifying of freedom--was providential, and good news not only for us but the world. "And the glow from that fire can truly light the world."
 
Much has been strained. We were all concussed by 9/11--we reeled--and came down where we came down. For the administration, extreme events prompted radical thinking. American exceptionalism was yesterday. They would be universalists, their operating style at once dreamy and aggressive: All men want the same thing, and we're giving it to them whether they want it or not. Now the dreamers hope to be saved by men--James Baker, Vernon Jordan--they once dismissed as cynics. And the two truest statements on Iraq are, still, Colin Powell's "You break it, you own it" and Pat Buchanan's "A constitution doesn't make a country, a country makes a constitution." Iraq has a constitution but not a country.
 
When history runs hot, bitterness bubbles. Democrats who should be feeling happy are, from what I've observed in New York and Washington, not. The closest they come to joy is a more energetic smugness. Republicans are fighting among themselves--or, rather, grumbling. They haven't, amazingly, broken out in war, and if they did, no one would be debating if it were a civil war. It would be like Iraq, like a dropped pane of glass that is jagged, shattered, dangerous.
 
We will need grace to get through this time: through the discussion of the Baker-Hamilton report, through debate on the war, through a harmonious transfer of legislative power in January, through the beginning of the post-Bush era.
 
People often speak of an absence of civility in Washington, but that's not quite the problem. Faking civility is a primary operating style: "My esteemed colleague."
 
What is needed is grace--sensitivity, mercy, generosity of spirit, a courtesy so deep it amounts to beauty. We will have to summon it. And the dreadful thing is you can't really fake it.
 
A very small theory, but my latest, is that many politicians and journalists lack a certain public grace because they spent their formative years in the American institution most likely to encourage base assumptions and coldness toward the foe. Yes, boarding school, and tony private schools in general. The last people with grace in America are poor Christians and religiously educated people of the middle class. The rich gave it up as an affectation long ago. Too bad, since they stayed in power.
 
The latest example of a lack of grace in Washington is the exchange between Jim Webb and President Bush at a White House Christmas party. Mr. Webb did not want to pose with the president and so didn't join the picture line. Fair enough, everyone feels silly on a picture line. Mr. Bush approached him later and asked after his son, a Marine. Mr. Webb said he'd like his son back from Iraq. Mr. Bush then, according to the Washington Post, said: "That's not what I asked you. How's your son?" Mr. Webb replied that's between him and his son.
 
For this Mr. Webb has been roundly criticized. And on reading the exchange I thought it had the sound of the rattling little aggressions of our day, but not on Mr. Webb's side. Imagine Lincoln saying, in such circumstances, "That's not what I asked you." Or JFK. Or Gerald Ford!
 
"That's not what I asked you" is a sentence straight from cable TV, from which many Americans are acquiring an attitude toward public and even private presentation.
 
Our interviewers and anchors have been taught, or learned, that they must show who's in charge, who's demanding answers, who's uncompromising in his search for truth. But of course they're not in search of truth; they're on a search for dominance.
 
Interviewers now always, as you have noticed, interrupt the person they're interviewing. Yes, they are trying to show who's in control of this conversation, and yes, they're trying to catch the interviewee off guard in hope of making news. They are attempting to keep trained and practiced politicians from launching unfruitful filibusters and boring everyone.
 
But interviewers also interrupt their subjects because they don't want the camera on the subject. They want the camera on themselves. They interrupt to keep the camera where it belongs. If they don't, the camera will stay on the interviewee and not the journalist, which will not help the journalist rise. They know their bosses, after all. They do not want the boss to say, "What an enlightening interview, who did it?" They want him to say, "You looked great, you were all over that guy, you grilled him!"
 
The Dominance of the Face leads to the inevitability of the interruption:
 
"Why did you vote 'no'?"
 
"I felt--"
 
"But why'd you do it?"
 
"Well, the implications of the question, and the merits of the arguments seemed--"
 
"That's not what I asked you!"
 
Because of this style, no one in America has been allowed to finish a sentence in the past 10 years. And it is not confined to cable but has spread to the networks, to government, and is starting to affect regular people, encouraging in them a conversational style that is not friendly or graceful, but depositional.
 
This has not contributed to the presence of grace in our public life. And too bad, because right now and for the next few months we'll need grace more than ever.; 

The restructuring of Volkswagen AG, Europe's largest auto maker, is increasingly in jeopardy as top executive Wolfgang Bernhard is poised to leave the company over a planned management shake-up backed by the company's largest shareholder, chairman Ferdinand Piech.
 
The move by Mr. Bernhard, an outspoken member of Volkswagen's management board with responsibility for the company's core VW brand, is the latest sign of high-level friction at Volkswagen following the resignation last month of its CEO, Bernd Pischetsrieder.
 
Volkswagen's supervisory board, the German equivalent of a U.S. board of directors, will meet next month to approve a reorganization of Volkswagen's management board, the group that oversees the company's day-to-day operations. That move will all but surely signal the end of Mr. Bernhard's two-year tenure at the company, according to people familiar with the matter.
 
As part of the planned reorganization, Volkswagen's board of directors has offered Mr. Bernhard a new company-wide post overseeing production. But people familiar with the matter said Mr. Bernhard has spurned the offer, arguing that it violates the terms of his contract, which runs until 2010.
 
Mr. Bernhard, 46 years old, has been the object of intense speculation in recent weeks within the auto industry and among Volkswagen investors, many of whom view him as critical to the company's attempts to return the company to its former levels of profitability.
 
Investor confidence in Mr. Bernhard runs so high that Volkswagen's market value rose nearly $1.25 billion the day in October 2004 that Mr. Pischetsrieder said he had recruited the former Chrysler executive to the company.
 
Since then, Mr. Bernhard has played the bad cop in Mr. Pischetsrieder's effort to steer the VW brand back to its roots as a maker of affordable cars after a troubled bid to move upscale in the late 1990s and early 2000s under Mr. Piech, then the company's CEO.
 
It was Mr. Bernhard who this past summer cajoled Volkswagen's powerful German union to accept a reduction in wages of roughly 20% for some workers at its Wolfsburg, Germany, plant by threatening to shift production of a planned sport-utility vehicle outside Germany. He prodded the union earlier this year to agree to an extension of working hours at Volkswagen's six traditional Western German factories without a pay increase.
 
Mr. Bernhard was also the driving force behind the company's decision last year to pull the $68,000 VW Phaeton sedan out of the U.S. market following disappointing sales there, a move that deeply rankled Mr. Piech, who championed the Phaeton's development when he was CEO between 1993 and 2002.
 
In recent months, Mr. Piech has seen his influence at Volkswagen grow as a result of the decision last year by Porsche AG to spend more than 3 billion euros ($3.94 billion) to become Volkswagen's largest shareholder.
 
The sports-car maker, which has a 27.5% stake in Volkswagen, was founded by Mr. Piech's grandfather, Ferdinand Porsche. Mr. Piech himself is a member of Porsche's board of directors, a dual role that has made some Volkswagen investors uneasy and which last year helped spark a power struggle between Mr. Piech and rival Volkswagen directors eager to curb his influence.
 
The latest dispute at Volkswagen centers on how the company will be organized in the wake of Mr. Pischetsrieder's departure, and what role Mr. Bernhard will play at the company. In recent weeks, people familiar with the matter said, Mr. Bernhard has traveled around Germany to meet with members of Volkswagen's supervisory board individually.
 
He has tried to persuade them -- unsuccessfully -- to reconsider a plan backed by Mr. Piech and top executives from Porsche that would reorganize Volkswagen's management board along lines similar to those at Porsche. At Porsche, individual management-board members are responsible for specific functions, such as overseeing company-wide production, research and development, and sales and marketing.
 
Although some Volkswagen board members have expressed sympathy for Mr. Bernhard's views, efforts to resolve the impasse have made little progress, with several board members telling Mr. Bernhard that the balance of power on the company's board has shifted decisively in recent weeks to Porsche and Mr. Piech as a result of the sports-car maker's continued purchasing of Volkswagen shares.
 
"It's fairly clear he won't stay," a person familiar with Mr. Bernhard's thinking said. "He's said 'if my job is changed, I've got to leave.'"
 
Mr. Pischetsrieder did away with Mr. Piech's corporate structure after succeeding him in 2002. At present, most Volkswagen workers with expertise in an area are assigned to either of the company's car divisions, VW and its Audi AG unit, reporting along brand lines rather than functional lines.
 
Porsche officials declined to comment. Mr. Piech couldn't be reached to comment. But people familiar with their thinking said they have argued that the new management structure will help the company cut costs by promoting more cooperation between its VW and Audi brands on new models and engines. A spokeswoman for Volkswagen said Mr. Bernhard wasn't available to comment, and that the company wouldn't comment on "speculation" about a possible new management structure.
 
It isn't immediately clear what Mr. Bernhard will do once he leaves Volkswagen.
 
Debates over how best to organize car companies are as old as the industry itself. But the matter is especially sensitive at Volkswagen because of concerns among investors that Mr. Piech is attempting to reassert influence over the company's day-to-day management.
 
To succeed Mr. Pischetsrieder, who formally steps down Sunday, the company has chosen the current head of the company's Audi unit, Martin Winterkorn. Mr. Winterkorn's selection has drawn scrutiny from investors partly because of his close relationship with Mr. Piech and because of Mr. Winterkorn's role in helping to develop the Phaeton as a top aide to Mr. Piech in the late 1990s and early 2000s.;

</text>
