<text id="A11" category="" words="2012" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Past as Prologue Russia: Moscow presents itself as the new 'middleman' in the Middle East. But its role may actually be that of spoiler' Newsweek, February 27, 2006, Pg. 0; 'The Box Is King The humble shipping container has revolutionized commerce, for b" Author="Owen Matthews; Christian Caryl; " PublicationDate="February 27, 2006 ; April 10, 2006 ; " SampledFrom="All; Beginning; " WebAddress="Nexis UK">

Once, not so long ago, Europe saw itself as the Middle East's honest broker, poised between a hard-line United States and an equally intransigent Muslim world. At the same time Russia, once a regional superpower, was... nowhere. While the European Union played mediator in conflicts from Palestine to Iran, Russia contented itself with hawking a few weapons systems and tending its own post-Soviet backyard.

What a difference a couple of years can make. In the wake of Hamas's Palestinian election win and Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadine-jad's defiance over his country's uranium-enrichment program, Europe is edging ever closer to the tougher stance taken by the United States. Meanwhile, a newly confident Russia has stepped into Europe's shoes as middleman between East and West, reaching out to the region's untouchables--and making it clear that Moscow won't be taking orders from anyone.

Earlier this month, President Vladimir Putin outraged the United States and Israel by inviting the leaders of Hamas to Moscow for talks. "Hamas is in power--this is a fact" was Russian Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov's blunt message. "It came to power as a result of free democratic elections." Moscow has broken ranks with the West in Iran, too. Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said that Russia won't--for the time being, at least--back U.N. sanctions against Tehran, even as U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice complained that Iran is now "in open defiance of the international community." Russia insists instead that the way forward is to persuade Tehran to accept a scheme to enrich its uranium on Russian territory. "No one has the right to deny another country the right to safe atomic power," Russia's atomic-energy chief, Sergei Kiriyenko, recently told NEWSWEEK.

The new assertiveness, analysts say, is part and parcel of Russia's recent muscle-flexing in Eastern Europe. After a winter spent wielding energy as a political weapon against wayward former Soviet states such as Ukraine and Georgia, the Kremlin has now turned its sights to a broader forum. "First Russia went on a counterattack in the former Soviet Union," says analyst Dmitri Trenin of the Carnegie Moscow Center. "Now it is doing the same in the Middle East." Putin gave an important clue to Russia's thinking earlier this month when he described the Hamas victory as "an important setback for American efforts in the Middle East." The implication: America has no infallible monopoly on power and influence, and certainly not at Russia's expense.

For all the United States' and Israel's indignation at Russia's meddling, there's actually a chance that Moscow may succeed where the others have failed. "Unlike America, Russia is not bound up by legal objections to talking [with Hamas]," says Alexander Kalugin, Russia's special envoy to the Middle East, who met with senior Hamas representatives last week in Ramallah. And what Russia has to say to Hamas doesn't differ much in substance from the message propounded by the other members of the "quartet" of interested parties--the United States, the EU and the United Nations. "Their message will be consistent: that Israel has a right to exist, that previous Palestinian Authority agreements should be honored and that they should renounce violence," says one Western diplomat, speaking on condition of anonymity.

The main problem is that Russia didn't see fit to discuss its initiative with the others. "There was not a lot of advance consultation about the talks," admits the diplomat. For the Kremlin, it seems, the important point is to distance itself from the United States--and to emphasize that Russia is no longer a junior partner in Washington's foreign policy.

The risk is, of course, that Russia's strategy of talking to Hamas could backfire. After all, Russia dubs its own Chechen separatists "terrorists" and complains vociferously when the U.K. and United States offer political asylum to rebel leaders such as Ilyas Akhmadov, a self-styled "ambassador" of independent Chechnya. "If today Moscow talks to Hamas," warns Russia's Chief Rabbi Beryl Lazar, "tomorrow we'll hear demands for talks with [Chechen rebel Shamil] Basayev, the day after tomorrow for talks with Al Qaeda."

And Russia's self-appointed role as honest broker doesn't sit terribly well with its place as a major arms supplier, especially to Iran. Last month Rosvooruzheniye, Russia's giant state-owned arms-export company, announced that Tehran had agreed to spend $1 billion on 30 Tor-M1 air-defense missile systems, capable of protecting a target from up to 48 incoming planes or projectiles to a range of six kilometers. Iran also has a longstanding accord with Moscow for up to $7 billion in conventional arms, including MiG-29 fighters, assistance with Iran's small submarine fleet, BMP-3 armored personnel carriers and landing craft.

The bottom line? Moscow may be broadly cooperative in international efforts to get Iran to cease its uranium- enrichment program--but at the same time, it's providing Iran with the means to defend itself against a possible air raid like the Israeli strike that destroyed Saddam Hussein's French-built Osirak reactor in 1981. In that, Russia's "new" role looks more like that played in the past--less middleman than a check on Washington and the West.; 

The city of Busan, South Korea's largest port, feels like a room crammed with oversize furniture. Apartment buildings and hotels crowd into a narrow strip between steep hills and a deep harbor. There is no view of the water from the claustrophobic main street, even though it follows the harbor's edge, because the road is blocked on both sides by steel shipping containers in basic red, green and blue, stacked two or three high like children's blocks.

One's car is surrounded by tractor-trailers hauling containers, and occasionally traffic grinds to a halt as long railway trains creep across an intersection hauling--you guessed it--still more containers.

In Busan (population: 4.7 million), there's not much question about what rules trade: the Box, as they call it, is king. The city's livelihoods depend on the 24/7 conveyor belt that in 2004 handled 11.4 million TEUs--"twenty-foot equivalent units," the basic unit of measurement in the container trade--up from 2.3 million in 1990. That makes Busan the world's fifth largest port by volume, and earlier this year it opened a state-of-the-art terminal 52 kilometers to the west, hoping to siphon a majority of the container traffic away from the strained city center.

For its total devotion to the Box, Busan is an apt place to ponder the rise of container shipping, which celebrates its 50th anniversary this month, as a vital and increasingly controversial cornerstone of global commerce. With roughly 20 million containers moving around the world today, carrying as much as 95 percent of goods coming into America, containers have become the essential baggage compartment of modern life. Economist (and former NEWSWEEK writer) Marc Levinson, author of "The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the Economy Bigger," argues that this simple innovation "made globalization possible."

Indeed, it is hard to imagine how world trade could have grown so fast--quintupling in the last two decades--without the "intermodal shipping container," to use the technical term. The invention of a standard-size steel box that can be easily moved from a truck to a ship to a railroad car, without ever passing through human hands, cut down on the work and vastly increased the speed of shipping. It represented an entirely new system, not just a new product. The dark side is that these steel containers are by definition black boxes, invisible to casual inspection, and the more of them authorities open for inspection, the more they undermine the smooth functioning of the system.

So containers have become a perfect vessel for the smuggling of just about anything, from counterfeit goods and currency to people and even nuclear weapons--a fear that underlay the recent furor over a Dubai company's bid to take over terminal operations at several U.S. ports. Security experts have warned repeatedly that a container carrying a "dirty" nuclear weapon would make the ultimate "poor man's missile," and nations the world over are now searching for new technology capable of searching every single box that crosses their borders. The Bush administration's Container Security Initiative aims to enlist the help of other countries in identifying suspicious containers in ports of origin before they're loaded onto ships bound for the United States. "A hidden revolution has been going on," says maritime-security expert Stephen Flynn. "And now we've become so dependent upon it that it's like the air we breathe. We don't notice it until it's not there. Then you notice it big time."

It's impossible to miss now. The recently busted nuclear smuggling network run by top Pakistani scientist A.Q. Khan shipped all of its goods inside containers, notes former U.S. State Department official David Asher. And there was the famous case, in early 2002, when Italian officials opened up a container being shipped from Egypt to Canada only to discover a man named Amid Farid Rizk, traveling with all the conveniences that a presumed terrorist could want: a laptop computer, a satellite phone--and several airport-security passes.

Ironically, anonymity was originally a key selling point. Back in the 1950s, when an American trucking magnate named Malcolm McLean first dreamed up the Box, ports were messy, chaotic places--far from today's smoothly geometrical container terminals. Stevedores used cranes to lift individual loads of all shapes, sizes and packagings out of ships, then placed them in dockside warehouses until they could be trucked away. It was usually impossible to calculate how long the process would take, or how many of the goods would be stolen along the way. McLean realized that standardized containers would increase efficiency, and thwart thieves. Crafting new containers was just a start. McLean built new ships and trucks specially designed to handle the boxes, launching the modern industry of business "logistics," a term that had previously been used exclusively by armies, says Levinson.

McLean's first container ship sailed in 1956, but the idea didn't begin to catch on for another decade. The impetus came from the Pentagon, which needed to speed the movement of war matériel to U.S. forces in Vietnam. Profits were impressive, but McLean realized that many of his containers were making the trip back to the United States empty. So he began scheduling stops in Japan, then the world's most rapidly expanding economy, where businessmen were exporting increasingly large numbers of transistor radios, calculators and cars to America.

As the container caught on, costs plummeted. In 1959, by Levinson's estimate, freight could make up as much as 25 percent of a product's cost. Today shipping costs are a neglible fraction of the total. In 2006 the cost of shipping a standard 40-foot box from China to the United States, complete with up to 32 tons of cargo, can run as low as $2,000. That "makes the postage stamp seem overpriced," notes Flynn.

By lowering shipping costs, McLean had neutralized the advantage of geographic proximity, and set the stage for Asia's "tiger" exporters, and later China's rapid rise as factory to the world. There were other trade-offs, too. As Levinson notes, container shipping "assisted the rapid economic growth of Korea while offering precious little to [landlocked] Paraguay."

Ports, once seamy, dangerous and vaguely romantic, became profoundly rational, even soulless places. As Japanese-style "just in time" manufacturing began to spread around the world, shippers began employing more and more advanced technology, and ever-bigger container ships, to deliver ever-larger shipments on increasingly exact time schedules. Today the global container-terminal business is dominated by shipping companies, and the two biggest hail from the two highest-volume container ports, Hong Kong and Singapore. "The container-terminal industry has globalized very rapidly," says Neil Davidson, research director for Drewry Shipping in London. "I think it's partly because certain operators made strategic decisions, and they happened to be Chinese-owned and Singaporean and Danish rather than American or German. It's partly historical accident, partly just a greater desire by other companies to come to the fore."

Most Americans haven't been paying much attention--a point dramatically borne out by Dubai Port World's decision to unload its newly acquired container operations in U.S. ports, after the public uproar against placing the facilities in Middle Eastern hands.;

</text>
