<text id="A12" category="" words="1987" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Looking for Friends in Very Strange Places.' Time, 10 July 2006;Time, 'Bush Says, Bring It On; the Critics Will' 2 January 2006; 'Back Into History' Time, 24 July 2006" Author="N/A; N/A; Mike Allen" PublicationDate="10 July 2006; 2 January 2006; 24 July 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; End" WebAddress="http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1209964,00.html; http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1145222-1,00.html; http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1218059-2,00.html">

Peter the Great built St. Petersburg on Russia's far northwestern edge as a strategic window on Europe. On his way to this year's G-8 summit in St. Petersburg, President Bush will stop off at his own strategic window on Europe: Stralsund. If you've been to Stralsund, the question might be, Why? The town, once in East Germany, has a population of about 60,000 and is famous for a local berry drink that tastes like flat, bitter orange soda. All that matters to the President, though, is that Stralsund was once represented in the Bundestag by Angela Merkel, who unseated Gerhard Schröder last fall to become Germany's first female Chancellor. Bush and Schröder barely spoke, but Bush and Merkel hit it off when she visited the White House in January, and the overnight Stralsund detour is indicative of the President's new stab at European diplomacy: find friends, even if the effort takes you to out-of-the-way places.
The President's image across Europe is so poor that in a recent poll on the Continent, a majority of respondents said the U.S. was more of a threat to world stability than China or Iran. When questioned about that poll at a news conference in Vienna last month, Bush snorted at what he considered an "absurd statement" and said, "For Europe, September 11 was a moment; for us, it was a change of thinking. I vowed to the American people I would do everything I could to defend our people, and will." The retort was part of the confident, nondefensive approach Bush took during 44 hours in Vienna and Budapest. "Let me talk about Guantánamo," he said early in one meeting, not waiting for his hosts to bring up the unpleasant subject of the military detention center. (It's a subject that, because of the Supreme Court ruling, is still likely to be a staple of the questions at his European press conferences this week.) The massive demonstrations that had been predicted in Austria did not materialize, and Bush was tickled when Austrian President Heinz Fischer slathered praise on the U.S., recounting the Marshall Plan's role in rebuilding his country after World War II and calling the poll's results "grotesque."
Bush occasionally got crabby on European trips early in his presidency; in 2002, after enduring days of anti-American demonstrations, he famously called NBC's David Gregory a preening "intercontinental" when Gregory asked French President Jacques Chirac a question in French. But Bush's advisers believe he has discovered a formula for dealing with the Continent that is working for him. The White House concentrates his visits and speeches on friendly countries and largely ignores the recalcitrant ones. "We're building relationships where there are relationships to build," said a White House official. That explains why the President spends so little time in France and Spain--the blue states of Europe--and so much in Poland, Lithuania and Slovakia, countries once behind the Iron Curtain where his odes to democracy are particularly resonant. Beyond just visiting, Bush has been pushing for the eastward expansion of NATO and the European Union, which would give the map of Europe more of a red-state look.
White House aides say that this is diplomacy pure and simple and that it would be wrong to give the President's approach a political cast. But advisers admit that Bush the healer and Bush the diplomat are the White House theme music for his final two years in office--out of necessity, because of the need to enlist Europe in pressuring Iran and North Korea and as part of an effort to burnish the President's legacy.
So he's trying to gain converts, one country at a time. In Vienna, First Lady Laura Bush toured the original megachurch, St. Stephen's Cathedral, built in the 1100s, and the President was jolly enough to tease a photographer about his tumbleweed-like hair. Austria was having a heat wave, but Bush patiently answered personal questions from students under hot lights and tapped along as the Vienna Boys' Choir offered up On the Beautiful Blue Danube. Afterward, one of the boys presented the President with a teddy bear. The boy was from Ohio. The President asked him how the Reds were doing. At least for a moment, Europe didn't seem so alien.


Up until a couple of weeks ago, George W. Bush's script to put the misery of 2005 behind him had seemed destined for a smooth rollout. Buoyed by the apparent success of the Iraqi elections, the President would score a quick confirmation victory with Supreme Court nominee Samuel Alito, follow it up with a soaring State of the Union address and then return to full campaign mode with a sweep around the country, talking about big issues like immigration and Medicare and throwing the spotlight on a resurgent economy. But the revelation that his Administration has been spying in this country without warrants--illegally, critics say--may have put a crimp in Bush's plan to climb back on top of the agenda as the new legislative session begins. "When Congress comes back," warns a top G.O.P. congressional aide, "domestic surveillance and privacy issues will be all over the front pages."
To which the President and his strategists seem to be saying, Bring it on. From practically the moment news of the domestic-surveillance program hit the front page of the New York Times, the White House decided its strategy would be to "overwhelm the skeptics, not back off, not change anything about the program and really home in very strongly on the fact that this is a legitimate part of presidential warmaking power," says an adviser. Bush launched a ferocious defense in his Dec. 17 weekly radio address, inviting in a network camera to capture the rare live delivery of the speech as he declared that the no-longer-secret surveillance program makes it "more likely that killers like these 9/11 hijackers will be identified and located in time." G.O.P. strategists argue that Democrats have little leeway to attack on the issue because it could make them look weak on national security and because some of their leaders were briefed about the the National Security Agency (NSA) no-warrant surveillance before it became public knowledge. Some key Democrats even defend it. Says California's Jane Harman, ranking Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee: "I believe the program is essential to U.S. national security and that its disclosure has damaged critical intelligence capabilities."
But the NSA operation--and particularly Bush's decision to bypass the generally amenable Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court for authorization--has drawn fire not only from liberal Democrats but also from some of the most conservative in Bush's party, in which government restraint is a fundamental precept. "There is a test of Republicans on this," says activist Grover Norquist, normally a White House ally. "The country will let you get away with this in the wake of 9/11, but that doesn't make it right." And even if Republicans are prepared to bless Bush's program, they know it theoretically would have to mean extending such sweeping Executive power to, say, a President Hillary Clinton.
The first test of the controversy's political resonance could come as early as next week, with the opening of Alito's confirmation hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee, whose fiercely independent chairman, Republican Arlen Specter, has called the Administration's rationale for the no-warrant surveillance "a stretch." Opponents of Alito's nomination, who had planned to put the abortion issue on center stage, are quickly retooling their strategy. Says Patrick Leahy, the top Democrat on the Judiciary Committee: "I will be asking Judge Alito a lot of questions about checks and balances and what he can say that would convince us he would be willing to act as a check and a balance."
Alito's record could give his critics plenty of ammunition. The Third Circuit judge has long been an advocate of the unitary-executive concept, a constitutional interpretation that is a favorite of Bush's and Vice President Dick Cheney's, which argues that the President should have nearly total control of Executive Branch agencies and resist any incursion on that power by Congress. And in a 1984 memo recently released by the National Archives, Alito--at the time a lawyer with the Reagan Administration Justice Department--argued that government officials who order illegal domestic wiretaps can be immune from lawsuits. The case in question arose in 1970, when then Attorney General John Mitchell allowed the FBI to wiretap Vietnam War protesters suspected of plotting to kidnap National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger.
Administration officials concede that the controversy will inject a volatile new element into the confirmation debate but say Alito will resist getting drawn in. "It will form the basis for questions and possible senatorial grandstanding, and the hearing may be more hostile than it was with [recently confirmed Chief Justice John] Roberts," an official involved in the nomination tells TIME. "But like any nominee to the court, you're not going to see him predict any cases or make any commitments to the committee." As for that two-decade-old memo, it was a domestic matter that has "no nexus, no connection, no link" to the current debate, says Steve Schmidt, a White House aide helping shepherd Alito through the confirmation process.
The Alito nomination is not the only issue on which the Administration will have to confront the controversy. It will add to Bush's already difficult struggle to renew the most controversial provisions of the USA Patriot Act, which was passed after 9/11 and gave law enforcement broad new powers that have since unsettled some on both the left and the right. Congress last month disappointed the White House by giving the provisions only a five-week extension, setting a new expiration date of Feb. 3. And some kind of congressional investigation into the NSA spying program seems certain. Specter, for one, has promised hearings early in the year--a move, sources tell TIME, that the White House is hoping to head off by convincing the Senator to defer to the Intelligence Committee, whose hearings would be behind closed doors and classified. "They're going to lean on Specter very hard not to hold hearings," says a Republican official. Bush has warned that any public hearings on programs would simply tip off terrorists and invite them to adjust their tactics, and he says, "This is a war."

That's a theme Americans will hear again and again leading up to the State of the Union address, which officials say will position Bush as a "strong and decisive leader," prosecuting the war on terrorism as he reins in spending at home and spreads democracy around the world. "It's Bush as Churchill, Bush as Reagan and Goldwater and Bush as Woodrow Wilson," says a presidential adviser. But when civil liberties are involved, inviting historic comparisons can be a dangerous business. "This is an Administration," says Leahy, "that has tried to bypass courts and the legal procedures more than any since Richard Nixon."


He had deliberately diverged from the Middle East course set by his two predecessors when he hired an unabashedly pro-Israel staff. "I'm all for conferences," Bush said in a 2004 appearance with British Prime Minister Tony Blair, "just so long as the conferences produce something." George H.W. Bush and his Secretary of State James Baker were seen as heroes by some Palestinians; Bill Clinton made the quest for Middle East peace a centerpiece of his legacy project. Bush aides say the times were different then and the vaunted progress under Clinton turned out to be what one called "a false stability."
Does George W. Bush have dreams of presiding over a grand Middle East peace deal at Camp David or some other photogenic spot, like the Red Sea summit of his first term? Aides say he is content for now to take steps toward transforming the region in less obvious but, they believe, more fundamental and lasting ways. So Bush today is in the precarious position of putting his hopes in a region that has yielded only heartbreak.

</text>
