<text id="A38" category="" words="1995" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Director puts Dylan in a stage 'circus' ; Twyla Tharp takes 'Times' on Broadway.' USA Today, 26 October 2006, D7; 'Actor Snipes faces indictment on tax fraud charges ; Prosecutors file 8 counts accusing him of nearly $12M in tax evasion.' USA Today, 18 O" Author="Elysa Gardner; Greg Farrell ; Ann Oldenburg " PublicationDate="26 October 2006; 18 October 2006; 26 October 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; End" WebAddress="Factiva">

NEW YORK -- This is a tale of two icons. The first is choreographer and director Twyla Tharp, who several years ago used Billy Joel's song catalog to develop the Tony Award-winning stage hit Movin' Out, which enjoyed more than 1,300 performances on Broadway and a successful national tour. 
The second is Bob Dylan, whose music and lyrics inspired and are showcased in Tharp's new outing, The Times They Are A-Changin', which opens tonight at the Brooks Atkinson Theatre. 
During a rehearsal break, Tharp, 65, says there should be "no comparisons" between her latest troubadour tribute and the one that preceded it. "They're like apples and oranges," says the dance maverick, whose no-nonsense manner can be engaging and intimidating. 
"In Movin' Out, the band was upstairs and the vocal was carried by the piano player," Tharp explains. "Billy's material was handled in a way that was very Billy, in terms of the orchestration, and the piano players had voices that gave some sense of Billy Joel." 
In Times, "there are characters who carry the songs, so movement is part and parcel of the action. We've transposed a number of Dylan songs for the female voice, and there are duets." 
The numbers include Blowin' in the Wind, Just Like a Woman, Like a Rolling Stone and other popular and critical favorites. 
"Some songs are taken in a totally different direction from that folk-concert world Dylan was in," Tharp says. "The progression had to do with establishing this dream world or circus world, and finding metaphors that could be embedded in the movement." 
Asked what drew her to Dylan, Tharp, who has also drawn on repertoires ranging from Beethoven to Jelly Roll Morton, says simply, "It has to do with looking at the work of someone else and figuring out if it's appropriate for me at this point. Dylan has obviously had a career for decades, and each one has its own validity." 
Tharp is reluctant to discuss Dylan's reaction to Times, stating flatly, "There's nothing to be said." 
But in a separate interview, Dylan, who caught Times during its world premiere at San Diego's Old Globe Theatre, begs to differ. "It hit me like a lightning bolt," he says. "It went through me on a celestial level, and not because I had anything to do with it. Dance is not my expertise, but I felt like I was flying when I left the theater. A couple of the duets knocked me flat. It was pretty steamy. These songs were coming across in a way I couldn't get them across. I understand now she's made it 1,000% better." 
Tharp says the Broadway production is "very different from the one in San Diego. The song list is quite similar, and the character list is essentially as it was. But some scenic transformations are different, and the ensemble list is totally different, because my dancers were still on contract to Movin' Out until the spring." 
Whether New York critics prove as effusive as Dylan remains to be seen. Tharp isn't taking it as a given that the show will prove to be as popular as Movin' Out did, either. 
"There will be people who have deep connections to the Dylan canon on its own terms," Tharp says. "That canon is always going to be there. But this is something different. It's a translation into another world, and that's the adventure." 

This is one "bad guy" role that Wesley Snipes doesn't want. In a federal indictment unsealed Tuesday, prosecutors hit Snipes, the prolific actor and movie producer, with eight counts of tax fraud. 
According to the indictment, Snipes allegedly not only avoided paying millions in income taxes from 1999 through 2004, but he fraudulently tried to get an $11 million refund for taxes paid in the 1990s. 
Prosecutors also filed charges against two Florida men who acted as tax advisers to Snipes, Eddie Ray Kahn and Douglas Rosile. 
Snipes, who used to have a residence near Orlando, has starred in nearly 50 movies including White Men Can't Jump, New Jack City and the highly successful Blade series. But he reportedly also has run into a series of financial and legal difficulties. In this case, prosecutors allege that Kahn and Rosile convinced Snipes that under an unusual interpretation of federal law, known as the "861 argument," only income derived from foreign-based activities was taxable. A U.S. court has never supported the argument. 
Kahn founded a group known as American Rights Litigators and Guiding Light of God Ministries. Although GLGM described itself as a "Christian ministry and organization established to assist men and women in their pursuit of truth and freedom as Americans," the government alleges GLGM is a for-profit operation that sells fraudulent tax schemes. According to the indictment, Snipes paid Kahn a consulting fee and paid to become a member of his American Rights Litigators group. 
Rosile, an accountant whose CPA licenses to practice in Ohio and Florida were revoked, worked with Kahn to file tax returns for GLGM clients to claim refunds based on the "861 argument." According to the indictment, if the government refunded money based on the "861" theory, Kahn would take 20% of the refund and pay half to Rosile. 
Despite warnings from previous tax advisers that his movie- related income was taxable and the "861" scheme was bogus, Snipes apparently sided with Kahn and Rosile in 2000 and stopped paying income taxes, the indictment says. Using the "861 argument," Snipes tried to recover $4 million in taxes paid for 1996 and $7 million for 1997. The government also claims that Snipes tried to pay some of his income taxes from 2000 to 2002 by sending $14 million in bogus checks to the U.S. Treasury. 
Paul Perez, the U.S. Attorney in Tampa who filed the charges, said in a statement: "Those who intentionally and unlawfully harass the IRS through deceit, trickery and fraud undermine the collection of revenue that is vital to every aspect of the operation of our government." The Associated Press reported that Perez said Snipes has not been arrested because authorities don't know his whereabouts. Two of the charges that Snipes faces each carry a maximum sentence of five years. The remaining six charges carry up to one year each. 
A spokesman for Snipes could not be reached for comment. Kahn and Rosile also could not be reached. 

Even series not focusing on two guys in particular are still exploring the subject. 
On NBC's The Office this season, Steve Carell, as the office boss, spent an entire episode being glum over the fact that he had no guy friends. And Josh Schwartz, creator of The OC, has written an upcoming story line featuring Peter Gallagher's husband/father character seeking out a guy pal. 
"I think there comes a time in a man's life when he looks around and he realizes, 'You know, I don't really have any guys to hang out with,'" Schwartz says. The show's goal: to make Gallagher's character "more relatable." 
But where is this TV trend coming from? 
Last year, The New York Times reported a phenomenon in which heterosexual men were getting together for something other than business or sports, and it was dubbed a "man date." The Washington Post also examined the idea recently, calling heterosexual closeness a "male-ationship." Lately, the term "bromance" has been cited in the urban dictionary of slang for a friendship between "brothers." 
"The whole culture of masculinity is changing, and changing quite radically from the days when John Wayne and the Lone Ranger were the top images of what it meant to be male," says Judith Sherven, a relationship expert and author of several books with her husband, Jim Sniechowski, also a relationship expert. He says it's an outgrowth of the feminist movement. She says it's a breaking down of barriers. 
"There aren't rigid sex-role stereotypes that govern everyone's behavior anymore," she says, adding that women always have comfortably had friends, and now TV characters are reflecting men's freedom to express themselves with their friends. 
"Now men are open to the fact that this is certainly within the realm of being masculine. It doesn't mean they're acting like women. They're following a human instinct, and there aren't the prohibitions against it." 
The only limits would be the ones that entice Ryan Murphy, creator of cable's Nip/Tuck, the edgy surgery show that explores all sorts of sexual relationships. After all, when two men become close, the next question is: How close are they? 
Murphy said at the start of the Nip/Tuck season that he would be playing with the relationship between the two male surgeons by having one begin to have dreams about whether his love for the other meant he's bisexual or gay. 
"It's pushing those boundaries a little bit. The show always examines sexuality and troubles of intimacy and who you are based on what you look like and how you react to people, so it's a natural evolution," Murphy says. "I think you see these two really are the closest they're going to be to another human being -- but can't go deeper than that." 
And on Studio 60, the two characters suddenly realized they might be getting too close. In a recent scene, they got into a shouting match that wound up in a wrestling match on the beach. 
Matt: "Are people looking at us right now?" 
Danny: "I think they are." 
Matt: "Could you punch me in the face or something, because to a casual observer this appears a little homoerotic for my comfort." 
Danny: "I definitely hear you on that. What should we do?" 
Matt: "Go." 
They get up, looking sheepish. 
Danny: "All right, just play it cool." 
A buddy history 
Two male friends is an old comedic device -- from Abbott and Costello to Felix and Oscar. Even Starsky and Hutch were good for laughs, intentional or not. 
On NBC's Twenty Good Years, Jeffrey Tambor and John Lithgow play two 60-year-olds, a widower and a divorce, who move in together to share their last "20 good years" of life. (The sitcom, new this season, was pulled from the network's schedule Tuesday, with its last airdate scheduled for Nov. 8.) 
Tambor plays Jeffrey, a judge. Lithgow plays John, a doctor. Just like The Odd Couple, they are mismatched roommates, one uptight, the other wild. 
The two actors say their pairing is less a reflection of any national zeitgeist regarding menship and more about a harking back to the roots of comedy. 
"The cliche of a comic pairing is straight man and a zany," Lithgow says. "In our case, we throw the ball back and forth." Says Tambor, "We take turns being Laurel and Hardy -- or Lucy and Ethel." 
But both say their relationship is not about being gay or hinting at homoerotic undertones. "We're not gay men, we're foolish men," Lithgow says. 
Similarly, Denny Crane (Shatner) and Alan Shore (Spader) have brought a comic touch to an intimate relationship between two guys on Boston Legal. Both are as old-school hetero-manly as men can be: bedding women, smoking cigars and winning big cases. 
But listen to how they talked in the episode when they took a fishing trip to Canada and ended up sleeping in the same bed: 
Denny: "Shirley was looking at us funny. Think she knows we slept together?" 
Alan: "She might. We still have that glow." (A beat.) "Quite a trip." 
Denny: "I shot my first steelhead." 
Alan (softly): "Thank you, Denny. You took my mind off Tara. You took me to a new land. But most of all ... you took me to a new place." 
Denny: "What do you mean?" 
Alan: "You've occasioned a cynical, material, urban man to feel passion. For a fish." 
Denny: "I think Canada liked us." 
Alan: "How could they not?" 
Denny: "We make quite the team, I'll tell you that." 
Alan: "Yes, we do." 
Denny: "We're good on the road." 
Alan: "Indeed." 
Kind of suggestive? 
Spader says no way.

</text>
