<text id="A40" category="" words="2015" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Emmy show has lost its way Aside from a few funny moments and couple of timely tributes, the awards show rarely charted a course worth taking.' Denver Post, 28 August 2006, A17; 'Moonrakers to shine again for a night.' Denver Post, 11 August 2006, F4; 'Lu" Author="Joanne Ostrow; Nick Groke; Michael Booth; Bill Husted" PublicationDate="28 August 2006; 11 August 2006; 18 August 2006; 1 August 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning; All" WebAddress="Factiva">

Emmy night '06 proved that the talk about the awards being adrift isn't just talk. The mostly uninspired list of winners was matched by a stodgy, bloodless show.
There was nothing remotely envelope-pushing in all the envelope- ripping at the 58th annual Emmy Awards.
The event has been losing its sheen in recent years. This year was dull, duller, dullest.
OK, one timely touch was the depiction of the 'variety show' nominees on iPods and cellphones supposedly held by members of the audience. The variety/special directing award - summoned onscreen from inside a Howie Mandel briefcase and bounced from master control truck to auditorium as the director called the shots - was another clever bit.
Kiefer Sutherland finally got to make a speech; 'The Office' got its due.
Otherwise, it was an unremarkable show, tailor-made to be hidden deep in August.
The most remarkable moment didn't occur onstage. When Simon Cowell led the tribute to Dick Clark, the audience at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles booed. The fact that Cowell has been in the vanguard of the 'reality TV' wave that has battered television wasn't lost on the audience that has witnessed a job shortage thanks to the unscripted-TV trend. Considering the circumstances, however, the response was rude.
Clark, who suffered a stroke in 2004, made a rare appearance before the hushed crowd, expressing his thanks for a lifetime in show business.
Then back to blah: Megan Mullally, Alan Alda, Barry Manilow, Mariska Hargitay, Tony Shalhoub, 'Amazing Race' for the sixth time. It was all about yesteryear.
The ads were infinitely more hip than the show. (Discover's barrage of scissors cutting up credit cards was fun.) In terms of presentation, pacing and sensibility, the Emmy proceedings were bleak.
Host Conan O'Brien scored with a 'Music Man' parody, recasting 'Trouble' to reflect the woes of his network. 'We got trouble, right here at NBC!' he sang, observing that things are so bad, they're relying on Mandel of 'Deal or No Deal.' But O'Brien's opening cried out for an editor: A simulated plane crash, like that on 'Lost,' was sickeningly close to the day's top news, a plane crash in Kentucky that killed 49.
At least 'My Name Is Earl' got nods for directing and writing, although it was shut out in the acting categories.
Likewise, 'The Sopranos' was recognized for writing, not for acting.
Just as the commercials were more memorable than the show, the presenters were more impressive than the winners.
The most forward-looking (not to mention hottest) pair all evening was Evangeline Lilly and Wentworth Miller as presenters. Give Lilly an award for carrying off that dress, too.
The late Aaron Spelling deserved his salute, of course, and the Shrine audience seemed touched. But, for viewers, there must have been a better way to salute the king of 'guilty pleasure' TV.
Slow, slower, slowest.
Jon Stewart and Stephen Colbert came close to saving the proceedings in their biting presentation of the 'reality TV' category.
They were too little, too late.
Maybe next year the Emmy show should be buried in July.


Three days after the Beatles played Red Rocks in 1964-the only show on that tour not to sell out-the two most popular bands in Colorado clashed at Lakeside Amusement Park.
Several thousand people showed up for that sold-out battle of the bands between Denver's The Moonrakers and Boulder's The Astronauts, not surprising since it was the period when local rock 'n' roll hit its apex.
The Astronauts eventually caught on as a surf-rock band on RCA Records and their hit song, 'Baja,' is still consistently released on compilations. The Moonrakers broke big after releasing a string of garage-punk singles that ruled the city scene in the mid-1960s.
Now, after more than 30 years apart, they have re-formed for a one-time, long-awaited reunion show in Lone Tree on Sunday with the Freddi-Henchi Band.
'There was a purity in the music and an excitement in the air,' keyboardist Denny Flannigan said of the bevy of bands that sprung up after rock's first wave of rockabilly and pop R&amp;B receded, and just as a new breed of garage rock began to crest.
'What stands out in my memory from that time is being able to play with so many talented musicians and good bands.'
The Moonrakers, who later changed their name to Sugarloaf and had a national hit with 'Green-Eyed Lady' in 1972, are a key component of Colorado's largely forgotten rock music history.
In Denver, there were the Moonrakers, the Poor, the Rainy Daze, Boenzee Cryque, Bakersfield Charter and the Soul Survivors. In Pueblo, there were the Trolls; the Soul from Colorado Springs; the Monocles from Greeley; and the Astronauts in Boulder.
They all formed a loose collective of bands thriving at watered- down 3.2 beer clubs open to those 18 and older, including the Galaxy on West Alameda Avenue, the La Pitche and Pussycat-a-go-go on Sante Fe Avenue, the Exodus on Lincoln Avenue, Tulagi in Boulder and Kelker Junction in Colorado Springs.
And, on down nights at the Trocadero Ballroom at Elitch's and the Moonlight Gardens Ballroom at Lakeside, the Moonrakers took their place at the center of it all.
'When we first started to break, we arranged to battle the Astronauts at Lakeside,' Flannigan said. 'No matter how many times we battled them or played with them, we never knocked them out.
'There were a lot of local bands and local fans, and it was all credited with being the start of something.'
In September 1965, the Moonrakers' 'You'll Come Back' reached No.1 on the KIMN Radio Hit Parade chart, knocking out the Kingsmen's 'Louie Louie.' It was followed by the rocker 'I'm All Right' and a version of 'Baby Please Don't Go' that stands out among the dozens of other versions as more atonal and noisy with its Wurlitzer electric piano.
'We had long hair and our own instruments, which was key,' Flannigan said. 'We were the first band in Colorado to break from the four guitars and a drum set sound.'
Tower Records released the early Moonrakers singles alongside music from the Standells, the Chocolate Watch Band and Pink Floyd. And the band played with the Dave Clark Five, the
Byrds, the Beach Boys and Dusty Springfield, among others.
But by the end of the decade, bands were moving west, and the Moonrakers reformed as Sugarloaf.
The original members - Joel Brandes, Van Dorn, Bob MacVittie, Bob Webber and Flannigan - all moved away.
'We've been fortunate to be a part of people's lives for so long. But it felt like it would be incomplete to not play another show,' Flannigan said. 'So we put the pieces into play. We've all had a desire to do this again, and we're going to assume it's like riding a bicycle.'
For Sunday's show, at Treo at Lone Tree, Bob Yeazel of Sugarloaf and Jerry Krenzer of Freddi-Henchi will play in place of the absent Webber. But Brandes, Dorn and Flannigan will travel from California, and MacVittie will come from Arkansas.
'But The Moonrakers were always a Denver band,' Flannigan said.

For hundreds of years, when an industry felt its products were in danger of losing favor with the public, the merchandisers tried cutting prices.
Movie theaters are finally catching up with that tenet of elastic demand, announcing a new set of discounts meant to slow the migration of customers toward pay-per-view, downloads and other ways of watching filmed entertainment.
Colorado Cinemas will offer blanket $5 pricing for all of its movies at 10 multiplexes during the 'twilight' hours of 4-6 p.m., every day, starting this afternoon. That's a significant savings from the usual matinee pricing of about $7.50 at most area theaters, and a big cut from the $9.25 to $9.50 full-price ticket.
The move comes a month after the AMC Theatres chain launched an 'A.M. Cinema' program at 300 theater complexes nationwide, including its Colorado cinemas. AMC's discounts cut the price of a movie beginning before noon on Friday, Saturday, Sunday and holidays to $5 at Denver-area locations.
The AMC program began nationwide July 14, after a four-
month test in Denver; Kansas City; Columbus, Ohio; and Charlotte, N.C. The test produced 'great feedback' and pushed up attendance, though AMC did not release specific numbers, according to company spokeswoman Melanie Bell.
The twilight price cuts should appeal to an even wider audience, said Tom Bieleseldt of Colorado Cinemas.
'We've identified a segment that's not going to the movies as frequently as we'd like, and we'd like to reach out to that audience,' Bieleseldt said. 'Five dollars is a pricing point that resonates with people.'
The 4-6 p.m. time slot should appeal to teenagers who want to do more than one thing on their nights out, seniors who want to start early, and couples with kids at home who want an early movie before going out to dinner, he said.
Theater chains are responding to ominous trends among younger moviegoers. While box office revenues have been solid this summer, teenagers and young adults are increasingly comfortable watching movies at home on DVD or pay-per-
view, and many want to download movies for personal use as soon as they appear in theaters.
A recent extensive Los Angeles Times poll of entertainment choices said 44 percent of people aged 21 to 24 are seeing fewer films in theaters each year. In the same age group, 56 percent said they would rather watch a movie at home if it were available the same day it opened in the theater. 

That's a wrap.
'Resurrecting the Champ' finished shooting Monday with a bang, a big Denver scene featuring Josh Hartnett and Hall of Famer John Elway on the patio of Elway's restaurant.
The film, based on a magazine story by Denver-based L.A. Times correspondent J.R. Moehringer, was shot in 36 days, all but two of them in Calgary, Canada. Since it's set in Denver, however, director Rod Lurie and his crew were here to get some exterior shots (Denver Coliseum, Coors Field, etc.).
Hartnett plays a 'Denver Times' sportswriter, based loosely on Moehringer. The actor, famous for his roles in 'Black Hawk Down' and 'Pearl Harbor,' began Monday's shooting at Dove Valley, where the Broncos just opened camp. After ad-libbing an interview with Jake Plummer, he dashed off to Elway's for a lunch scene with that other Broncos QB, a scene that also starred Hartnett's on-camera son, played smartly by Dakota Goyo.
The setup: Hartnett and his son are finishing up lunch when the boy spots Elway. The boy runs up to Elway, thinking he's pals with his dad. The gridiron icon is warm and welcoming, though it's clear he has no idea who Hartnett's character is. 'You play football?' Elway asks the boy.
'Yeah,' the kid says. 'But my hands aren't big enough to hold a real football.'
'Lemme see,' Elway says. 'Your hands are twice the size mine were at your age.'
Lurie said he has long admired Elway - and before long No.7 was earning the director's admiration as an actor too. After one take, someone yelled out: 'An athlete who remembers all his lines? Incredible!'
Having starred in countless commercials, and a cameo on the TV show 'Las Vegas,' Elway said he wasn't nervous about his first time on the big screen. 'If you mess up, you get to do it over again.'
Not like football.
Lurie, who co-wrote the script, has high hopes for the movie, which is slated for release next year. 'The performances are amazing,' he says of Hartnett, Samuel L. Jackson and the rest of a cast, which includes Teri Hatcher, Alan Alda and Kathryn Morris.
Hartnett spent most of his time in our town lying low at the JW Marriott. 'Champ' has been an exhausting slog for the rising star. Six days of shooting a week, six straight weeks.
Although Hartnett was exhausted, Venessa Harris and Lindsay Spencer were thrilled. The two servers at Elway's got to be extras Monday. Both were paid scale, but afterward both looked as if they would have gladly paid for the privilege.

</text>
