<text id="B01" category="" words="1993" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="CANCER IN ASHLAND.' The Boston Globe, 30 April 2006, E3; 'BECOMING LEGAL.' The Boston Globe, 29 March 2006, A10; 'THE WAGES OF POVERTY.' The Boston Globe, 27 March 2006, A10; 'PRISON ABUSE CONTINUES.' The Boston Globe,  7 March 2006, A14; 'HOPING FOR HOPE" Author="N/A" PublicationDate="30 April 2006; 29 March 2006; 27 March 2006; 7 March 2006; 1 February 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

THE HISTORY of industrial pollution of the nation's land, air, and water is by now so well known that the only surprising aspect of the report last week about the cancer cluster in Ashland is that the worst of the poisonous discharges happened so recently. The late 19th and early 20th centuries were notorious for manufacturers with a public-be-damned attitude, but the Nyanza chemical and dye facility began operations there in 1965. It was freely dumping arsenic, heavy metals, and carcinogenic solvents into waste lagoons while US astronauts were walking on the moon in 1969.
That landing on the moon was followed by a long overdue attention to the fouling of this planet. Congress passed the Clean Water Act in 1972 and the Superfund law, for cleanup of such sites, in 1980. A report like the one the state Department of Public Health released this week on the Ashland pollution and its apparent link to cancers in that town should give new impetus to efforts in Congress to strengthen the financial underpinnings of the Superfund law.
Establishing a causal connection between toxic discharges and specific cases of cancer is always difficult. The evidence in the DPH report is strongest in regard to the five soft-tissue sarcomas diagnosed over a two-year period in Ashland residents younger than 35. All five persons, two of whom died of the disease, were known to have played in the contaminated water that eventually made Ashland one of the 10 most polluted Superfund sites.
According to epidemiologists, the average occurrence of such cancers in the United States would be two cases per year in a population of 100,000. Since Ashland in 1970 had a population of just 8,882, it should have seen far fewer than even one case in a year. The concentration of soft-tissue sarcomas in the town could have been a fluke, but there is now a serious study saying it was not.
Though there is work still to be done in cleaning up an underground plume of Ashland pollution, the project is proceeding apace. That is sadly not the case with many other Superfund sites because Congress has refused to renew the provision in the 1980 law that taxed companies in the high-polluting chemical and petroleum industries to pay for the cleanup of sites where the original polluter has gone out of business or cannot be identified.
Without such a fund, the US Environmental Protection Agency has had to seek annual appropriations for the cleanup of such "orphan" operations, and Congress has refused to give the agency the money needed to do the work expeditiously. Ashland is a grim reminder of what is at stake when Congress puts the interests of its campaign donors in industry ahead of the public interest.


CONGRESS HAS TAKEN a bold step to update the nation's immigration laws and enhance security. By advancing sensible legislation on Monday, the Senate Judiciary Committee also rebuked the House, whose bill called for merciless and unwise security crackdowns.
Immigration is a kind of Cinderella story. The economy hums with little mention of the girl doing its grueling work. Now the country is looking at that girl. She's the millions of undocumented immigrants who cook, clean, pick fruit, and work construction. They live outside the law but pay taxes. The economy would buckle if they were all deported. Still, their request for legal relief is often met with outrage: People who violate immigration law must not be rewarded.
But the other outrage is that the United States is using these workers, relying on their labor and on the taxes they pay, while leaving them in the legal shadows.
"The immigration system doesn't work for anyone," Senator Edward Kennedy said this week in a statement. "There is virtually no legal way for a foreign worker to enter the country and take a full-time, year-round job." This guarantees an illegal flow of workers.
A bill filed by Kennedy and Arizona's Republican Senator John McCain was the spine for the comprehensive legislation adopted by the Judiciary Committee. It would increase border security, create a temporary guest worker program, and offer a chance to become a legal resident.
The bill wisely does not include language that would make it a criminal offense, rather than a civil one, to live here illegally. And it would not punish anyone for giving humanitarian aid to illegal immigrants freeing Catholic Charities, among others, from the specter of being prosecuted.
The public should reject the hype. Inflammatory rhetoric about immigrants coming here to steal jobs, sell drugs, and plant bombs is false and obscures real problems. The American workforce is at risk, thanks to a widespread lack of education and skills. And national security isn't strong enough. But building big fences along the border won't fill the big holes in national intelligence. Homeland defense can't just be tougher. It also has to be smarter.
The Judiciary Committee bill can work. It would give illegal immigrants a way to work legally and to make amends by paying fines. It would protect the economy. And it would enhance national safety by increasing the ranks of law enforcement and by expediting deportations. Rational, safe change has been championed by people in rallies across the country, including one in Boston on Monday night. The full Senate and the House should heed these cries for fairness.


MASSACHUSETTS is an expensive state; housing, transportation, fuel, and healthcare all drive up the cost of living. Luckily, Massachusetts is also a wealthy state; the second wealthiest in the nation, with a median income of more than $52,000, or about $25 an hour.
Unless you happen to be making the $6.75 minimum wage in Massachusetts, in which case you are not so lucky.
The idea that a person can be working full time and still be living under the poverty line a reality for millions of Americans is a national shame. But for workers in wealthy Massachusetts to be earning sub-poverty wages is a sin. Today's minimum wage, which has not been adjusted since 2001, leaves a full-time worker $2,560 below the $16,600 annual poverty line for a family of three.
A bill to raise the minimum wage by $1.50 an hour over two years has been stalled in the Legislature, where discredited old arguments about negative effects on job growth are heard. Earlier this month a House committee watered down the proposal so that the wage would rise by just $1 and, importantly, not be indexed to inflation. Obviously, purchasing power is eroded by inflation. If the minimum wage set in 1968 had been properly indexed it would be $9.23 by now, well above the $8.25 in the original bill.
James Marzilli, the Arlington Democrat who sponsored the original House bill, is right to call the new version "entirely inadequate." If the committee bill is enacted without indexing, the value of the new wage will already be below the current level by the time it is implemented in 2007. It is hard to see the point of going through this exercise only to have workers fall behind again. Other economic measures society considers important Social Security payments, most tax brackets, even the poverty line are automatically indexed; why should low-wage workers have to beg for increases every few years?
There is no evidence that the last four increases in the minimum wage led to large job losses. Unemployment has gone up recently in Massachusetts, but the economic sectors most affected by the minimum wage hospitality, leisure, and health services are growing, and few economists project a reversal due to wage increases.
Contrary to the claims of opponents, the minimum wage is not confined to teenagers with after-school jobs. According to the Massachusetts Budget and Policy Center, a nonpartisan think tank, 154,000 people in the state are earning less than the proposed $8.25 right now. Another 329,000 would also benefit from an increase because of ripple effects. Many of them are the sole breadwinners in their families, and 59 percent are women.
The poor are forever being lectured about the dignity of work as an alternative to welfare. A state as rich as Massachusetts ought to be able to make work pay.


US MILITARY officials have long been concerned that mistreatment of prisoners at Guantanamo or at US-run prisons in Iraq and Afghanistan could boomerang against this country when US soldiers are taken prisoner in future conflicts.
But the primary reason for the United States and its Iraqi allies to ban prisoner torture and detain only those who are provably guilty of terrorist activities will always be that the failure to do so is morally wrong; it will also hurt the United States and the new Iraqi regime in world opinion and in quelling sectarianism within Iraq.
Yesterday, Amnesty International reported that prisoner abuse continues at facilities in Iraq maintained both by US forces and the Iraqi government. Last year and this year, the human rights organization interviewed released prisoners, the relatives of current prisoners, and lawyers involved in prisoner cases. It found that electric shock and beatings with plastic cables are being used in interrogations and that thousands of inmates are being held without charge or trial.
US authorities denied the allegations and said all their detainees are given a document explaining the reasons they are being held. An official of the Iraqi Interior Ministry also rejected the allegations, but Iraq's acting minister for human rights, Nermeen Othman, told the BBC that there have been cases of torture and that the government is trying to stop it. Last November, the Iraqi government admitted that 170 detainees at one Interior jail showed signs of torture and malnutrition.
On Friday, US officials complied with a Freedom of Information Act request from the Associated Press and released 5,000 documents from Guantanamo hearings. Some detainees defiantly supported extremism, but many swore they were innocent rounded up by persons seeking US bounties. US officials say most of the 490 still there present a real threat if released, but just 10 have been charged with criminal offenses.
In one transcript provided to the AP, US officials accused an Afghan of being the Taliban governor of a province or of working for the governor. He denied it, saying he was a victim of mistaken identity, and told the presiding colonel to contact the governor to confirm his account. No, the colonel said, that's the Afghan's responsibility a demand both unrealistic and outrageous, trampling America's treasured presumption of innocence. If this exchange is typical of how US officials decide whether to continue holding prisoners, it is not surprising that a United Nations commission condemned conditions there last month. At Guantanamo and in Iraq, the United States undermines its claim to the moral high ground when it does not hold itself and the new Iraq government to the highest human rights standards.


But exporting democracy has proved difficult in Iraq, and the risks became all too obvious with the Hamas landslide in Palestinian elections.
Bush also focused on healthcare, recommending expanded use of health savings accounts, high-deductible plans that would allow individuals to save for medical costs in tax-free accounts. But the idea has proved no more palatable than the partial privatization of Social Security that Bush rode to its death last year. Even if more people signed up, it would do little to expand coverage. Bush claimed last night that government is "meeting [its] responsibility" to help provide health care to the poor and the elderly, forgetting the uncovered working poor, whose numbers have increased steadily during his tenure.
"The American economy is preeminent" in the world, he said, ignoring the huge budget and trade deficits that make the nation increasingly beholden to China and other foreign powers.
"Our educated, hard-working, ambitious people" give the United States its greatest global advantage, Bush said last night, but in fact he is squeezing college loans and has underfunded the No Child Left Behind law so deeply that governors of both parties are protesting.

</text>
