<text id="B03" category="" words="1999" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Educators slow to wise up to the gender problem.' USA Today, 13 October 2006, p. A11; 'Smile, you're on ... the Web.' USA Today, 11 October 2006, p. A10; 'So much to do, so little time ... so Congress skips town.' USA Today, 7 August 2006, p. A10; 'As Cas" Author="N/A" PublicationDate="13 October 2006; 11 October 2006; 7 August 2006; 3 August 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

Last month, Melissa Roderick, a University of Chicago professor and leading authority on school reform, arrived at a startling conclusion: The traditional measurements of the nation's progress in improving education, which use race and income as markers, are flawed. 
Why? Because boys and girls coming from the same race, families, incomes, neighborhoods and schools are turning out very differently. The girls are doing better. 
Nearly half of all boys graduate from Chicago Public Schools with less than a 2.0 average, compared with a fourth of the girls. Only 8% of the system's African-American boys have a 3.0 average -- a key indicator of the ability to complete college -- compared with 18% of the girls. 
The numbers are jarring, which explains Roderick's revelation that Chicago schools won't improve without strategies that focus on boys' achievement -- the same kinds of strategies used so successfully to boost math and science skills among girls. 
Roderick is on to something important. Some researchers contend the educational gender gap is strictly a function of race and class. Those are undoubtedly factors, particularly for boys from poor, single-parent families growing up without father figures. But anyone thinking gender issues affect only minorities or the poor needs to go 15 miles from downtown Chicago to the Wilmette public schools, one of the nation's wealthiest and most successful districts. 
There, educators discovered that targeting boys -- who were badly trailing the girls in achievement -- was the smartest strategy for boosting overall student performance. This school year, Wilmette boosted its hiring of male teachers and trained teachers in classroom strategies that benefit boys. 
Other educators are beginning to wake up to the gender problem. What's needed is a national task force, put together by Education Secretary Margaret Spellings, that would consider doing for boys what was done for girls a decade ago. 
In addition to being a matter of fairness, a shift to boy- oriented policies has the potential to produce other gains: 
*Raise parents' and teachers' awareness. Parents with struggling boys often are told not to worry because boys are slow to pick up reading skills and math is their strong point. That conventional wisdom is outdated. Many boys don't catch up in reading, and they don't always do better in math. 
This month, a Massachusetts education think tank, the Rennie Center, reported that 41% of girls in the state are proficient or better in reading, compared with 29% of boys. Paul Reville, who runs the center, said the biggest surprise was finding that girls outperform boys in math as well. That shouldn't be a surprise: Reading is a key link to understanding math and science. 
*Boost college graduations. Lagging literacy skills result in many boys ending up unprepared for college, which in turn explains declining percentages of men on campus. Currently, 133 women graduate from college for every 100 men. 
If boys can't make it through high school, they certainly can't make it through college. For better or worse, in today's information- based economy, college has become the new high school. 
What's striking about the gender gaps is that most school districts do little or nothing about them. In his survey of Massachusetts schools, Reville kept expecting to find a school carrying out reforms that target boys, as Wilmette did. He never found one. 
Reville, like Roderick, is an education outsider. Until the insiders -- teachers, principals and superintendents -- recognize the problem, too many boys will continue to flounder. 


Agog. No doubt about it, the $1.65 billion Google is paying for YouTube is serious money. YouTube is not yet 2 years old, isn't profitable and employs just 67 people. If Wal-Mart were worth as much per employee as Google is paying for YouTube, its stock would be valued at $37 trillion, which comes to about three times America's gross domestic product. 
Wretched excess? Perhaps. Dot-com-insanity 2.0? Maybe. But it's hard to look at Google's purchase and not see something more than a company with too much money to spend. 
Like iPods and TiVo before it, YouTube is rapidly destroying the paradigm television has followed since the 1940s, in which programming is presented for viewing at a scheduled time. It is also turning starving artists into video moguls and making video on the Web a hassle-free experience. Yes, there are good reasons why Google would go gaga for it. 
For the uninitiated, YouTube is a site where people post material, ranging from their own campy videos of cats pawing a spinning turntable to copied segments of major network television shows. It is such a phenomenally successful platform (by one measure, it's the world's 10th most popular website) that some television content companies are treating it as unstoppable. Companies ranging from CBS to Sony, many of the same outfits that fought music file sharing sites such as Grokster, are signing licensing deals with YouTube to allow their material to be posted for a cut of the advertising proceeds. 
All this puts YouTube at the center of a rapidly changing, and potentially very profitable, universe. YouTube offerings will be integrated into Google searches, and the technology could help Google offer its advertisers ways to go beyond simple text ads. 
The purchase might yet prove to be a mistake. If significant numbers of movie and television companies refuse to enter into licensing deals, the company could be a nightmare of copyright issues. 
Regardless, the deal seems bound to accelerate innovation, turning viewers into producers, freeing them from the tyranny of the TV schedule and expanding their horizons into far corners of the world. 
Gotcha. What do you get when you marry the up-to-the-minute technology of YouTube with the ancient art of politics? Either an unfiltered view of candidates that will be a boon to voters, or anonymously posted video clips that will open the way for some of the nastiest campaign tricks in years. Or, perhaps, a little of both. 
This year, several campaigns have sent staffers to follow opponents on public outings, capture them on videotape and post embarrassing moments on YouTube. There's nothing new about tailing an opponent or seizing on a gaffe, but this campaign season is the first when technology has provided a way to upload "gotcha" moments onto the Internet and launch them worldwide for free. 
The most infamous posting of the summer is of Sen. George Allen, R-Va., who was caught calling the Democratic staffer tailing him, a young man of Indian descent, "macaca." That's considered an ethnic slur in some cultures. The clip spread like wildfire on YouTube, landed on national front pages and network TV and put a dent in Allen's once wide lead over Democratic rival Jim Webb. 
In Montana, where Democratic state Sen. Jon Tester is battling to win the U.S. seat held by Republican Sen. Conrad Burns, a camera- wielding Tester aide caught Burns briefly closing his eyes during a hearing in Great Falls last August. The Tester campaign added music, titled it "Conrad Burns' Naptime" and threw it up on YouTube. 
Allen's wound was self-inflicted, but the minute-long clip of Burns smacks of a cheap shot: It shows him struggling to keep his eyes open, not sleeping through the hearing. Who hasn't had that experience? 
Analysts and voters have argued for decades over what's fair criticism of a rival and what's twisting the truth. If YouTube allows voters to catch unvarnished glimpses of candidates, rather than just what they choose to show the media, it will add some refreshing reality to campaigns. Or it could degenerate into yet another form of dirty negative ads. 
This much is sure: YouTube is making the already tough business of campaigning for office even more of a tightrope walk -- carefully staged to avoid a televised pratfall. 

As Congress settles into its month-long August break, it's hard to shake the feeling that the House and Senate haven't earned their time off. 
Instead of tending to basics and working out differences on divisive but vital issues such as immigration, members have spent much of the past several months in political posturing and time- wasting debates over non-essential issues. 
One thing Congress must do each year is pass the annual spending bills that fund everything from the space program to border security. So far, the Senate has produced just one of the 11 appropriations bills. 
Instead, Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist, R-Tenn., has found it more important to fritter away scarce time on an obsessive quest to repeal the estate tax and on blatant pandering to social conservatives with proposed constitutional amendments on flag- burning and gay marriage. Even those who think those issues are crucial would have an easier time defending debate time for them if the Senate had done its mandatory work first. 
It's not as if Congress can't act quickly if it wants to. To stop election-year talk that Republicans planned to let the Voting Rights Act expire, the House and Senate moved at lightning speed to renew key provisions of it a year early. Other achievements include a pension reform bill, a mining safety law, changes to the Patriot Act, emergency funding for wars and hurricanes, and an expansion of embryonic stem cell research that President Bush shamefully vetoed. 
But that's just a fraction of what a productive Congress should achieve. 
When lawmakers return from their recess next month, they will have only about 15 working days before they're scheduled to go home again Oct. 6 to campaign for re-election. Voters who want to judge whether their members of Congress have done their jobs should monitor their progress on issues such as these: 
*Immigration. A bipartisan majority backs tightening border security and dealing humanely with the nearly 12 million immigrants here illegally. Yet House Republicans are blocking any compromise with the Senate. 
*Lobbying rules. It's inexcusable that in one of the worst years in memory for congressional corruption and money-related scandals, Congress still hasn't tightened rules governing the incestuous relationships between lobbyists and lawmakers. 
*Iraq. The mission of many of the 133,000 U.S. troops in Iraq is shifting from fighting insurgents to trying to avert all-out civil war. Sen. John Warner, R-Va., says that might even require a new congressional resolution to replace the one that authorized the 2003 invasion. Yet Congress left Washington trading hoary sound bites rather than engaging in the serious debate warranted by the new situation on the ground. 
*Trying detainees in the war on terror. The Supreme Court slapped down the Bush administration's plans to try detainees before special military commissions; it's up to Congress to construct a process consistent with the Constitution and U.S. values. 
*Minimum wage. GOP leaders finally offered to back a long overdue minimum wage increase, but only if Democrats agreed to link it to estate tax relief for a handful of the nation's richest families. Fortunately, this cynical coupling failed in the Senate at the end of last week. When Congress returns, it should give America's poorest workers a raise and forget about giving its wealthiest heirs a fat tax break. 
*Spending bills. Other Congresses have completed them all on time, before the Oct. 1 start of the new fiscal year. It takes discipline. Will this Congress measure up? Will it do anything to rein in the $300 billion federal deficit, or will it continue irresponsible spending increases and tax cuts? 
Republicans shoulder most of the blame for this do-little record, since they're in charge. But Democrats have too often shown they'd rather criticize than compromise, particularly when it comes to shoring up Social Security and Medicare for the long term. 
President Bush is taking only a 10-day vacation this August. With a "to do" list this long, it's hard to see why members of Congress need a month.
Now that Fidel, 79, has ceded power, why not use the moment to move toward lifting the trade and travel embargo? The impact would be big and immediate. It would remove the policy that has let Castro blame the problems of his decrepit system on the United States.

</text>
