<text id="B05" category="" words="1989" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="A word for civility Young America heard from.' The Arkansas Democrat Gazette, 29 September 2006, 16; 'Immigration, good Even the pointy-heads agree.'  The Arkansas Democrat Gazette, 16 August 2006, 16; 'Creating Amerimexida.' The Arkansas Democrat Gazette" Author="N/A; N/A; Mike Masterson" PublicationDate="29 September 2006; 16 August 2006; 20 July 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All" WebAddress="Factiva">

GENTLE READER and Regular Correspondent asks the question: What's the toughest part of the job? Well, tough is a relative term. Striking a keyboard for a living ain't digging ditches. Or anything else that involves real work.
But our reader deserves a straight answer to a straight question. And the answer came to us the other day during the debate between Bill (Clinton) Halter and (Joltin') Jim Holt, this year's candidates for lieutenant governor. The toughest part of the job? Not giving in to cynicism.
It's no easy trick. Especially when you're sitting through an hour-long political debate on a gorgeous night when you could be out walking the dog or at least watching Matt Jones play for the Jaguars on TV. Or washing your hair. Or clipping your toenails. Cynicism had already taken a big lead in this Monday night game.
But a funny thing happened on the way to Curmudgeon Land: Skip Rutherford, dean of the Clinton School and host of the evening's festivities, introduced us to some of the students on hand. And there were plenty. The place looked like a Student Union, with the grizzled press playing the part of the underappreciated-and-wanting-folks-to-know-it faculty. Dean Skip had eager minds/young voters from all over the state taking notes and paying careful attention. The only ones acting up were members of the media.
After the debate, we struck up a conversation with a young man from Lyon College in Batesville. He said he really enjoyed hearing the two candidates-and he seemed totally sincere. Honest. He was the very portrait of the public servant as a young man.
He described himself as conservative "for the most part," but not committed to either the Republican (Mr. Holt) or the Democrat (Mr. Halter) in the race for the state's No. 2 job. The young man said he especially appreciated how civil the debate had seemed. He liked that. He said he's tired of all the political screaming and heated rhetoric. And he's just a junior in college! Boy, wait till he has a few decades of campaign-watching under his expanding belt. He'll know what tired-of-dumb-rhetoric really is.
But we were encouraged.
Think about it: Here's a member of Generation Y. Or is it Z? Anyway, a kid who grew up in the era of shout radio and blogs and rapid/ rabid response teams and what's he excited about? A little civility.
Does the heart good.
In the end, the student from Lyon said he learned something, and he had plenty to think about-on issues ranging from taxes to illegal immigration. And he couldn't wait to hear more. And he wanted to attend a governor's debate, too. And . . . . Talking to the young man, listening to him, we started to feel more than a little guilty and a tad melancholy. Guilty for not sharing his enthusiasm and melancholy for not sharing his youth. Oh, how we'd love to waste it again!
Yep, something had rubbed off. And it was a good something. As we look back on that first debate of the fall campaign season, we don't much think about Jim Holt's reason-free answers or Bill Halter's risk-free ones. We think about that student from Lyon. And we're not so worried about the future.


ANOTHER DAY, another study, another confirmation of the obvious. Who knew economics, academics and all kinds of other -ics could be so predictable? But when it comes to the effect of immigration in this nation of immigrants, the answer almost always seems to be the same: Immigration, good.
Or to quote the headline in a story in last Friday's paper: Study: U.S. workers not hurt by alien influx.
The story reported on a study by the nonpartisan Pew Hispanic Center, which found that the 32 million immigrants-legal, illegal and some gray area in-between-who have flocked to America since 1990 have not-repeat NOT-hurt employment prospects for folks who were already here. Not even the folks without much education. To quote the study: There is "no apparent relationship between the growth of foreign workers with less education and the employment outcome of native workers with the same low level of education." Oh, sure, there's the occasional crank with a political agenda who says it ain't so. Like this guy Steven Camarota at the Center for Immigration Studies whose name popped up in the same story. He openly advocates for stricter immigration laws, so he's got his own agenda. But, mostly, this latest study adds to a growing consensus among economists and other pointy-headed types. Which is that, more than just not hurting U.S. workers, immigrants help the U.S. economy.
We keep an editorial from the Wall Street Journal of June 20th taped to the wall near our computer, and refer to it when yet another round of irate e-mails comes our way-usually in response to an editorial of our own about Hispanics in Arkansas. The irate seem frustrated that we just don't understand that them Messicans are taking jobs from real Amurhicans. And ain't nothin' good gonna come from this Hispanic Tide.
So to pre-empt another round from Irate &amp; Co., and save ourselves some labor at the keyboard, we reprint this from the Journal: Immigration Consensus Finally a consensus has been reached on immigration. No, not among politicians, who can't agree on a rational immigration reform. The agreement is among professional economists.
In an open letter to President Bush and Congress last week, more than 500 prominent economists, including five Nobel laureates, proclaim that "immigration has been a net gain for American citizens." The letter adds that "while a small percentage of native-born Americans may be harmed by immigration, vastly more Americans benefit from the contributions that immigrants make to the economy, including lower consumer prices. As with trade in goods and services, gains from immigration outweigh the losses." Alan Greenspan often made this same point about the benefits of immigration while he was Federal Reserve Chairman.
What is striking about this immigration letter is that it is signed by economists from different fields of research, political affiliations and ideologies. It is possible that no other issue in the economic field, with the exception of the benefits of free trade, inspires such unanimity of professional opinion as immigration does.
Well said, fellow inky wretches. Even for a bunch of yankees in New Yawk City. If this across-the-board agreement among economists and researchers continues on the subject of immigration, maybe even politicians will agree on a rational immigration reform.
Nah. Politicians agree on something rational? Why, that'd be un-Amurhican. It's so much easier to be Irate.


If Tulsa's talk radio KFAQ represents the basic views of Oklahoma's conservative citizens, there is growing concern there with the proposed Super Corridor highway that within 50 years would facilitate competitive international trade beginning at the Mexican border in Laredo, Texas, and northward to Canada, splitting both Oklahoma and our nation in half.
I was returning to Fayetteville from Tulsa while listening to radio hosts and callers express their feelings about this grand "alien autobahn" plan to connect Mexico with Canada smack-dab through America's heartland. Maybe I've been awake but simply lacking awareness of this mega-project spearheaded by North America's SuperCorridor Coalition Inc., or NASCO. Somehow I just hadn't heard until now about the International Mid-Continent Trade and Transportation Corridor. How about you?
It seems the world's first eight-lane Super Corridor, complete with rail and utility lines, will divide the eastern and western U.S. much like an endlessly flowing river of multiethnic humanity, exhaust and concrete.
The radio hosts said this transportation corridor, which some are calling the "NAFTA superhighway," will range in width from four football fields to 12 miles in places, using the established pathways of existing highways. It will begin in the deep water ports of Southern Mexico, which accept freight from many nations, northward to beyond Winnipeg, Canada, incorporating existing Interstates 35, 24 and 94. Special "smart ports" for freight will be constructed at major cities such as San Antonio, Dallas and Kansas City.
These radio voices, naturally, were most concerned with what will happen when the Texas portion of this expansive, multimodal corridor (called TTC-35) now being planned by the Texas Department of Transportation along the existing I-35, meets Oklahoma's southern border. I-35 now splits Oklahoma from north to South through Oklahoma City.
The radio discussion varied on topics such as exposing our internal organs to the world in a time of terrorism and who will have jurisdiction over this supposedly secure international corridor. The answer is that a trilateral commission composed of members from Mexico, the U.S. and Canada will jointly rule all that transpires within this international strip. That alone was enough to give these radio voices a semi trailer-load of concerns.
Other worries are that many Americans will inevitably lose their homes and farms as this globalized vision of uniting three sovereign nations along existing (and enormously aggrandized) interstates, as well as "significant east-west connectors"-here read I-40-unfolds. If the project proceeds as planned, that is. One researcher has written that in Texas alone, the Super Corridor will remove nearly 600,000 acres of farm and ranch land from the tax rolls while displacing upward of a million people from their homes.
But the most vociferous angst on the program was devoted to our own national sovereignty in this time of terrorism and how it appears to be eroding before our very eyes, especially at the porous border with Mexico. Many Oklahomans seem highly skeptical of the motives behind the proposed Super Corridor. They believe the American people haven't been informed about this proposal and therefore have not had anything resembling an adequate voice in understanding or approving the concept.
Instead, they say, the efforts toward seeing this become a reality to "improve the quality of life and trade" in North America have been between the Dallasbased, non-profit NASCO and government bureaucrats at the federal, regional and state levels.
These folks said they want to see the plan nipped by Oklahoma lawmakers and officials until all of its citizens (and every other potentially affected American) are made aware of the agendas, goals and methods behind opening this supposedly secure international thoroughfare. They were pleading with other Oklahoma citizens to demand answers from state and federal lawmakers about this Godzilla of a public works project. Who can fault them? Look at Boston's "Big Dig." Providing the people with reliable information about a project like this, whether you consider yourself conservative or liberal, seems a reasonable enough request to me. But in light of the skeptical climate in America, where every group and government seems to have its hidden agenda and lobbyists to further it, these radio folks were rightly concerned about knowing where the full truth might lie, especially when it comes to other nations with their own patriotic and financial allegiances.
We all realize that in today's society, the love of money dictates and controls everything from pulpits to politicians, don't we, valued readers?
The talk show hosts said it can be difficult to sift through the PR flap being offered by those, such as NASCO, who wholeheartedly support the idea. However, facts can be discovered, even on the government's own Web sites, that the hosts said are often contradictory. One example lies in comparing the announced TTC-35 highway plans under way to streamline traffic across Texas with what others who have a direct stake in the project are telling the public about plans for the entire corridor. An overview of these contradictions and concerns can be read at humaneventsonline.com.
Information about this corridor can be most difficult to obtain. One visitor on the program said she tried FOIing materials from the government and was told the information totaled over 4,000 pages.
I have no problem understanding why our neighbors in Oklahoma, already aroused by the illegal immigration issue, are a bit edgy nowadays over having the world's first international highway through their living room.

</text>
