<text id="B10" category="" words="1997" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'When Gas Rises, Approval Tanks: The link between pumps and polls may be even stronger than you think.' Businessweek, 15 May 2006; 'Skip Your Veggies? Not So Fast: A new study questions low-fat diets. The real story is more complicated.' Businessweek, 20 " Author="N/A" PublicationDate="15 May 2006; 20 February 2006; 20 March 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; End" WebAddress="http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/06_20/b3984063.htm; http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/06_08/b3972070.htm; http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/06_12/b3976057.htm">

George W. Bush is the latest President to learn a painful political lesson: Americans get very unhappy when gasoline prices spike, and they take it out on the guy in the White House.
Throughout the Bush Presidency, the pattern has been striking. Whatever else is happening, from temporary triumphs in Iraq to Administration scandals, when prices at the pump jump for more than a month, the President's popularity almost always falls. Indeed, throughout the Bush Presidency, changes in the Energy Dept.'s monthly pump price survey closely parallel the President's disapproval rating, as measured by the Gallup Poll.

As it turns out, a BusinessWeek analysis of historical data finds that this problem has bedeviled Presidents at least since 1973, when the Arab oil embargo created gas lines, a price spiral toward 55 cents per gallon, and an additional headache for President Richard Nixon. Of course, price spikes aren't the sole cause of falling Presidential popularity. The relationship is a correlation, and other factors contribute to public perceptions of a President.

Nixon had to deal with not just gas prices but Watergate. Jimmy Carter faced the Iran hostage crisis and economic stagflation. George H.W. Bush was hurt by a sluggish economy and a backlash against a tax increase. And Bill Clinton was slowed by scandal fatigue. But through it all, the striking relationship between rising gas prices and plunging Presidential popularity stands out.

One other bit of bad news for the current President: History suggests that while rising gas prices are very bad for incumbents, falling gas prices don't necessarily help Presidents improve their job approval ratings.



Here comes another wild ride on the roller coaster of health advice. For years we have been told that eating less fat and munching on more fruits and veggies can work magic, preventing everything from heart disease to cancer. Now a study of 48,835 women, part of the Women's Health Initiative, says that such "healthier" diets bring no benefits.
The study was published by the respected Journal of the American Medical Assn.(JAMA). But before you rush out for fast food, ask a few simple questions. What did the study actually examine? Do its data support such a sweeping conclusion? We often overreact to studies that are more limited and uncertain than we realize. One startling fact: Fully one-third of all dramatic new findings simply don't hold up in later studies. Remember hormone replacement therapy? Once presumed to cut heart disease risk, it was later found to be dangerous -- and now doctors are questioning those supposed risks.

Among other things, the new diet report shows how research dollars can be won for questionable studies. In the early 1990s, when the study was proposed, prominent researchers such as Harvard's Dr. Walter Willett argued that it wasn't worth doing. Reviewers at the National Institutes of Health turned it down for funding. But Dr. Bernadine Healy, appointed as NIH director in 1991, lobbied relentlessly for support for the suite of studies that make up the Women's Health Initiative. "It was an end-run through Congress that got it approved," Willett recalls.

Based on its design, the trial had little chance of making major advances in the science of nutrition. It set out to compare women eating normal diets with women asked to eat less fat and more fruits and vegetables. But the two groups' diets really didn't differ all that much. Those with "healthier" diets cut calories from fat by only 8.2% compared with the normal group and ate only 1.1 additional servings of fruits and vegetables a day. That's too small a difference to expect health benefits.

What's more, scientists now know that the type of fat we eat is generally more important than the amount. Monounsaturated fats, such as those in olive oil, or omega-3 fats found in fish are healthier than saturated fat, as in butter or beef. Worst of all are so-called trans fats, which are created by adding hydrogen to natural fat. Trans fats are widely used in everything from margarine to cookies, and have been linked with increased risks of heart disease. By focusing just on total fat intake, the study missed a chance to tease out the effects of these different types of fat. "It's really important not to go away with the message that diets don't matter," says Willett.

There are larger lessons as well about how science works. The detailed methods of a study are crucial, and their limitations are often glossed over. When Dr. Steven Woloshin of Dartmouth Medical School looked at press releases trumpeting various scientific articles, "we found that 77% failed to mention the study's limitations," he says. And up to half of all articles exaggerated the actual benefit or risk being studied.

One common distortion is to present the effects of a treatment or intervention in relative terms, such as saying that a particular diet or drug cut the death rate in half. That sounds huge, but it might mean that there was only one death per million people instead of two, which is a reduction in actual risk that's too small to matter. All this helps explain why science so often seems to be flip-flopping. And there's no mystery about why results are often exaggerated: Researchers, medical centers, and scientific journals are all competing for funds and publicity, just like everyone else.

The truth is, science is often less definitive than people think. Even when a study does find a clear benefit or danger, the results may not be applicable to the real world, where people have more complicated health issues and medicine isn't so black and white. There's a long list of treatments and medical interventions, from bypass operations to back surgery, where the benefits may not be as great as once thought. What does this mean for diet? "We don't want to be morbidly obese or too skinny," says Dr. Nortin Hadler, professor of medicine at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, "and it's pretty compelling that between those two extremes, we can't measure many differences." So try to stay fit, keep your weight down, aim for a relatively healthy diet, and don't worry too much about the latest headlines in the medical journals.


"We've been setting targets and making them," says Marilyn O'Connell, Verizon senior vice-president for video services.

Verizon and other telecoms are counting on Internet and TV revenues to offset their steadily eroding income from local and long-distance calling. The new competition is putting great strain on the balance sheets of cable and telecom players, while consumers emerge as the big winners. Over the next five years they will likely see dramatic improvements in TV and Internet services and relief from ever-skyrocketing prices. Verizon is charging about $100 a month for a package of TV, Internet, and phone services in Keller, competitive with cable and satellite offerings in town.

Town residents are taking their role as video pioneers quite seriously. Like thousands of neighbors, Vernon Drewa, a retired manager for the Federal Aviation Administration, canceled his old provider, satellite service DirecTV, and signed up with Verizon. He likes the sharp quality on his five TVs -- and the lack of interruptions that plagued his satellite signal on stormy days. As a history buff who swaps research around the world, he is thrilled to download a 2,500-page document in less than 10 minutes instead of the hour it used to take with his old Verizon hookup. There's no turning back for Drewa. He recently ripped down the 12-foot satellite dish in his yard. "I took it to the lake house," he says. "I'm hoping it will work as a fish hatchery."

On a nearby street, local real estate agent Marc Clemons has become one of the most popular guys on the block. The neighborhood kids flock to Clemons' two-story house to play video games at superfast speeds on his fiber-optic-wired flat-screen TV. When he's not playing host, he and his wife watch their favorite shows and marvel at the rich picture. "All my neighbors have to do is see the clarity, and they've got to have it," says Clemons.

For all of Verizon's gains, though, it's too early to write off cable and satellite providers. Keller, 14 miles northeast of Fort Worth, won't be an easy model to replicate elsewhere in the country. Verizon chose an affluent venue with an existing cable provider that offered no phone service. Cattle still graze on a few remaining undeveloped tracts, but most of the farmland has turned into street after street of homes that average about $250,000. Attracted by a well-regarded school district and an easy commute to Dallas and Fort Worth, upwardly mobile families (93% of residents are under 60, with average household income near $100,000) are flocking to town.

It's a great place to do business, too. Highway 377, the main thoroughfare through Keller and adjacent bedroom communities, is a magnet for the usual cast of fast-food chains, banks, and retailers. When Verizon, the main phone company in Keller by virtue of the 2000 Bell Atlantic Co.-GTE Corp. merger, approached City Hall two years ago for permission to upgrade with fiber optics and later to get a TV franchise, there was little resistance. "Our initial response was, 'why not?"' recalls City Manager Lyle H. Dresher. Fiber optics could be a drawing card to attract tax-paying businesses to Keller. And if overall revenues for video services increase, the city gains from its 5% cut of whatever Verizon makes there.

PERFECT TARGET 
It's surely no coincidence that Verizon picked a town where it could cinch a franchise agreement without long delays. Because most of Keller's infrastructure is new, fiber optics could easily be installed through modern underground conduits without tearing up local streets. What's more, Verizon was able to pit its sales effort against a weaker, local cable franchise, Charter Communications (CHTR ), rather than one of the cable industry's bigger guns like Comcast (CMCSA ) or Time Warner Cable (TWX ). Charter contends competition is nothing new. In fact, the cable company appears to have preemptively lowered its fees for new service by as much as 50% before Verizon arrived. Charter denies that its promotion was related to Verizon's entry.

Still, persuading consumers to let a phone outfit provide television service is a huge challenge. Verizon decided that the usual mass-marketing effort would cost too much and be ineffective in such a tiny market. So Marketing Director Brian Angiolet devised a guerrilla campaign, staging events that included offering kids the chance to dabble with the fast Net speeds and crisp video. "We asked ourselves who would most appreciate downloading at up to 5 or 15 [megabits per second]," says Angiolet.

The huge capacity of fiber optics means Verizon can promise to keep adding bells and whistles. It already delivers about 400 channels, including more than 20 high-def outlets. And the company claims it will be able to add more local programming and foreign language packages.

The cable guys contend they can continue increasing speeds and capacity without paying for fiber-optic lines running to the home, largely because they have spent $100 billion since 1996 to upgrade their lines. They already have a big lead in broadband Internet and are taking sizable market share from the telecoms by selling customers bundles that include telephone services.

Just the same, Verizon is picking up momentum in Texas, where it has introduced fiber-optic TV in 15 other towns. The telecoms got a huge break last summer when Texas passed a law that establishes standard state-issued franchises. This makes it possible to enter new markets without negotiating franchises with each locale. Verizon will need other states to follow suit if it is to keep on its game plan.

Difficult politics and increasing costs are about to kick in as Verizon broadens its campaign -- not to mention its having to face down fierce counter-tactics by the cable giants. So Verizon executives may not want to extrapolate too much from the honeymoon in Keller.

</text>
