<text id="B11" category="" words="1993" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The lost Olympics.' San Francisco Chronicle, 28 February 2006, B6; 'Sense of urgency on state prisons.' San Francisco Chronicle, 28 February 2006, B6; 'How to make a disaster worse.' San Francisco Chronicle, 16 February 2006, B8; 'How to keep U.S. competi" Author="N/A" PublicationDate="28 February 2006; 28 February 2006; 6 February 2006; 1 February 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

THE UNITED States left the Turin Olympics with 25 medals and almost as many unhappy memories of lost opportunities.
Much of the pre-Games hype centered on erstwhile world champion skier Bode Miller, who was slow when he wasn't clumsy -- and worse yet, professed not to care much. Speed skaters Chad Hedrick and Shani Davis tarnished their medal-winning performances with their testy exchanges in public. Snowboarder Lindsey Jacobellis was zipping toward an impressive victory when she decided to add a touch of flair -- grabbing her board in mid-air -- and stumbled into second place.
Another would-be megastar of the Games, U.S. figure skater Sasha Cohen, fell twice at the start of her long program. To her credit, she persevered with a powerfully graceful finish - then accepted the silver medal with a joy and class that was too often missing from American stars in Turin.
As always, there were plenty of inspiring performances in the Olympics -- veteran speedskater Apolo Anton Ohno and "Flying Tomato" snowboarder Shaun White among them -- but no certified American idol emerged from these Games.
Did we say "American Idol?" Count NBC among the disappointed. It spent $600 million for the broadcast rights, and kept getting swamped in the ratings by a Fox show featuring amateurs without any pretension of world-class proficiency.


CALIFORNIA'S prison system is arguably the most troubled of any state endeavor.
The sudden resignation of Roderick Hickman, Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger's secretary of corrections and rehabilitation, only adds to the perceptions of a prison system in crisis.
Hickman said he is quitting because he did not get the support he needed from Schwarzenegger.
Hickman has grounds to be frustrated.
Regrettably, it seems that Schwarzenegger has backed off on his pledge to make "rehabilitation" a major goal of the prison system. He changed the name of the department to include "rehabilitation" in the title, but instead of expanding rehabilitation programs they have been scaled back.
His administration's goal to reduce the prison population by 15,000 went nowhere. Instead, the prison population has continued to rise, reaching a record 168,000 inmates.
During his first year in office, he courageously reversed former Gov. Gray Davis' policy of rejecting all but six of the recommendation from the Board of Prison Terms to release inmates serving indeterminate life terms. However, last year he began to imitate his predecessor by rejecting more and more parole board's recommendations.
Instead of working to reform California's flawed "three strikes" law, Schwarzenegger played a decisive role in defeating Proposition 66 in 2004. The initiative would have reformed the law by requiring the third strike to be a serious or violent felony. Without this reform, hundreds of inmates are unnecessarily serving life sentences because of the law -- at a huge cost to the taxpayers.
Most disturbing, the only reform initiative Schwarzenegger is pushing is to add an astonishing 83,000 prison and county jail cells -- at a cost of $200,000 per cell.
What about all that talk about reducing the prison population?
No wonder Hickman is frustrated. At the same time, he has come to symbolize the unacceptable gap between rhetoric and results that characterizes the Schwarzenegger administration's prison-reform efforts. It may be time for new leadership at the top.
Schwarzenegger and his staff continue to insist that he is committed to "rehabilitation" -- but his words and actions speak otherwise. If he is indeed committed to real reform, he should make a public statement to that effect. He should commit to reducing the prison population, to reforming the parole system, which must include effective "re-entry" programs for parolees. He must commit to amending the state's sentencing laws that continue to jam our prisons far beyond their capacity.
Schwarzenegger has had no difficulty declaring a "state of emergency" to fix the state's levee system. Perhaps he should consider a similar "state of emergency" for the prison system -- and get cracking on fixing it.


WITH THE 100TH anniversary of the San Francisco earthquake two months off, we'll likely hear that government up and down the tree is ready to handle a repeat.
If Hurricane Katrina is any guide, it's time to think again. Authorities from the local level all the way to Washington bungled the hurricane response, deepening a disaster for which there was ample warning, pinpoint plans, and a newly tooled Department of Homeland Security poised for action. The hurricane was a chance for the nation's brand-new domestic security system to shine, not founder.
It didn't turn out that way. In fact, the official negligence was a disaster itself. The inaction may have worsened the toll of 1,300 dead, hundreds of thousands left homeless and billions in damage.
A congressional report this week sums up the problem through its governmental lens: What was missing was initiative -- the ability to see a problem and take considered action.
Money, relief convoys, extra cots on dry ground: None of it matters if the likes of homeland security chief Michael Chertoff, emergency director Michael Brown and a list of feckless Louisiana politicians can't decide what to do. This muddle includes a White House that was distant and coldly uninterested during Katrina's advance and arrival.
Pounding home the point that government officialdom blew it isn't startling. But this time, look who's doing the finger-pointing. The denunciation comes in a Republican-written report. Democrats had boycotted the panel's work, thinking it would be a whitewash to safeguard the GOP in an election year.
The panel didn't play favorites, parceling out blame to nearly everyone with an assigned role. "Katrina was a national failure, an abdication of the most solemn obligation to provide for the common welfare,'' the committee report said.
Looking forward, there's a bigger message than the rearview- mirror blame-game that goes with government bungling.
California and the Bay Area remain at nature's mercy from weather, earthquakes or fire. It's time to check and recheck local plans to make sure everyone's on the same page, and emergency planners can take on the dicey game of managing disasters on the fly.
An earthquake won't come with a warning. Other California-style perils come with little advance notice. Wildfires nearing Southern California suburbs, flood waters rising in populated areas, and a levee collapsing in the Delta could happen within hours.
Emergency workers have tried to anticipate such disasters, working hard to prepare the response of public-safety agencies and the public. Still, as Katrina showed, the results can hinge on official judgment and initiative. Let's make sure we're ready.


QUARRELSOME Washington has found a motherhood issue at last. Both President Bush and Congress want to pour a river of money into research labs and science classrooms.
The idea comes ready-equipped with instant appeal and long-term promise. Businesses, universities and scientists have clamored for years to boost cash-starved research programs that put the country at the forefront of innovation. The Internet, medical innovations such as laser surgery, and tech devices such as global-positioning satellites are examples of what government-sponsored research can produce.
Unfortunately, the country has coasted for years on past successes. Along with static federal support for continued research, foreign competitors have picked up the pace. Tech leaders and educators here note that India and China are investing heavily in colleges that turn out engineers, software designers and researchers.
American students, uninspired by what they find in math or science class, are choosing other careers. Worries about a globalized economy eating away at U.S. advantages should begin with this failure to inspire and educate the next generation of lab techs, experimenters and tinkerers.
A 500-page study by the National Academy of Sciences spoke out on the sense of drift that was eating away at American prowess. "We are worried about the future prosperity of the United States,'' the report stated. "We fear the abruptness with which an edge in science and technology can be lost ... This nation must prepare with great urgency to preserve its strategic and economic security.''
This anxious call went out last October, and now it appears the message has finally sunk in at the White House. The president's proposal could repair the damage. Or it could dwindle away as another forgotten policy plank from a low-wattage State of the Union address.
Bush is calling for $50 billion over 10 years, making his pledge dependent on future leadership. Plans launched now can't work unless they are carried on for years.
It's also not clear where the money will be found by a White House that seems unable to break its addiction to tax-cut politics. The president, mired with a 42 percent approval rating, clearly sees a research-and-science package as a conflict-free crowd-pleaser.
His new message also has the potential to change his image as profoundly anti-science in outlook. He has tolerated "intelligent design'' as a legitimate alternative to evolutionary theory, doubted the existence of global warming, and undercut federal attempts at stem-cell research. His pledge to push for bolder federal involvement in furthering science could be a welcome break from this sorry record.
Politics aside, the White House proposal hits all the right chords. It seeks money to train 70,000 math and science school teachers. Better-trained students would go on to work the research labs, where more money would boost deep-science budgets. Neglected agencies such as the National Science Foundation, the National Institute of Standards and Technology and the Department of Energy's Office of Science would have their funding doubled.
It's an ambitious vision that rolls far into the future. But a long timetable, for better or worse, is what serious science needs to do its best work. There will be flops and half-baked plans. But there should be benefits and breakthroughs if the strategy is executed well and given time. Results won't come overnight, especially for a president and Congress hoping to erase an image of dysfunction, corruption and gridlock.
"Democrats agree,'' said House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi of San Francisco, when asked what she thought of the package.
Two similar GOP-authored bills to upgrade science teaching and extend tax breaks for research are already before Congress, meaning that timely action is possible. Given that both parties favor the same goals, the prospects for action are good.
The president's "American Competition Initiative'' is especially favorable for the Bay Area. This is home to major research facilities such as UC Berkeley, Stanford and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. It's also a center for technology and biotech work by private firms.
Silicon Valley was impressed after feeling slightly neglected by a Bush team preoccupied by Iraq and other priorities. "I had to wait six years to hear about long-term investment,'' said Carl Guardino, president of the public-policy oriented Silicon Valley Leadership Group. "But it was good to hear it.''
President Bush has set a marker for a national pledge to boost research and science education. He should capitalize on a willing attitude in Congress to make sure the program happens. It's a chance to push both the nation and the boundaries of science forward.


ALWAYS STOIC, humble and soft-spoken, Coretta Scott King could have easily been cast off as the woman behind the great man. Instead, many called her the "first lady of the civil-rights movement."
After her husband's assassination in 1968, she was thrust into the public spotlight. Quietly, and always with grace, she raised her four children while fighting to preserve and expand her husband's legacy.
Building on the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.'s dream, King made the civil rights a human-rights issue, preaching nonviolence, fighting for gay rights and raising awareness of AIDS in the black community. She was outspoken against gun violence, and violence in films, TV and video games. King fought to keep her husband's memory alive by lobbying to make his birthday a federal holiday and establishing the King Center in Atlanta. Some criticized King for abandoning her husband's mission when she spoke on different issues. The King family also faced criticism when its members fought publicly over the fate of the King Center.

</text>
