<text id="B12" category="" words="1988" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'A season for pardons.' San Francisco Chronicle, 24 December 2006, B5; 'Christmas in rehab.' San Francisco Chronicle, 21 December 2006, B7; 'On Foster Care Reform / Why are these children dying?' San Francisco Chronicle, 3 December 2006, E4." Author="Debra J. Saunders; Debra J. Saunders; N/A" PublicationDate="24 December 2006; 21 December 2006; 3 December 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

ON THURSDAY, President Bush commuted the prison sentence of Phillip Emmert, who was convicted on methamphetamine charges and sentenced to 22 years, followed by five years of supervised release in 1992. May a new era of compassionate conservatism be upon us. 
Bush has used his commutation powers before. With Emmert's commutation and the 16 pardons issued on Dec. 21, Bush has issued 113 pardons and commutations while in office. This is, however, the first time that Bush has cut years from an offender's sentence, and a drug offender at that. 
Margaret C. Love, who was the pardon attorney under the first President Bush, said of the Emmert commutation, "This appears to be exactly the kind of case where the president needs to intervene, and he is to be commended for doing it. But why only one after all these years? Given what we know about federal drug sentences, it is hard to believe that this case is the only one that merits a sentence reduction." 
I, too, have criticized Bush for not commuting more sentences, but there is no denying how politically risky pardons can be. When he was Texas governor in 1995, Bush pardoned a man who had been convicted for growing marijuana in his back yard, only to see the man, who had become a deputy constable, arrested for stealing cocaine from a suspect within four months of his pardon. 
In Emmert's case, Bush has put off his release until Jan. 20, and required Emmert to fulfill his five years' supervised release. 
As a conservative, I think it is important that Bush is clear- eyed and has smart standards. I've seen those who would turn convicted cop-killer Mumia abu Jamal into a martyr. Ditto the executed Stanley Tookie Williams. Their most ardent advocates made excuses for their criminal actions and never seemed to care that these men took innocent lives. 
According to the Washington Post, the Bush administration gives weight to a prisoner's "acceptance of responsibility and showing remorse" -- as well as the seriousness of the crime, how long ago it was committed, compelling need, post-conviction conduct and whether criminal-justice officials involved in the case support clemency. 
Emmert's story fit those criteria. His history, provided to me by Families Against Mandatory Minimums, tells how Emmert rehabilitated himself in prison so that he was moved from a medium-security facility to a minimum-security camp. 
One other aspect of Emmert's story -- the disproportionate and unduly severe sentence he received -- should be among Bush's criteria. Emmert had one prior conviction for driving without a license. A 22-year sentence for a low-level function in a first drug offense is insane. 
America would be a better country if Bush were to commute sentences for other nonviolent drug offenders. Clarence Aaron was sentenced to life without parole for a first-time nonviolent drug offense in 1992, when he was 22, and will die in prison without intervention. That sentence is positively medieval. 
This is not a drug case, but next month, two Border Patrol agents, Jose Alonso Compean and Ignacio Ramos, will begin serving 12 and 11-year sentences for shooting a fleeing drug smuggler in the buttocks, not filing the necessary reports and depriving the smuggler of his Fourth Amendment right to be free from illegal seizure. Bush should commute their sentences before they report for prison. These two men have paid enough for their mistakes. 
Readers frequently ask me what they can do to help win commutations for those serving draconian federal drug sentences. The time to act is now. Write the White House and let the president know you support his commutation of Emmert's sentence and you would like to see more. Show Washington there is political benefit in showing mercy. 

DONALD TRUMP has figured out that America is addicted to addiction stories. With Tara Conner, the current Miss USA, you see the pattern with red-white-and-blue efficiency: Young hottie works hard, makes it, parties too hard, is seen bouncing half-naked on Fox News every 20 minutes, middle-aged male solons on same network tut- tut young babe's immorality, and when that gets old even for middle- aged men, she enters rehab. 
Yes, this is the age of the short- attention span scandal. Over- achievers hit rock bottom before they're 21. 
And what a story, with the possibility that Trump could utter his signature "you're fired" phrase. Thus, Miss USA's story was exported to media around the globe. O joy to the world. 
Shame as a spectator sport? To believe that, you have to believe that Trump has moral standards, although I suppose one can believe that The Donald has moral standards for other people. You also have to believe that Conner is truly ashamed, not pretend shamed, of stories that have garnered more press coverage than her coronation. (A Nexis check of news stories on Conner showed 94 stories this week, compared to 10 when she won her tiara.) 
You don't have to be a cynical New Yorker to figure that people don't care about beauty pageants as they did 40 years ago, but if Trump Inc. can throw in some silicone and scandal, maybe pageants could make a comeback. Here's a fitting slogan: Miss USA, she's not wholesome any more. 
Anyone who has seen Conner's bikini strut -- and if you watch TV news, you've seen it -- should be clear on Conner's image. She was not about "world peace" -- unless you spell it p-i-e-c-e. Her presentation was a celebration of youth and sex appeal. 
So who is Trump to harrumph if Miss USA wants to have some fun? True, until Conner turned 21 on Monday, it was not legal for her to drink, and there have been rumors of drug use. Leave such matters to the authorities, not a comb-over morality czar. 
And spare me all that nonsense about Miss USA being a role model. Actually, she is a model. Given her tearful gushing at Trump's decision to give her a "second chance," Conner may be an actress, too. 
She did, however, seem none too pleased to be cast in the role of alcoholic. It says something about the demands of the scandal machine that a 20-year-old can't simply go wild when handed goodies and freed from parental supervision. No, she has to have a disease. 
When she exits rehab, Trump noted at Tuesday's press conference, Conner can be "a great example for troubled people." You don't have to close your eyes to imagine the segment on Oprah, with a bright- eyed Miss USA marveling at how Trump and rehab helped turn her life around. 
At the press conference, Trump and Conner both trumpeted the beauty of a world that gives people "a second chance," but methinks they had their eye on the Second Act. 

The new law is not being followed by all: The Children's Advocacy Institute, a San Diego-based research and lobbying group that co-sponsored the 2004 law, requested the names for 2005 from all 58 counties. Nearly a year later, they're still waiting for two counties to respond. 
The names that they do have for 2005 -- 48 so far -- offer more questions than answers. What does it mean, for example, that nine of the deaths were children age 17 or older, five of whom were within six weeks of their 18th birthday? Are 17-year-olds simply more likely to get in car accidents? Suffer drug overdoses? Skateboard without helmets? Or does it mean the fulfillment of our worst fears -- that some children, facing the harsh realities of homelessness and desperation when they "age out" of the system at 18, are taking their own lives instead? 
"There's no way to get more information without going to the courts," said Christina Riehl, staff attorney for the Children's Advocacy Institute. 
There is absolutely no reason why an advocacy group, a newspaper, an elected official, or any other concerned member of the public should have to go to court to find out what happened when a foster youth dies. 
But due to California's baffling policies on disclosure, it's extraordinarily difficult for the public to learn who in the system is dying and why. Nearly every bill that has come through the Legislature in the past several years has been stonewalled by the County Welfare Directors' Association. 
Take AB1817, a very modest bill sponsored by Assemblyman Bill Maze, R-Visalia, three years ago. Concerned about a wave of foster children's deaths in his district, Maze simply wanted legislators to be allowed to review the case files of deceased children in the system. But he couldn't get his bill out of the Judiciary Committee. 
"They said that, as an elected official, I'd just use these cases as a political forum," said Maze. "I think it's just baloney. We need to know if there's some kind of pattern or trend or lack of oversight in case management, because, until we know that, we won't know how to fix the problem. But needless to say, I've been fought against on this issue tremendously by the welfare directors of this state." 
Maze is not the only one frustrated by the lack of information about child deaths from California's social-services bureaucracies. Last year, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services determined that the state was violating federal law by failing to file reports about the deaths and near-deaths of children due to abuse or neglect. Threatened with the loss of $60 million in child- welfare funds, this summer the state began requiring counties to file these reports. But -- and here's the rub -- the Department of Social Services keeps all names confidential, even in the case of foster children. 
Imagine -- our state's most vulnerable children, betrayed by a state system that was supposed to protect them -- and we have no idea who they are. A look at the questionnaires the state started providing this July offer only haunting glimpses of their fates: 
-- On July 30, a 15-year-old foster child died after either jumping or being pushed from a moving car in a suspected sexual assault. 
-- On Aug. 17, a 2-year-old foster child drowned after her foster parents left her alone in a bath tub. 
-- On Aug. 24, a 16-year-old committed suicide by shooting himself in the head after telling his sibling that he couldn't take their legal guardian's abuse anymore. 
Confidentiality is important, especially when it comes to protecting the identities of family members and abuse reporters. We understand, as well, that it's important to protect the names of abused children who suffer near-fatalities but are expected to recover. But there are no good reasons why the full case files -- including names, counties and histories -- for dead foster children shouldn't be open to all of us. There can't be any accountability without transparency. 
When we asked Sue Diedrich, assistant general counsel for the state Department of Social Services, why they couldn't tell us more, she said that the state could risk its federal funding. 
That's simply not true, according to a federal official who tracks the issue. 
"Federal law doesn't require that a state release (those details), but it doesn't prohibit those disclosures either," said Susan Orr, associate commissioner of the children's bureau in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Indeed, there are at least two states, Georgia and South Carolina, which offer up just the sort of connect-the-dots information that an informed public needs -- and unlike California, they haven't had any threats of a funding cut-off. 
There is a solution to this, and this year Assembly members Sharon Runner and Karen Bass even tried to offer it. It was AB2938, which required the release of juvenile court records, and county and state files, in the case of a child death pertaining to abuse or neglect. AB2938 should be expanded to include the deaths of foster children, regardless of whether or not they died as a result of abuse or neglect.

</text>
