<text id="B13" category="" words="2004" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'EDITORIAL DNA evidence powerful tool.' Denver Post, 25 January 2006, B06; 'EDITORIAL A fresh focus on domestic partners Focus on the Family is supporting legislation to provide expanded legal benefits for heads of untraditional households including gay c" Author="N/A" PublicationDate="25 January 2006; 6 February 2006; 19 March 2006; 16 April 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; End" WebAddress="Factiva">

A man who spent more than half his life in prison for crimes he didn't commit was freed this week thanks to DNA evidence. Alan Crotzer, 45, was the fifth Florida inmate cleared by DNA in recent years.
Whether in real life or on TV dramas, DNA evidence has proven to be a neutral tool in determining guilt or innocence. It has the potential to establish a person's innocence, as it did with Crotzer, and it can confirm guilt, as it did with Roger Keith Coleman, a Virginia man executed in 1992 for murder.
What we have learned as science becomes increasingly more sophisticated is that the main forms of evidence on which our justice system has relied, including eyewitness testimony and even forced confessions, are too often unreliable.
Crotzer had been sentenced to 130 years in prison for armed robbery and rape and served 24 years before DNA tests proved his innocence.
Before Virginia Gov. Mark Warner left office earlier this month, he ordered DNA testing in the case of Coleman, who was electrocuted in 1992 for killing his sister-in-law. Coleman had maintained his innocence to the end, but DNA capabilities not available earlier showed otherwise.
So far, none of the 1,005 people executed since the U.S. Supreme Court reinstated the death penalty in 1976 have been proven innocent using DNA. But that's no cause for complacency. To the contrary, more than 100 people on death row have been exonerated of their crimes thanks to DNA testing.
Warner did the right thing in ordering the Coleman test and trying to determine if justice had been served.
DNA in Colorado has never been used to free anyone from prison, Department of Public safety spokesman Lance Clem said. But it has been used to exonerate plenty of suspects before they were convicted.
Under a new law in Colorado, every prisoner entering the state prison system is required to provide a DNA sample for the files. It has already proved useful in a case involving a Thornton man accused of rape, who has now been implicated in three other rapes dating back to 2002, said Clem.
The growing number of cases in which people have been exonerated with DNA should give prosecutors pause.
'Are you ready for what you waited so long to hear?' state Circuit Judge J. Rogers Padgett asked Crotzer on Monday. 'Motion granted, you're a free man.'
The prosecutor, Mike Sinacore, got it right when he said, "Trying to fix an error in the system is just as important as trying to convict someone who is guilty."


Focus on the Family, the Colorado Springs-based organization of conservative Christians, has endorsed a measure by Sen. Shawn Mitchell, R-Broomfield, that would expand legal benefits to non- married heads of households, no matter the orientation of the couple. The position seemed a contrast to the group's vigorous efforts to 'preserve traditional values and the institution of the family.'
The legislation itself is a direct challenge to a civil unions proposal by Rep. Tom Plant, D-Nederland, that will ask voters to grant same-sex partners a menu of rights now only extended to married couples, such as inheriting property, making medical decisions on behalf of a partner and child support arrangements.
Jim Pfaff, state policy analyst for Focus, said Mitchell's bill is a 'common-sense alternative' to the domestic partnership legislation. 'A domestic partnership bill based on sexual orientation is giving extra benefits to a class that has a high standard of living at the expense of other adults who are at or near the poverty level, and we believe that's discriminatory,' he said.
Mitchell's bill extends a range of benefits to unmarried people who sign what he calls a 'reciprocal beneficiary agreement.' He says relatives, friends, roommates and same-sex couples would all be eligible.
His bill covers such a broad potpourri of relations that we wonder if it will seem reasonable to most lawmakers or voters, but such a measure opens a new front in the debate on what rights to extend in the nation's ever-increasing number of non-traditional households - living arrangements that Donna Reed would be hard-put to recognize. While benefits would include dependent health care coverage, property-sharing rights, funeral decisions and organ donations, Mitchell intentionally excluded issues related to parental or guardianship rights over a child or child-support issues. 'This doesn't try to recreate the family structure,' he said.
Pfaff said that while Mitchell's Senate Bill 166 includes same- sex couples, 'it is not premised on sexual orientation.' If it were, the group would not support it, he said.
It's a subtle way to show some tolerance in the debate over same- sex rights, and Focus also surprised some observers this week on a matter of popular culture when it endorsed the film "End of the Spear," despite the casting of a gay actor in the lead role. The movie depicts the real-life slaying of missionaries in Ecuador. Some other Christian groups bashed it because of the casting, but Focus' media critic Bob Waliszewski said his website assesses the content of entertainment offerings "rather than the skeletons in the closet of every actor, producer, cameraman. We just don't go there." What matters, he said, is that "it's a wonderful story. It's well done."

We were pleasantly surprised last week when Focus on the Family expressed its support for state legislation that would provide expanded legal benefits for same-sex couples and other non- traditional households.
In the chaos of domestic-partner, civil-union and gay-marriage measures, there will be plenty of time to take sides in 2006 as state lawmakers and voters consider whether to expand the standing of same-sex couples to anything that resembles heterosexual marriage.



The inevitable result of the combination tax cut fever/spending spree indulged in by Congress and the Bush administration came Thursday when Congress raised the limit on the national debt to an unprecedented $9 trillion - about $30,000 for every man, woman and child in the United States.
There was nothing inevitable about this mess. Under President Bill Clinton, the federal budget enjoyed four years of surpluses - the longest such run since before the Great Depression - before Bush took over in 2001. Tax cuts, wars in Afghanistan and Iraq and Gulf Coast hurricane damage, coupled with unchecked increases in pork barrel spending and the new Medicare drug benefit have since generated $400 billion annual deficits.
Obviously, the congressional budget process is broken. It can't be fixed quickly, but two rules long followed by the Colorado General Assembly would help restore accountability to Congress.
The first commendable Colorado rule is that any amendment to a bill must fit under that bill's title, which can be narrowed as it passes through the legislative process but not broadened. Thus, if a bill originally says 'Farm subsidies for apples and oranges,' it can be later narrowed to only cover apples. But it can't be expanded to include a $180 million rain forest in Iowa.
Such a rule requiring amendments to be germane to a bill would stop the farces that routinely tie up Congress when anti-abortion riders or other hot issues are tagged on to unrelated bills such as military appropriations. More important, it would stop unrelated pork barrel projects from being tacked on to legitimate spending bills.
A second salutary rule of the Colorado legislature requires that conference committees meeting to resolve different House and Senate versions of a bill cannot go beyond the scope of the differences between those bills without receiving the permission of their parent bodies.
In the legislature, if the Senate wants $1 million for a program and the House wants $1.4 million, they may compromise at $1.2 million. In Congress, a Senate bill for $1 billion and a House bill for $2 billion may be 'compromised' at $5 billion - with a host of unrelated appropriations tacked on. Those conference committees meet in secret, and final action on the bills in their respective chambers is cursory at best. It may be weeks before the details of such midnight appropriations deals emerge to public view.
Finally, we again endorse HR 4890, the Legislative Line Item Veto Act. The measure wouldn't give the president a true line item veto such as that enjoyed by Colorado's governor, because such a law has been ruled unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court. But as Rep. Mark Udall, D-Colo., argues, the measure 'will give the president the power to force votes on wasteful spending, while preserving Congress' power of the purse.'
The two procedural reforms Congress should borrow from Colorado, coupled with the revised line item veto, would focus the spotlight of public attention on waste and inefficiency in the federal government.
These three steps won't return the nation to solvency overnight. But they would constitute an impressive beginning toward that vital goal.


The boy hung up and only hours later did he call again. Police finally responded only to find that the mother had died of heart problems that might have been survivable had medics responded to the first call.
Last year, a Michigan woman called 911 to say she had been shot in the head. The operator asked the caller if she was a mental patient and insisted that had she really been shot she wouldn't be able to call. The woman, now a paraplegic, got help only after calling relatives in Minnesota who contacted Detroit police.
Both calls were treated as pranks when precious minutes could have made a difference. It's a boy-who-cried-wolf syndrome - 911 operators get too many crank calls and must struggle to identify the true emergencies.
All states, including Colorado, have experienced problems with a system that fields millions of calls a year. In Colorado in 2004, an Elbert County man called to say he had been attacked by pit bulls, was trapped in a barn and feared that his wife outside the barn was in danger. Due to staff shortages, an inexperienced jail attendant helping answer 911 calls put the man on hold. More than an hour passed and the woman died in the dog attack.
Most of the Colorado problems have to do with the confusion wrought by nuisance calls and hang-up calls, not staff shortages or poor training. In some counties, more than 50 percent of 911 calls aren't legitimate. The problems have grown with the increased use of cellphones, some of which have an automatic dialing feature that will call 911 if a specific key is depressed, often a 9 or a 1. Jefferson County 911 supervisor Cindy Cline recommends that people use their key lock; otherwise, if a phone is bumped or jostled it can call an emergency operator without the user's knowledge. Cline said 911 operators have received calls from babies playing with phones and people in restaurants who accidentally banged the phone.
Since a 911 call is free on a cellphone, Cline said people also abuse the system, calling to order a tow truck, get transferred to other numbers, and all manner of favors.
Chris Olson, president of the Arapahoe County 911 Authority Board and director of the county's safety services, said cellphones now make up more than half the calls to 911. Hangups are frustrating because if an operator is unable to contact the caller, the county's policy is to dispatch police. While Olson believes most calls in his county are legitimate, most hangup calls are not.
Identifying possible prank calls is especially difficult.
The Detroit incident prompted several queries from concerned citizens seeking reassurance from the Colorado Bureau of Investigation. 'If properly trained, operators will ask certain questions to sort out the prank calls,' said CBI's Lance Clem.
A year ago in Boulder, a 911 call came in that law enforcement figured was a prank. They responded anyway to find a 14-year-old girl inside her house with her dead father. The call was all too real. When in doubt, 911 operators should always err on the side of caution.
As for pranksters and nuisance callers, it's essential that you leave the 911 system to those who need it.

</text>
