<text id="B14" category="" words="1983" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Chinese Shadows.' The Wall Street Journal, 30 October 2006, A12; 'Steeling Jobs.' The Wall Street Journal, 1 October 2006, A14; 'Europe v. Microsoft.' The Wall Street Journal, 25 September 2006, A14; 'Dissidents at Dartmouth.' The Wall Street Journal, 1 S" Author="N/A" PublicationDate="30 October 2006; 1 October 2006; 25 September 2006; 1 September 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

If U.S. politicians think they can impose trade barriers without consequences for American economic interests, they should take a look at China these days. Beijing is reacting to America's talk of tariffs and limits on foreign investment by imposing new restrictions on foreign investment in that country.
Earlier this month, the Carlyle private equity fund agreed to buy half, rather than 85%, of a state-owned construction firm after Beijing bureaucrats intervened. A French firm's bid for China's dominant cookware manufacturer is under competition review. Foreign investment in the brokerage industry has been recently shuttered. And so on.
The most egregious example may be the continuing saga of Guangdong Development Bank, a bankrupt lender in which Citigroup and Societe Generale were competing to buy a majority stake. After bidding, however, they were told they'd have to settle for only 20% of the equity. The State Council in Beijing is still figuring out how to handle the bids. This is the equivalent of President Bush's Cabinet blocking a bank merger in Atlanta -- or perhaps Members of Congress objecting to a takeover of a relatively small U.S. oil company by a Chinese company. Never mind that more foreign cash and know-how are exactly what China needs if it wants to clean up its lumbering, corrupt banking industry.
Lest you think we're exaggerating the anticompetitive mood, consider China's new "Rules on the Merger with and Acquisition of Domestic Enterprises by Foreign Investors," enacted by six Chinese regulatory agencies last month. The rules provide the Communist Party with a mechanism to regulate foreign mergers and acquisitions, impose new guidelines on offshore financing of Chinese companies, and give the Ministry of Commerce the authority to squash deals it doesn't like, among other things.
Beijing's regulators aren't exactly exemplars of transparency, so it's hard to know if this is the start of a broader anti-foreign backlash, or simply an effort to duplicate regulatory language used elsewhere. To date, no major deals have been blocked under the new rules. But there's still plenty of room for worry.
Take Article 40, which gives the Ministry of Commerce room to halt foreign acquisitions of Chinese companies in "core industries," without defining, exactly, what those industries are. Some are easy to guess: Media, for one, is unlikely to be opened up anytime soon given that the Party's control rests on its stranglehold on information. But what about other state-dominated sectors -- such as steel, automobiles, retail, or China's horribly backward mobile phone industry?
Article 40 also gives Beijing the right to block acquisitions of Chinese domestic firms with a "well-known" trademark or a "traditional" Chinese brand. That's odd, given that China doesn't possess any well-known international brands -- or register many of its nascent brands with foreign patent offices. Perhaps this is simply Commerce's way of planning for the future.
We're told that the Ministry of Commerce may very well allow the French-Sino cookware merger when it hears the case in the coming weeks. But the broader reversion to economic nationalism remains a worry -- which is why American politicians shouldn't give Beijing politicians any more protectionist episodes to emulate.


'For decades, U.S. auto companies did not intervene in steel trade cases. We do so now because further relief is unjustified -- and it is undermining American manufacturing competitiveness."
For the sake of the American economy, we hope that statement gets someone's attention at the International Trade Commission (ITC) today. It's from the six largest automobile manufacturers in the U.S. -- General Motors, Toyota, DaimlerChrysler, Ford, Honda and Nissan.
On the table before the ITC today is whether the anti-dumping duties imposed in 1993 on "corrosion-resistant steel" should be lifted. This steel is crucial to making cars. Pushing back against the automakers, steelmakers are expected to argue, as they did 13 years ago, that they need the duties to repel unfair foreign competition and avoid harm.
Well, times change, and it's time to lift these duties on steel. This isn't 1993.
It's hard to overstate the importance of access to corrosion-resistant steel for American manufacturing. Auto makers need it for exterior body panels, doors, hoods, roofs and fenders -- in other words, to produce a car. It is used in making auto parts, construction materials, appliances and consumer hardware. Metal fabricators, many of them small family-owned operations scattered across the American heartland, depend on it. From corporate America to Mom and Pop operations, the U.S. needs this steel to stay in business. The automakers will testify on the side of the foreign companies accused of dumping, but in fact they're testifying for the U.S. economy.
Under U.S. trade law, the duties can't be lifted unless it can be shown that the petitioning industry -- steel -- is no longer exposed to harm from competition. The protectionists at the U.S. Commerce Department haven't helped matters by releasing a report claiming that without the duties "dumping" would resume. But as the nation's steel users are arguing, that report drew its conclusions from market circumstances in 1993. There's little doubt that the dynamics of the global steel market are entirely different than they were 13 years ago.
For starters, since 1993 the U.S. government has absorbed two-thirds of Big Steel's pension "legacy" costs ($9 billion), which was one of the biggest barriers to the industry's consolidation. Data showing a 70% increase in prices for corrosion-resistant steel in 2004-2006, compared with the 2000-2003 period, suggest that the reorganized U.S. industry has strong pricing power. Big Steel is also turning in impressive profitability numbers, easily outstripping the 5.5% profit-on-sales average reported by the Census Bureau for durable-goods manufacturers as a whole in the first half of 2006.
Pricing power and profitability are a direct consequence of the supply restraints caused by anti-dumping duties. Those duties, which can range from 2% to 40%, are also assigned retroactively; so foreign sellers of steel to the U.S. -- which have to collect the duty as part of their price -- never know what their final financial exposure will be. This discourages many foreign companies from even thinking about shipping steel to the U.S. And with global demand for steel strong, why bother? Meanwhile, U.S. users of steel find reliable supplies at globally competitive prices hard to come by. U.S. mills have been known to refuse quotes and limit order size.
Big Steel, which employs 130,000, might want to consider the consequences of squeezing its own customers. U.S. car makers and the auto-parts industry support 2.4 million jobs, and the auto sector buys about half of all U.S. shipments of corrosion-resistant steel. If these businesses move off-shore, U.S. steel will have to compete without the protection of the ITC.
The auto industry says it already buys "the overwhelming majority of [its] steel from U.S. steel mills and will continue to do so irrespective of the outcome of this dispute." But that may not be the case if companies that need steel move their manufacturing businesses off-shore. As Josephine Cooper, Toyota group vice president says, "There is no longer an economic basis for keeping these duties. The steel industry benefits from unnecessary protection while the duties hurt a much wider sector of the U.S. economy."



Europe was expected to try a new approach to monopoly cases when Neelie Kroes took over as EU antitrust chief two years ago. Finding creative ways for Brussels to assail Microsoft isn't what most people had in mind.
The latest dust-up concerns the software giant's newest incarnation of the Windows operating system, dubbed Vista. Microsoft is now scrambling to decide whether it should ship the program to Europe along with the rest of the world later this year, or delay to avoid upsetting the European Commission. After the EU fined Microsoft half a billion euros in 2004 for alleged antitrust violations with Windows, and another 280.5 million euros ($356.8 million) earlier this year for failing to comply with its vague and ever-changing orders, Ms. Kroes has warned Microsoft not to cross the line with Vista.
The problem is figuring out what that line is. Ms. Kroes earlier this year named five areas of concern with Vista, ranging from built-in security software to the way PDFs are handled. The company proposed changes to address her worries, but Ms. Kroes has declined to say whether they would suffice. Her spokesman says only that "the Commission has been giving guidance to Microsoft for over a year. But ultimately it is for Microsoft to decide how they package and sell Vista."
In other words, the Commission is all but certain to nail Microsoft once Vista comes out, based on some unknowable notion of what is and isn't permissible. Take Adobe, whose PDF format for electronic documents is the industry standard. Adobe has asked the EU to examine Microsoft's inclusion in Vista of new Microsoft programs that perform functions similar to Adobe's, at no cost to consumers. Adobe also objects to Microsoft's free inclusion of a command to save files in non-Adobe programs, such as Word, as PDFs; currently, users must buy Adobe software to create PDFs, although the software for reading them is free. Microsoft has offered to make the PDF-creating plug-in for Vista available as a separate, but still free, download. But Adobe wants the Commission to require Microsoft to charge for the download -- even though Adobe wouldn't get any of the proceeds.
Of course, if Adobe were to make such a request of Microsoft privately, this would be considered collusion. And consumers will pay more and have less choice if Adobe gets its way. From a regulatory standpoint, in other words, Adobe is asking the EU to protect its total monopoly in the electronic-document market by acting against Microsoft's near monopoly in the operating-system market.
Ms. Kroes claims she's simply trying to ensure a level playing field and protect incentives for innovation. But her actions actually stifle creativity: In essence, she is telling Microsoft to proceed with the utmost caution when trying to improve its products, lest it incur her wrath. This precautionary principle doesn't encourage innovation in other fields, and the result won't be any different in software. With her Microsoft obsession, Ms. Kroes is demonstrating that once a company finds itself in the EU's crosshairs, Brussels will go to any length to pursue it.
Ms. Kroes made headlines a year ago by indicating, in a speech in New York, that she favored an American-style antitrust philosophy: namely, judging whether a company's practices help or harm consumers, rather than their competitors. She was back in Manhattan this month, insisting that she still adheres to the consumer-harm standard. But her actions make it hard to believe she means it.


The left-leaning faction that dominates American higher education doesn't take kindly to strangers -- particularly those who challenge the prevailing academic orthodoxies. Just ask Harvard's Larry Summers.
Or consider the escalating governance controversy at Dartmouth College. A few reformers have achieved a bit of influence, and now the New Hampshire school's insular establishment is doing everything it can to run them out of Hanover.
Since 1891, Dartmouth has been among the handful of colleges and universities that allows alumni to elect leaders directly. At present, eight of the 18 members of the governing Board of Trustees are chosen by the popular vote of some 66,500 graduates, from a slate nominated by a small, mostly unelected committee. (The remaining seats, reserved for major donors, are filled by appointment.)
In practice, the Trustees have been largely ornamental overseers, rubber-stamping the management decisions of the "progressive" college administration and faculty. The passivity of the Trustees owes, in part, to the fact that many official alumni representatives operate as a de facto wing of the establishment, pushing candidates who won't make trouble.
In 2004 and 2005, however, Dartmouth alumni were finally offered genuine choices. Over three successive Trustee contests, independent candidates bypassed the official channels and got onto the ballot by collecting alumni signatures.

</text>
