<text id="B17" category="" words="1994" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Merchants of corruption / Drug cartels' increasing role in U.S. corruption requires a clearheaded U.S. response.' Houston Chronicle, 24 December 2006, p. 2; 'Family feud / HPD police union tactics in challenging Chief Hurtt both unprofessional and counte" Author="N/A; N/A; CLAY ROBISON" PublicationDate="24 December 2006; 30 July 2006; 4 June 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

CRIME waves, like hurricanes, periodically slam American cities. Houston suffered a sharp rise in murders during the first half of this year; Washington, D.C., was assaulted by brazen influence- selling. Now Brownsville and other cities along the Mexican border are being pummeled by corruption. Border guards, city agencies, even judges have been caught taking bribes. The crime wave shows that American officials are no more immune from the cancer of corruption than any others.
According to the FBI, border bribery cases began rising noticeably several years ago. In Brownsville alone, police snared a municipal court clerk fixing traffic tickets in the middle of a busy police station, a code inspector who let used car lots operate without building inspections and a county commissioner who accepted $10,000 in kickbacks in exchange for a jail-building contract. Texas isn't alone in seeing more corruption: two border guards were convicted in California for freeing thousands of illegal immigrants in exchange for cash.
Of all nonfatal crimes, corruption is particularly troubling. It can undermine whole societies, including our own, if those in power fail to recognize and then crush the real source. That's why it's crucial that law enforcement, government officials and the public grasp the role of regional and political events in its spread. In the border area, several experts say, much corruption is associated with Mexican drug cartels and the tightening of border security.
The framework for borderland corruption has existed for centuries. Distant from capital cities and serving as bridges between different cultures, borderlands everywhere often develop less lawful, more unregulated ways of doing business. And in Mexico, until recently led by autocratic governments, citizens historically had to "buy" access to public services by slipping cash to officials.
These traditions still linger in cities such as Brownsville, said border historian Anthony Knopp. Yet, Knopp said, "That certainly doesn't account for the spike in corruption.''
How could it, after all: Though Brownsville's officials - and its citizens - might seem more corrupt, Mexico's proximity hasn't changed. What has changed measurably is the clout of Mexican drug cartels. "I think a sheriff here on the border has two choices when he gets elected or tries to run for office,'' Knopp asserted. "He either is likely to take some money, or get shot, or look the other way from the people who are connected with if not part of the major cartels.''
With enormous budgets and their own militias, the cartels have a stranglehold on Mexico. Their struggles for ascendancy and cash are terrorizing several Mexican cities, posing an almost insurmountable challenge for new President Felipe Calderon.
Ordinary Mexicans bear some responsibility. For too long, they saw drug trafficking as a U.S. problem, fed by American vices. They didn't see, until too late, how tolerating or accepting traffickers' bribes spawned the devastating violence now bleeding their cities.
Organized crime also has fed on recent immigration policies. In the past five years, a surge in border personnel has slowed illegal crossings. But it's also prodded human traffickers to pay higher bribes, said David Shirk of San Diego's Transborder Institute. The many new guards also may not be as well-trained or supervised as those before them, which can translate to ethical weakness.
The threat all these transborder criminals pose to American cities is frightening, indeed.
Aggressively strengthening public institutions by demanding transparency and accountability on both sides of the border is one weapon. So is the federal task force formed when Brownsville first started seeing corruption increase.
Maybe most powerful of all, though, is the understanding of how corruption travels. It piggybacks onto weak institutions and feeds on specific economic and political conditions. It spreads like a plague in communities where wrongdoing visibly goes unpunished. From Mexico to Houston to Washington, no culture is immune from its own weaknesses and temptations.


THE Houston Police Department, like most other law enforcement organizations, operates on a military-style command structure rather than by consensus of its rank and file.
Just as an Army general does not require the consent of the troops in order to command them, Houston Police Chief Harold Hurtt's job does not depend on whether his officers or their representatives approve of him or his policies. That judgment must come from the citizens of Houston, Mayor Bill White and City Council.
Leaders of the Houston Police Officers' Union are touting an unscientific survey reflecting the opinions of about half the 4,700- officer force. The opinions voiced by the self-selected respondents are uniformly critical of Hurtt and his command staff and laced with insulting comments such as "idiot" and "racist clown." The union alleges that Hurtt has been unresponsive to the complaints of its members, that he is more concerned with officers' appearance and petty infractions than in fighting crime.
Union President Hans Marticiuc has a right to poll his membership for their viewpoints. In a lengthy meeting with the Chronicle editorial board, however, Marticiuc and the union's executive director, Mark Clark, were hardpressed to say what they would do different. Instead, Marticiuc attacked Hurtt's character and competency. He said Hurtt chose some of the HPD's top brass for their ethnicity rather than their policing abilities.
The union leaders' most substantive complaint was that the chief was not giving his officers backup. Unfortunately, Hurtt cannot give patrol officers the backup they need on the street unless the mayor and City Council give him a lot more money to replace the many veteran officers who are retiring. And the department budget cannot grow substantially until the caps on city revenue are removed from the city charter.
With the department suffering a severe staff shortage and a resurgence of violent crime, animosity and insults only worsen the stressful conditions. To his credit, Chief Hurtt has refused to respond in kind, saying only that he is "really disappointed that the character displayed was not more professional. I expected a lot more from them."
As an outsider coming from Phoenix, Hurtt's selection by Mayor Bill White two years ago was an unpleasant surprise for the union, which supported previous Mayor Lee Brown and the police chief he appointed, Clarence Bradford. Upon arrival, Hurtt required patrol officers to wear protective vests and revived a policy banning beards and exposed tattoos, sparking sharp criticism from union members. In airing their complaints, the union leaders seem more aggrieved at having lost their insider privileges with the department's previous leadership than anything Chief Hurtt has done or left undone.
Some of the union's charges against the chief, such as excessive discipline, are not backed up by the facts. During 2003, Bradford's last full year as chief, the department filed 1,681 discipline cases against officers and civilian employees. In 2005, Hurtt's first full year, disciplinary actions totalled only 829. Although the force shrank by 646 officers during that period, the ratio of disciplinary actions to officers dropped sharply under Hurtt.
Union officials contend that the results of their survey represent the entire department's views, even though fewer than half of the officers responded to it. University of Houston political scientist and pollster Richard Murray notes that such scattershot surveys are more likely to generate responses from people who agree with the point of view of the group compiling the questionnaire.
Murray said a better method of measuring police opinion would be to select a random, representative sample of the department and work to get a complete response from each targeted employee. "Then you can use the statistics of sampling probabilities," he said, "and say with a plus or minus 5 percent we're confident this reflects everybody."
Ultimately, Chief Hurtt's tenure in Houston will be judged not on the basis of personalities or polls, but on his performance in protecting the public under difficult circumstances - including the evacuation to Houston of more than 100,000 impoverished and traumatized Hurricane Katrina victims.
Hurtt says the union survey will make him work harder to explain his policies to the public and win the support of his officers. If so, it will have served some positive purpose.


FOR all it did or didn't accomplish, the recent legislative session on property taxes and school funding was bittersweet for Texas teachers, with the emphasis, for most, on the first two syllables.
And if you are in the majority of Texans who believe the state is putting too much emphasis on standardized testing in the classroom, you may end up with a bad aftertaste as well because the new House Bill 1 raises the testing stakes even higher.
HB1 is the new law signed by Gov. Rick Perry last week as he continued to tour the state, proclaiming "victory" in his effort to reduce local property taxes and end a lawsuit against the state over an unconstitutional school funding system.
Most of the attention, so far, has been on how significant or insignificant the school tax cuts will be and on the new business tax and higher cigarette tax that will help pay for them. Those, however, aren't the only controversies that HB1 provokes.
Among other things, the law also provides for an across-the- board teacher pay raise of $2,000 (or $1,500, if you account for a $500 health stipend lawmakers took away from teachers a few years ago) plus competitive, teacher bonuses.
The bonuses, worth as much as $10,000, could be based on several factors, including a willingness to teach underprivileged kids. But inevitably many will be based on the scores a teacher produces on the Texas Assessment of Knowledge and Skills (TAKS) test, enhancing the argument that many educators have to spend too much class time preparing students for standardized exams, at the expense of promoting creativity, problem-solving and other critical skills.
An educator-friend doesn't worry about "teaching to the test" because he teaches above-average students in one of Austin's better funded school districts. But that may change if he is forced to compete for a bonus.
"If they start throwing $1,000 or $3,000 at me, I would follow that in a proverbial heartbeat," he said. "Why? Because we (teachers) are being choked and squeezed in the middle class."
Some grade-schoolers already have to pass TAKS to be promoted, and high school students have to pass it to graduate.
It also helps determine how schools are academically ranked and, under the new law, will help kick some principals out of their jobs if their campuses are ranked academically unacceptable two years in a row.
Some principals may deserve to go, but others may be victimized after doing their best in extremely difficult situations. It is going to take more than the TAKS test or tough language in HB1 to transform some schools in economically distressed neighborhoods with high dropout rates and low-to-zero parental involvement.
That's a problem with standardization. In real life, one size rarely fits all.
Nevertheless, every state now has to have some type of standardized test to measure student achievement under the federal No Child Left Behind Act. There are consequences for too many student failures, consequences obstensibly designed to improve educators' accountability and thereby improve educational opportunities for all children.
President Bush and the Republicans in power in Austin brag about increasing "accountability" and pat themselves on the back when test scores rise.
It is easier, after all, to preach "accountability" for students and teachers than to fork over more tax dollars for the public schools. (The recent session boosted overall education funding by a princely 5 percent or so.)
It is too early to know whether the testing frenzy will have a permanent, positive effect on public education, but many Texans have had enough.
Fifty-six percent of respondents in a recent, bipartisan survey commissioned by the Texas State Teachers Association said there was too much emphasis on state testing, with Republicans, Democrats and independents in almost identical agreement.
Democratic gubernatorial nominee Chris Bell is campaigning against high-stakes testing and believes the $360 million spent on selected teacher bonuses should have been used for a larger, overall pay raise.
He is correct.

</text>
