<text id="B19" category="" words="2022" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Time to repeal campaign finance law' Chicago Sun-Times, 31 December 2006, Pg B07; 'Hoggishness reigns in D.C., boardrooms' Chicago Sun-Times, 31 December 2006, Pg B06; 'Real perpetrators not held accountable for Abu Ghraib' Chicago Sun-Times, Chicago Sun" Author="George Will; Monroe Anderson; Nat Hentoff ; " PublicationDate="31 December 2006; 31 December 2006; 30 December 2006; " SampledFrom="All; All; All; " WebAddress="Factiva">

A three-judge federal court recently tugged a thread that may begin the unraveling of the fabric of murky laws and regulations that traduce the First Amendment by suppressing political speech. Divided 2-1, the court held -- unremarkably, you might think -- that issue advocacy ads can run during an election, when they matter most. This decision will strike zealous advocates of ever-tighter regulation of political speech (campaign finance "reformers") as ominous. Why? Because it partially emancipates millions of Americans who incorporate thousands of groups to advocate their causes, groups such as the ACLU and NRA. 

And Wisconsin Right to Life. It is another organization by which people assemble (see the First Amendment) to speak (see it again) in order to seek redress of grievances (the amendment, one more time). In 2004, the Wisconsin group was distressed because the state's senators, Russ Feingold and Herb Kohl, were helping to block confirmation votes on some of President Bush's judicial nominees. They wanted to run ads urging people to "contact Senators Feingold and Kohl and tell them to oppose the filibuster." 

But Feingold was running for re-election, and the McCain- Feingold "reform" makes it a crime for entities such as the Wisconsin group to use their corporate funds to broadcast an "electioneering communication" within 30 days of a primary or 60 days of a general election. An "electioneering communication" is one that "refers to" a candidate for federal office. 

In 2003, the Supreme Court upheld McCain-Feingold, but the court later said it would consider appeals against the law "as applied." The majority on the three-judge court, preserving the distinction between electioneering and grass-roots lobbying, held that the group's ads were exempt from the McCain-Feingold election-eve blackouts of speech because the ads were not "coordinated" with a candidate's campaign and did not engage in "express advocacy" -- did not use the words "vote for" or "vote against" a candidate. 

The dissenting judge wanted to examine the "intent" of the ads by examining their "context," looking for clues as to whether the sponsor of the ads hoped to not only advocate an issue but to influence an election. Imagine: Judges scouring the political landscape, searching for evidence (people's past opinions or associations; e-mails and other communications) that would empower them to rule that grass-roots lobbying about an issue is really the functional equivalent of electioneering (express advocacy). Such a process would necessarily be so protracted that no challenged ad could be authorized in time for an election. 

The Wisconsin group's case is probably heading for the Supreme Court. There Justice Samuel Alito occupies the chair that Sandra Day O'Connor occupied when she voted with the majority in the 5-4 ruling that upheld McCain-Feingold. 

Still, the reformers' zeal for regulating speech is undiminished. The Federal Election Commission recently fined some "527" groups $630,000. Their offense? Issue advocacy in 2004 that, "taken as a whole," could "only be interpreted by a reasonable person as containing the advocacy of the election or defeat" of a federal candidate. Editorial writers at the New York Times and the Washington Post approved, although the Times thought the fines insufficient, and although the Post, calling the current law "murky," thought the FEC should have enforced the murkiness quicker. 

The Times justifies suppressing 527s on aesthetic grounds -- they are run by "hard-edged activists," and their ads are too negative. The Post also is tellingly silent about the reformers' original corruption rationale for rationing political speech by restricting the political money that finances it. Instead, the Post says 527s wield "significant" influence. 

Bauer wonders why, absent a compelling government interest in combatting corruption, unregulated speech resulting in influence should be a federal offense. When, as surely it will, the Supreme Court considers that question, it can begin undoing the damage it did affirming McCain-Feingold and licensing government to ration political speech. ;

The Year of the Pig begins Feb. 18, the first day of the Chinese New Year. In America, we were well ahead of schedule. During 2006, from national to local government, from Wall Street to Rodeo Drive, hoggishness ran and reigned throughout our nation. This is our Year of the Boar in review. 

Outgoing U.S. House Speaker J. Dennis Hastert (R-Ill.) is one example. The Republican Party had hoarded power for the past 12 years, and in his lame attempt to protect it, Hastert ignored repeated warnings that Florida Rep. Mark Foley engaged in a peculiar practice of e-mailing and sending inappropriate instant messages to teenage pages on Capitol Hill. Also meriting mention is the outgoing chairman of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, Don Young (R-Alaska), for insisting that his sparsely populated state get its share of pork by way of the $223 million he earmarked in a bill for a "bridge to nowhere." Because Alaska's overall allocation of federal funds remains the same, the bridge, which would connect Alaska's Gravina Island -- population 50 -- to the mainland, may yet be built. 

Jack Abramoff, the onetime king of Washington's 14,000 registered lobbyists, was legendary for his ability to work the corridors of power, finessing congressional earmarks and exacting pork-barrel projects. Last month, the former Republican superlobbyist began serving his prison sentence for fraud, tax evasion and conspiracy to bribe public officials. In Washington's pay-to-play world, the buck didn't stop with the lobbyist. Abramoff won't do time alone. Former U.S. Rep. Robert Ney (R-Ohio) pleaded guilty two months ago to accepting bribes from Abramoff. 

Meanwhile, in the private sector, bringing home the bacon took on a greater meaning: The rich got far richer. Goldman Sachs CEO Lloyd Blankfein took home a record $53.4 million in cash, stocks and options as his year-end bonus. Other CEOs collected their big bucks through obscene paychecks. Thomas J. Fitzpatrick, head of SLM Corp. received $39,629,325 in total compensation. James F. Mooney, chairman of RCN Corp., received $9,938,711 in compensation -- a pittance compared with the $136.1 million the company lost. 

George W. Bush spent the bulk of the year staying stubborn, turning pigheadedness into a national tragedy. The president and Vice President Dick Cheney, both old oilmen, seemed incapable of facing the inconvenient truth that, unlike WMDs in Iraq, global warming was real and threatening. Last week, Bush's Interior Department finally proposed listing the polar bear as threatened under the Endangered Species Act. And after doggedly insisting that we should stay the course as we were slowly being sucked down a vortex, the November elections and the release of the Iraq Study Group's report earlier this month convinced the president that something's funky in Baghdad: his military strategy. Bush is currently holding secret sessions in Crawford, Texas, with his national security team, attempting to craft a plan that will get us out of the mess he got us in. 

In Sugar Land, 207 miles down the road from Crawford, Bush's former house enforcer, Tom "The Hammer" DeLay, had to drop his bid for re-election last April for more than his boorish behavior. The former House majority leader sits indicted, facing charges of money laundering. About half an hour northeast of his home stands what used to be Enron Corp. Earlier this month, Enron's chief operating officer Jeffrey Skilling began serving his 24-year sentence for 19 counts of conspiracy, fraud and insider trading. In Skilling's case, his gluttony cost 4,000 Enron employees their jobs, many of them their life savings, while investors lost billions of dollars. 

Closer to home, outgoing Cook County President Bobbie Steele will be collecting a $136,000 pension, after greasing the way for her son, Robert, newly installed in her old county commissioner seat, to take his turn at the public trough. On the La Salle Street side of the building, despite one scandal after the next, Richard M. Daley appears to be hoofing it to an easy re-election bid. The mayor has apparently gotten over his craving for flowers and fences. He now has eyes for cameras. With more than 2,000 crime-fighting and terrorist-spotting cameras in action and plans to put more on CTA buses, the mayor is now making sure that by spring, we'll have 74 photocops -- traffic light cameras -- shooting street intersections. Within 10 years, Big Brother Daley promises there will be a spy camera on every block. 

Naturally, in the world of celebrities, there's pork lite. After a rocky, two-year marriage, Kevin Federline is expecting $300,000 in a spousal support settlement from his estranged wife, Britney Spears. And sadly, George Clooney's pet pig, Max, died earlier this month. I see the death of the 19-year-old pig as a sign of hope. With the changing of the guard in Congress, this pursuit of piggishness could be maxed out. ;

In his farewell address at the Pentagon, Donald Rumsfeld said that the worst day of his nearly six years as secretary of defense was the disclosure to the world of the photographs of the prisoner abuses at Abu Ghraib. Those pictures might never have been known were it not for Joseph Darby, then a specialist with the Army's 372nd Military Police Company at Guantanamo Bay. Because his moral code told him "it had to stop," Darby may never be able to return home to Maryland. 

In a Dec. 10 interview with Darby on CBS' "60 Minutes," he told how the photos had been given to him by one of the perpetrators of the abuse, his friend, Charles Graner, now in prison. Knowing, as he says, the difference between right and wrong, Darby, anonymously, turned the pictures over to the Army's Criminal Investigation Division. But they knew where he worked, and the investigation began on who gave him the pictures. 

Darby told "60 Minutes" interviewer Anderson Cooper that he had no idea the photos would go around the world; "but you can't stand by and let this happen." 

Several months later, "60 Minutes II" obtained the pictures from another source; a New Yorker magazine article revealed Darby's name, and Rumsfeld said, at the time, in testimony before Congress that among those "who did their duty professionally" when the story broke was "First Specialist Joseph Darby, who alerted the appropriate authorities that abuses were occurring." 

While still at Guantanamo, Darby, in fear of retaliation, slept with a gun under his pillow. The Army decided to bring him back to the United States. Back home in Cumberland, Md., the whistleblower was a pariah. The commander of the local Veterans of Foreign Wars post, Colin Engelbach, told "60 Minutes" Darby "was a rat. He was a traitor. He let his unit down, he let his fellow soldiers down." 

When he arrived at Dover Air Force base, with his wife there to meet him, the Army told him it wasn't safe to go back to Cumberland, adding: "You can probably never go home." And, indeed, reported Cooper, "the Army's security assessment had concluded: 'The overall threat of criminal activity to the Darbys is imminent. A person could fire into the residence from the roadway.' " 

Does Darby regret that he turned over the pictures? "No, because if they'd been given to somebody else, it might not have been reported. We're Americans," he told Cooper. "We're not Saddam . . . We hold ourselves to a higher standard." 

Left out of the "60 Minutes" report was any mention of who was ultimately responsible for the abuses at Abu Ghraib and at other prisons in Afghanistan and Guantanamo. Charles Graner, Lynndie England and some of the other low-level guards in those photos have been punished, but not those much higher in the chain of command. 

In early 2002, when the Defense Department asked for instructions on how far they could go in extracting intelligence information from hard-to-crack detainees, a cadre of high-level lawyers at the Justice Department and Pentagon -- orchestrated by Alberto Gonzales, then counsel to the president -- set the grim climate for what happened at Abu Ghraib and elsewhere. 

Among these lawyers, the most influential, John Yoo, is back teaching law at the University of California; Jay Bybee sits on the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, and the nomination of William Haynes II to a federal appellate court is still pending in Congress. ;

</text>
