<text id="B21" category="" words="1981" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'PERK FOR FIREFIGHTERS.' The Boston Globe, 14 February 2006, A12; 'The lie of the storm.' The Boston Globe, 5 March 2006, E8; 'DRAWING OUTSIDE THE LINES.' The Boston Globe, 11 March 2006, A12; 'A DEADLY QUIET IN BOSTON.' The Boston Globe, 4 April 2006, A1" Author="N/A" PublicationDate="14 February 2006;  5 March 2006; 11 March 2006; 4 April 2006; 6 April 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

Confidence is a common trait of firefighters and other personnel engaged in emergency response work. In Boston, however, an unhealthy sense of entitlement has crept into the public safety departments, especially on the subject of private details. 
Boston firefighters earned $3 million in private detail pay last year, up from $2 million in 2003. The rules covering the details are inconsistent across the city's 11 fire districts. One district chief might require the presence of a firefighter at a wedding or outdoor festival where candles are lit or open cooking is taking place, while another chief would be satisfied knowing there is a fire extinguisher nearby. 
A good case might be made for retaining a trained firefighter in an occupied building where welding is underway near combustible materials. But short of that, it is difficult to see the value of paying a firefighter $32 per hour for private details. And that is especially true when administrative fees paid to the city by private parties are less than the amount needed to assign the details, leaving the taxpayers on the hook for the difference. 
Boston firefighters boast excellent response times. They perform well, and sometimes heroically, for a base pay of roughly $60,000 annually. But the public should also consider that Fire Commissioner Paul Christian has estimated that 80 percent of firefighters are able to fulfill their weekly work commitment in just two days by arranging a schedule of back-to-back shifts. That leaves more than ample time for moonlighting in private jobs, without the need for detail work. 
Christian, who retires tomorrow after 38 years, tried to reduce the sick-time abuse and unusually high injury rates that plague the department. The situation came to a head in January 2005, when 109 firefighters called in sick on a day when a heavy snowfall coincided with a New England Patriots playoff game. During Sunday's storm, only half that number of firefighters called in sick, according to Christian. 
The next commissioner will inherit a fire department that is well trained and well equipped. But issues such as sick time abuse and inconsistent private detail policies continue to weigh down the organization. There was some hope that Christian, a respected insider, could make headway with the union. But he leaves with labor issues unresolved and what he calls "lukewarm" relations with the rank and file. The appointment of a civilian commissioner with an extensive background in public administration, preferably an outsider, will be needed to quicken the pace of reform. 
The culture of paid details for the fire department is excessive and needs to be extinguished by better management. 

TELEVISION IMAGES can be misleading, but not in the case of the shadowy video that showed President Bush sitting quietly in Texas as he heard that Hurricane Katrina, bearing down on the Gulf Coast, was going to be "the Big One." Dressed in a suit coat even though he was on vacation, he looked like a president but did not act like one. Despite the warning on Sunday, Aug. 28, Bush let several crucial days slip by before he rallied the resources of the federal government to deal with this epochal disaster. 
Perhaps he was lulled by the take-charge attitude of Michael Brown, director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, who, the video shows, accurately gauged the magnitude of the storm and told his subordinates to do whatever was necessary: "I'll figure out some way to justify it," he said. "Just let them yell at me." FEMA, however, didn't have resources to cope with a disaster of this magnitude. It would have required an immediate massive response by the departments of Defense and Homeland Security, and only the president could have ordered these bureaucracies into action. 
Instead, it was business as usual when the storm struck on Monday, Aug. 29, and for a day or two afterward. Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff attended a conference on bird flu in Atlanta. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld toured military bases in California on Monday and the next day joined President Bush in San Diego for a ceremony commemorating the end of World War II. 
Bush considers himself a delegator, a character trait that was a weakness in this crisis. Vice President Dick Cheney and Chief of Staff Andrew Card were on vacation; the response wasn't coordinated until the full staff returned to duty later in the week. A hands-on president, Bill Clinton or Lyndon Johnson, for example, would have done better. 
Bush was further hampered by his decision, made after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, to focus his administration on the war against terrorism. In a speech at the San Diego ceremony he implicitly criticized Clinton for failing to respond to attacks in the 1990s. By fixating on his own war, Bush neglected the threat to America from wind and water. 
Three days after Katrina devastated the Gulf Coast, Bush went on television to defend his handling of the crisis, saying: "I don't think anyone anticipated the breach of the levees." That may be technically true. The weather specialist who delivered part of the video briefing only expected some water to wash over the levees, but cautioned that worse was possible. Bush did make one misstatement during the video. "I want to assure the folks at the state level that we are fully prepared," he said. But the Bush administration was not. History will judge him harshly for this failure. 

WHISTLER'S MOTHER has been evicted. After sitting in her long black dress through years of inclusion in the familiar and fat textbook "Janson's History of Art," the famous portrait of Anna Whistler painted by her Lowell-born son, James McNeill Whistler, is not included in the latest seventh edition. 
It's a small but telling salvo in the larger debate about the canon, about what knowledge matters most. 
Replacing Whistler's mother in Janson's new edition is Whistler's mistress, Joanna Hiffernan. She posed for "Symphony in White No. 2," a painting of a woman in a white dress standing beside a mirror over a fireplace mantle, her own face far lovelier than the weary- looking reflection in the mirror. 
This unintentionally settles a score. While the paintings of Whistler's mother and mistress both were exhibited in London in 1872, his mother got more public respect. Once, when Anna Whistler was on her way to visit her son, he moved Hiffernan out of his home and into nearby lodgings to keep up appearances. 
Change poses threats. It sparks fears that the mistress generation will forget what the mother generation knew. 
But the canon, of course, is always changing. Essential knowledge wanes into cliches. Professors use standard textbooks, but often only as stages upon which to give more elaborate, detailed, and updated lectures. 
And Janson's no longer competes solely with other textbooks. It is up against the canon-busting sprawl of the Internet, where knowledge seems without boundaries. And anyone who can create a website can present new continents of understanding, stretching if they want from cave paintings to the art of "The Simpsons." 
The canon is also increasingly affected by what students do and don't know. Some professors note that the country's young video game and computer experts haven't read the Bible and don't know Greek mythology. Instead, some students come to art history having read Dan Brown's novel "The Da Vinci Code," popular but fictional fare that flies free of historical facts. So the college canon has to have more entry ramps, refresher courses on Luke and Zeus, on how to sift fact from fiction and use technology to fill the holes in what one knows. 
The challenge is to teach students the canon and then teach them to leap beyond this so they can navigate in a world where knowledge is a rushing road of traffic crowded with people driving in different directions. 
What's needed is a dual pursuit both of knowledge and of the continuously changing contours of knowledge. 

NO ONE WAS in a talkative mood on Creston Street in Roxbury yesterday afternoon, one day after a daylight drive-by shooting that left one man and two teenage girls wounded. A woman sitting on a porch across from the shooting site said she was only visiting. Two men changing a tire nearby made clear that they wouldn't entertain questions. 
Silence is killing parts of Dorchester and Roxbury. Dozens of residents were enjoying the sunshine on Sunday when three men reportedly drove up Creston Street several times before one started firing. If an eyewitness steps forward to identify the shooter, however, it will be a rarity. Witness intimidation is now so common in gun- and gang-related cases that police and prosecutors despair at the chance of delivering justice. As of yesterday evening, police had not identified suspects in the Creston Street shooting. 
So much that is right and wrong about Boston is in plain view in this neighborhood. Along Blue Hill Avenue, between Creston and Intervale streets, 22 condominiums with an average selling price of $145,000 are under construction by the nonprofit Habitat for Humanity. The shootings don't dissuade the group. 
"This is exactly why we want to be there," says Habitat chairman Bruce Percelay. "That's 22 families with their eyes and ears open. They won't put up with this stuff." 
Growth in homeownership should help. But aggressive application of the state's new sweeping crime bill is needed first to convince witnesses that they will not be open targets for retaliation. The bill stalled for months in the Legislature while shooting rates escalated. Now that it is law, prosecutors must set an example by pressing for the maximum 10-year sentences in state prison for those guilty of witness intimidation. 
The building at 25 Creston St. where the shootings took place is owned by the nearby New Vision Community Development Corporation. As a rule, nonprofit development groups with a stake in the neighborhood, like New Vision, do an effective job at managing multifamily apartment buildings. But Creston Street poses a major challenge to New Vision's portfolio. Christopher Thompson, president of New Vision, says he hopes first to bring trauma specialists to the building to deal with Sunday's shooting and next to organize residents to protect their neighborhood. Destabilizing tenants, he adds, take advantage of laborious eviction proceedings to dig in. 
"We've got to neutralize the negative elements," he said. 
The shootings on Creston Street were nonfatal. But the neighborhood and others like it are in danger of being blotted out if the violence and intimidation outlast the efforts at recovery. 

At the same time, the agency is proposing weaker air-quality standards that would let oil refineries, chemical plants, hazardous waste incinerators, and other facilities emit greater amounts of toxic pollutants such as lead, mercury, and -- again -- arsenic. 
According to an internal EPA memo in December, seven of the EPA's 10 regional offices said the proposed rule would let polluters "virtually avoid regulation and greatly complicate any enforcement." The drinking water rule would affect systems serving 10,000 or fewer people, and would permit higher levels of other contaminants as well. In the case of arsenic, which occurs naturally in many water systems and is also spread by industrial pollution, about 10 million people would be drinking water that does not meet the tougher standard, which went into effect in January. Soon after the Bush administration first suspended the Clinton rule in 2001, the National Academy of Sciences reported that arsenic was even more dangerous than indicated in previous studies that had formed the basis for the Clinton rule. That report, requested by then-EPA head Christine Whitman, bolstered the belief of clean-water advocates that even the Clinton rule was too weak. The EPA proposal to permit arsenic levels as high as 30 parts per billion -- three times the Clinton rule limit -- is an open invitation for increased incidence of bladder and lung cancers. Decontaminating drinking water and reducing air pollution both cost money.

</text>
