<text id="B22" category="" words="2034" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Our views of 2006' The San Francisco Chronicle, 31 December 2006, Pg F4; 'Protect the polar bear' The San Francisco Chronicle, 28 December 2006, Pg B4; " Author="n/a; n/a; " PublicationDate="31 December 2006; 28 December 2006; " SampledFrom="All; All; " WebAddress="Factiva">

No on Alito 

From a strategic perspective, (Samuel) Alito's succinct, low- fiber responses to the often overwrought senators' questions paid off. Alito left no doubt about his impressive command of the Constitution and various milestone cases. 

But Americans deserved more. They deserved greater assurances that Alito's history as an ideologue did not presage an activist justice who would roll back the clock on rights and policies that have made this nation freer and more equitable. 

Alito failed to satisfy such concerns. Senators should reject this nomination. (Jan. 17) 

Cheney's 'friendly fire' 

As of Monday night, (Vice President Dick) Cheney, who avoids most public contact save for speeches before friendly crowds, still hadn't issued a full statement about the episode. 

No one's asking for a press conference grilling, Mr. Vice President, just an acknowledgement that the public deserves a plain- spoken explanation from the man responsible. And please, don't try that line about executive privilege protecting the White House from outside inquiry. 

There's an arrogance about the incident that pushes it past the first level of jokes and White House embarrassment. A relatively small event in the scheme of world affairs now takes on extra significance, all due to a White House that can't face reality. (Feb. 14) 

The lost Olympics 

The United States left the Turin Olympics with 25 medals and almost as many unhappy memories of lost opportunities. 

Much of the pre-Games hype centered on erstwhile world champion skier Bode Miller, who was slow when he wasn't clumsy -- and worse yet, professed not to care much. Speed skaters Chad Hedrick and Shani Davis tarnished their medal-winning performances with their testy exchanges in public. Snowboarder Lindsey Jacobellis was zipping toward an impressive victory when she decided to add a touch of flair -- grabbing her board in mid-air -- and stumbled into second place. 

Another would-be megastar of the Games, U.S. figure skater Sasha Cohen, fell twice at the start of her long program. To her credit, she persevered with a powerfully graceful finish - then accepted the silver medal with a joy and class that was too often missing from American stars in Turin. (Feb. 28) 

Katie's time 

Katie Couric, who defined the soothing and upbeat tone of morning television, is moving out of her comfort zone and into history. 

She will be tested and measured as she moves into the most rarified job in broadcast journalism: network anchor. 

The sniping at Couric's work on the lighter fare of a morning show is patently unfair. Yes, she did her share of cooking segments and author interviews over the years. But she was a respected reporter before she became a personality. Couric's NBC assignments in recent years have included myriad interviews with tough subjects -- and she has consistently shown herself to be up to the challenge, whether the interview is a world leader or a shaken survivor of the Columbine High shooting. (April 7) 

Home Run King 

Barry Bonds, who is one homer away from (Babe) Ruth's milestone, would never have had a chance to face major-league pitching if he, like Ruth, was born in 1895. But Bonds' records carry a taint of their own: the evidence that he started using steroids just before his home-run totals suddenly leaped to celestial levels at an age when most players' skills begin to fade. Bonds, who has denied using illegal performance-enhancing drugs, is facing the prospect of a perjury charge for his testimony before a federal grand jury. 

Giants fans will cheer wildly when Bonds hits No. 714 out of the park. But much of the rest of the baseball world is showing restraint and even contempt. There is an underlying feeling of sadness, of hollowness, in knowing that, unlike Ruth, Bonds is responsible for the discounting of his numbers because of their apparent chemical enhancement. (May 9) 

Mayor for Oakland 

Part of (Ron) Dellums' campaign focused on the people and neighborhoods who were left behind in the Brown years. At his news conference Monday, Dellums pledged to put together a transition team that reflected the "total diversity of this community," then building coalitions to fulfill his ambitious agenda. 

At 70, after a career in public life that took him from the Berkeley City Council to one of the most powerful chairs in the House of Representatives, Dellums may be embarking on his biggest challenge of all. In victory, he tweaked the journalists who characterized the campaign as being about him. 

"It's about us," he said Monday. 

It was as good a way as any to set the tone for a collaborative atmosphere in Oakland that will be needed for him to succeed as mayor. (June 20) 

Global warming bill 

Proponents of AB32 make a persuasive argument that there is an economic advantage to being ahead of the curve in stimulating technologies that will only increase in demand in the decades ahead. The potential economic stresses of the transition -- while admittedly difficult on certain industries -- pale in comparison to the wholesale devastation to our planet and our way of life if the nation with the world's largest economy and No. 1 contributor of greenhouse gases continues to sit on the sidelines. 

California must lead the way with the passage of AB32. (Aug. 16) 

Crocodile Hunter, R.I.P. 

For all his indulgence of risk, Steve Irwin died at 44 from one of the most improbable causes on Earth, a barb from a stingray. The element of danger was always there in Irwin's adventures. This time, luck wasn't. (Sept. 6) 

HP's lost way 

HP's lawyers said "pretexting," or using a false identity to obtain phone records, didn't break any laws. This hacking was "not generally unlawful," legal pettifoggery good enough to frame. 

This trouble can't be tidied up so easily. State Attorney General Bill Lockyer, who called the snooping "colossally stupid," is investigating. He thinks laws were broken, though there's no suspect as yet. HP's executives are in full damage-control mode, declining to name the investigators or explain the overboard inquiry. 

It's a tone-deaf performance from a company that knows better. (Sept. 8) 

Foster-care reform 

Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger today will sign eight bills designed to make a difference in the lives of tens of thousands of foster children in California ... 

... As Schwarzenegger noted in a letter to Assembly Speaker Fabian Nez in May, California has an "obligation to act" in response to the "sobering statistics" about what is happening to these children -- to our children, our collective responsibility. 

"We tried to craft legislation that would have an immediate impact on people's lives," said (Assemblywoman Karen) Bass, who emerged as the Legislature's champion of the foster-care cause. 

In a bold and bipartisan way, California legislators delivered an unprecedented combination of funds and laws to upgrade the foster- care system. (Sept. 22) 

Our choice: Arnold 

Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger said "something very special happened" in his third year in office. 

"We found the groove," he proclaimed during an interview with our editorial board last week. 

And Sacramento has been grooving with him. The just-completed legislative session represented one of the most productive in recent memory. The Republican governor and Democratic legislators worked together on essential long-term goals (upgrade our transportation systems and schools, help stop global warming) and short-term imperatives (raise the minimum wage, reform foster care, secure drug discounts for the uninsured) that will have an impact on Californians' lives. 

The climate of cooperation in Sacramento can be traced directly to the conciliatory tone struck by Schwarzenegger on the night of last year's special-election debacle ... In Schwarzenegger, Californians have a governor who can listen, focus and lead. He deserves to be re-elected on Nov. 7. (Oct. 19) 

Speaker Pelosi 

The message from American voters in Tuesday's midterm elections was ... change the course. 

That national mood was evident from the earliest returns. Americans were angry about the war in Iraq and the corruption and scandals that have enveloped Capitol Hill. 

As a result, the Democrats regained control of the U.S. House of Representatives for the first time since 1994 and, as the counting went on late into the night, were inching within striking distance of claiming a majority in the U.S. Senate. 

It was a historic night for the House and one of pride and elevated clout for San Francisco. "Speaker Nancy Pelosi" is about to become a reality. After two decades in Congress, the nation's first female speaker has all the qualities for the job -- the right blend of toughness and compassion, the knack for building and rewarding loyalties. (Nov. 8) 

So long, Rumsfeld 

One of President Bush's most-difficult tasks involving the war in Iraq was defending Donald Rumsfeld. Capitol Hill war critics, troop newspapers and a growing number of military leaders wanted the flinty, cocksure defense secretary gone. 

Now, in the aftermath of a White House defeat at the polls, Rumsfeld is out. Whether his exit is a peace offering to Democrats or damage control, it's welcome. 

The president badly needs fresh advice and independent thinking. (Nov. 9) 

Santa Clara 49ers? 

Chances are, the 49ers will be looking for some form of public assistance -- development rights, tax incentives, something -- to build an $800 million stadium that can't be financed on ticket sales alone. Santa Clara voters may well look at (owner John) York's less-than-forthright dealings with San Francisco and wonder how much to trust him. 

This region has been around the block enough times to know that the announcement of a team's relocation is not the same as a done deal. It's much too early to begin grieving about a lost city treasure or to start selling those "San Francisco 49ers of Santa Clara" caps and T-shirts. (Nov. 10) 

Iraq Study Group 

The elders have spoken: War is not the answer in Iraq. 

The nine wise men and one wise woman on the bipartisan Iraq Study Group accompanied their grim assessment of the situation in Iraq -- "grave and deteriorating" -- with the framework of a plausible alternative. 

In essence, the study group is asking President Bush to reconsider all of his fundamental assumptions about the war in Iraq, starting with his frequent assertion that "we're winning and we will win," unless the United States loses the will to stay until the "job is done." ... 

... The path laid out by the Iraq Study Group is one of hard work and aggressive diplomacy, fraught with uncertainty and extending well beyond Iraq's borders. It elevates a "comprehensive Arab- Israeli peace" to the place it belongs as a foundation of regional stability. 

Most of all, it involves Republicans and Democrats suppressing their cravings for partisan advantage and working together in the nation's interest. 

The elders are right. It's time to change course. (Dec. 7) 

Gerald R. Ford, 1913-2006 

No one would attempt to place Gerald R. Ford among the great presidents in U.S. history. But at a moment when his country needed a president of decency and humility -- and a feel for the national mood -- the former congressman from Grand Rapids, Mich., rose to the occasion. ;

TALK ABOUT taking the polar opposite view. After years of gutting environmental standards and denying global warming, the Bush administration has agreed to study whether or not the iconic and much-loved polar bear should be added to the nation's endangered species list. Bravo. 

Of course, the announcement came only after a lawsuit, a year of stonewalling, and an unprecedented public shift in thinking about global warming. Over a year ago, three environmental organizations sued the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service for just such a proposal after federal officials had been "reviewing" the status of polar bears for more than two years. There was nothing for them to review, really -- polar bears hunt, mate and procreate on polar ice, which has been shrinking at a rapid rate. Without ice, the bears starve on land. And so their population has declined 15 percent in the last decade, and things have gotten so bad for them that they are breaking into homes in search of food and marauding through towns - - recently, a polar bear was responsible for the death of a 15- year-old girl in the far western Russian Arctic.;

</text>
