<text id="B23" category="" words="1999" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'An absence of trust that needs healing.' St. Petersburg Times, 29 June 2006, 12; 'A fate he deserved.' St. Petersburg Times, 9 June 2006, 16; 'Archive of atrocities.' St. Petersburg Times, 23 April 2006, 2P; 'Jebucation.' St. Petersburg Times, 5 March 20" Author="N/A" PublicationDate="29 June 2006; 9 June 2006; 23 April 2006; 5 March 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

The disclosure of another secret counterterrorism program, this one mining international banking transactions, has revealed something far more troubling:
A fundamental chasm of mutual trust and confidence between the Bush administration and the nation's leading newspapers.
From this distance, and without more knowledge of the discussions between the administration and the newspapers, it is hard to pass judgment on the decision to publish. In general, history teaches that democracy is better served by a free press informing citizens about their government than by secrecy.
But the reaction from the White House and its cheering section, both in Congress and beyond, has been anything but constructive. President Bush called the disclosure "disgraceful," and Vice President Cheney lumped it together with the New York Times' previous disclosure of the secret eavesdropping on international phone calls without search warrants. Some Republicans on Capitol Hill have accused the newspapers of treason and called for a criminal investigation.
The central question is whether the news story will make it more difficult to track terrorist groups by following their money, as the White House claims. In fact, it's not clear whether the bank monitoring program was all that secret.
The Boston Globe reported this week that its own searches of public records, including government documents posted on the Internet, congressional testimony and guidelines for bank examiners, "describe how U.S. authorities have openly sought new tools to track terrorist financing since 2001. That includes getting access to information about terrorist-linked wire transfers and other transactions."
This latest clash between the newspapers and the White House calls for a more reasonable conversation about the competing obligations of openness in a free society and security in a time of war.
No responsible editor or publisher would deny the government's ability to effectively wage a war and keep some secrets from the enemy. We are Americans and patriots, too. In other wars in other eras, presidents have occasionally sought and received cooperation from newspapers that agreed not to publish sensitive information in the name of national security.
President Bush has lost the high ground to effectively make the same argument because of his administration's expansive view of executive power, its lack of respect for the judicial and legislative branches and its reflexive secrecy. Meanwhile, Congress consistently has failed to exercise its oversight role and hold the White House accountable for its actions. Some members of Congress had been informed about the financial tracking program only after newspapers started asking questions.
That leaves journalists in a lonely spot as they fulfill their obligation to aggressively report on our government's actions and publish fair, accurate accounts that citizens can judge for themselves.
We hope that the decision by the New York Times and other newspapers to reveal the data-mining program does no damage to the government's efforts to track down terrorists by tracing their sources of money.
Moreover, we hope that senior administration officials, including the president himself, take this opportunity not to make their case against the newspapers, but to make their case with the people who run them. This issue will arise again, and the discussion needs less superheated rhetoric about treason and more clear and specific evidence about the consequences of disclosure.
In return, the newspaper editors and publishers need to be open to the arguments of an administration that has used national security as an excuse to keep too many secrets.
In this era of a seemingly endless war and a shadow enemy, the stakes have become very high - for the press, for the government, and most of all, for the citizens they both serve.


The world is a better place without Abu Musab al-Zarqawi in it. The Sunni terrorist and his henchmen introduced the grotesque butchery of beheadings and suicide bombings to the war in Iraq. As the reaction in the region revealed, even many of the anti-American Sunnis whom Zarqawi claimed to represent had become appalled by the indiscriminate sadism of his tactics in Iraq and Jordan.
As recently as a year ago, eliminating the Zarqawi cancer might have marked a strategic turning point in Iraq. But Zarqawi succeeded in fomenting a broader sectarian war, and he leaves behind what Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld on Thursday called "a network of networks'' of terror in Iraq and elsewhere that can survive even the loss of a leader who encouraged a cult of personality. The 24 hours following the deaths of Zarqawi and several of his lieutenants brought an unabated spree of car bombings, kidnappings, random murders and other carnage in and around Baghdad.
Still, Zarqawi's death represents the most spectacular success for beleaguered coalition forces since the capture of Saddam Hussein. U.S., Iraqi and Jordanian intelligence operatives reportedly cooperated in the planning that led to the assault on Zarqawi's hideout near Baqouba. Building reliable partnerships with Iraq's security forces and supportive neighboring governments is a prerequisite for an orderly withdrawal of U.S. forces from Iraq.
To that end, a couple of less dramatic events this week may hold even more promise:
After weeks of stalemate, new Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki finally completed his Cabinet with the appointments of Jawad Kadem al-Bolani, a Shiite, as interior minister, and Gen. Abdul Qadr Mohammed Jassim, a Sunni, as defense minister. Earlier in the week, Maliki set in motion the release of thousands of prisoners, mostly Sunni, who were found to have been detained without just cause since the war began.
These efforts at reconciliation are only tentative steps toward building a more representative and self-sustaining Iraqi government. The divisions between Sunni and Shiite factions (and among competing Shiite blocs) remain acute, particularly within Iraq's police and security forces. Still, Maliki already has made more progress in that direction than his inept predecessor, Ibrahim al-Jaafari, managed in the previous year.
The rebuilding of Iraq will depend on incremental progress more than spectacular headlines. In the early, optimistic days of this war, White House officials overreacted to the capture of Hussein, the deaths of his sons and the rounding up of most of the faces on that notorious deck of Baathist cards. Meanwhile, the violence and chaos in Iraq continued to spread.
In public, the president and other administration officials reacted with more reserve to Zarqawi's death. They and our forces in Iraq are entitled to celebrate more fully in private this rare day of good news in a miserable war. The families and friends of Nicholas Berg, Eugene Armstrong and the thousands of other victims of Zarqawi's atrocities also are entitled to take some grim satisfaction from knowing that this mass murderer has met the fate he deserved.


The Nazi Holocaust probably was the most well-documented mass slaughter in world history. The Nazis established a well-ordered process for systematically murdering most of Western Europe's Jewish population, along with Gypsies, homosexuals and other victimized groups. And every criminal act had its piece of paper. But for too long those records have been held out of public view, denying the families of victims the positive proof of their relatives' fate that they deserve.
Finally, the German government has decided to drop its opposition to opening a massive archive of 50-million documents that has been held in the German town of Bad Arolsen since the end of World War II. The archive is more than 15 miles long and has information on 17.5-million people. It has been administered for the last 60 years by the International Tracing Service, an arm of the International Committee of the Red Cross, which helped people locate information on lost relatives who perished under the monstrous Nazi regime.
Ostensibly because of strict German privacy laws and other restrictions put in place when the archive was established, the documents have been kept sequestered and unavailable for historians and researchers. Even Holocaust survivors seeking information on relatives have sometimes had to wait years for answers due to the backlog. The archive's unanswered tracing inquiries stand at more than 400,000.
If the records were opened and digitized, no one would have to wait. With Holocaust survivors well into their sunset years, this cannot happen soon enough.
The United States has pressed for years to wrench open the documents, but the Germans have insisted that the archive remained closed until all legal liability issues were resolved. They said disclosing uncomfortable historical truths, such as who was subject to gruesome medical experiments and why, and who was treated for lice in the camps, might raise privacy claims.
It was a ridiculous and disturbing stall tactic.
Finally, German Justice Minister Brigitte Zypries has announced that her government will work to revise the international agreement that governs the records cache, to make them available to the public. The change is welcome, even if it is long overdue.
The immensity of Nazi crimes and the details of those atrocities are an established history that belongs to all mankind. When the world promises "never again" it needs to know the breadth and depth of the horrors of which man is capable.

The education establishment Gov. Jeb Bush has fought for seven years is now the reflection in the mirror and every bit as resistant. In his final year in office, Bush is so certain he is always right that his legacy agenda aspires, among other things, simply to get the last word.
Here are a few examples:
School vouchers. The state Supreme Court tossed out his first voucher program, Opportunity Scholarships, but he is willing to change the Constitution or risk court sanction to save it. The constitutional course is the more honest approach but would require the governor to explain to voters why he has never held private schools accepting vouchers to the same standard as public schools. The trickier, and legally suspect, route is to change the method of payment by folding the program into the existing Corporate Tax Credit Scholarship. Lawmakers might want to ask Patrick Heffernan, one of the original corporate voucher suppliers, why he thinks that is a bad idea.
Class size. Voters in 2002 rejected Bush's pleas and approved a constitutional amendment requiring fewer students in overcrowded classrooms. The governor is insisting they change their minds. The plan legislative leaders are embracing is a shameless barter deal, aimed at tricking voters into repealing part of the class size amendment in favor of an arbitrary and unnecessary requirement that 65 cents of each education dollar be spent in the classroom. The 65 Percent Solution is a partisan gimmick that could be passed legislatively. Linking the two is an insult.
Performance pay. The Legislature, frustrated that some districts haven't adopted workable performance-pay plans for teachers, couldn't decide last year whether to adopt a statewide plan. So the governor, through his Board of Education, is enacting his own. His attempt to tie bonuses solely to standardized test scores has angered teachers, principals, superintendents, school boards, and, according to a new opinion poll, the public. Are lawmakers willing to look the other way?
High school. Bush wants high school students to select majors, much like university students. But he has yet to identify the money necessary to expand alternative programs, such as vocational and technical education, and to hire additional guidance counselors. His changes in course requirements would also leave students with few options to explore electives.
This amounts to Jebucation, and it often thrives on the opposition of those it serves. The governor surrounds himself with people of similar views and then brands critics as enemies of change. In his final year in office, though, even some supporters are growing weary with his constant meddling.
"It's absolutely unreasonable to think a school district can focus on all those things at one time and still keep the buses running," says David Mosrie, chief executive officer of the Florida Association of District School Superintendents. "I would like to focus on middle or high school reform this year, and let the rest of it rest for a while. . . . Someone once told me if you have 50 priorities you really don't have any."

</text>
