<text id="B25" category="" words="2006" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'A Way Across The Border.' The New York Times, 1 August 2006, 15; 'Let's Start Talking.' The New York Times, 6 August 2006, 13; 'The Television Has Disintegrated. All That's Left Is the Viewer.' The New York Times, 13 August 2006, 9" Author="John Tierney; NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF; VERLYN KLINKENBORG" PublicationDate="1 August 2006; 6 August 2006; 13 August 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

The good news for immigration reform is that both liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans are denouncing a plan put forward last week. When both sides care enough to complain, at least they're talking. 
This plan comes from Representative Mike Pence of Indiana, the Republican who has spent the summer selling the idea to his party's leaders on Capitol Hill and in the White House. With their encouragement, he joined a Senate Republican, Kay Bailey Hutchison, in unveiling a shrewd compromise between the House's approach to immigration -- seal the border! -- and the Senate's plan for a guest-worker program. 
To mollify the border hawks, Hutchison and Pence proposed a guest-worker program that wouldn't start for two years, and then only if the president certified that new border security measures had been carried out. Although some Democrats are complaining publicly about the delay, this isn't a deal-breaker, because it would take a couple of years to set up the guest-worker program anyway. 
To get a guest-worker visa, immigrants would have to apply in their home countries. That's another concession to the House Republicans, who accused the Senate of effectively offering amnesty to illegal immigrants by letting them remain in America while they applied for a visa. 
By making them go home, Pence can reassure the Republican base that lawbreakers aren't being rewarded, they're just being given the same chance to apply for a visa as any worker in their home country. Anyone in a Latin American country with a free-trade agreement with the United States could get a visa if an American employer promised to hire him. 
But would illegal immigrants be willing to go home? Democratic critics of Pence, like Senator Edward Kennedy, warn that immigrants would be too afraid of losing their jobs, and in many cases their families, to risk being stranded in their home countries waiting for a visa. 
That's a valid concern, especially if federal bureaucrats had to process all those applications. Immigration officials are already swamped with paperwork. If millions of illegal immigrants suddenly started applying for a new guest-worker program, they could end up waiting years for visas. 
But Pence has an ingenious solution: guarantee workers that their visa applications will be processed within two weeks. The federal government would oversee the process and run background checks for security risks, but most of the routine work -- processing applications, doing medical checks, matching applicants with employers -- would be handled at ''Ellis Island centers'' in Latin American countries run by American private companies or agencies. 
Pence thinks the most likely operators of these centers would be companies experienced in placing job applicants, like Monster.com. But some of Pence's fans in the White House and on Capitol Hill envision letting other groups get involved too -- perhaps churches or labor unions or trade associations. 
If an applicant already had an employer willing to hire him, the center would confirm it. If he were looking for a job, the center would see if any employers were interested. Once word got out that there was a quick way to get a visa, illegal immigrants would want to come out of the shadows, and their employers would be under new pressure to make sure workers had the visas. 
The guest workers would be able, after 17 years, to apply for permanent residency. Some Democrats fear that after the long wait it might still be impossible for the immigrants to become citizens, but Pence says the system can be set up to make sure there are enough slots for them as long as they follow the law. 
''I don't think the American people are very concerned about giving legal immigrants the choice of permanent status or citizenship in the future,'' Pence says. ''What concerns Americans is giving people amnesty for breaking the law right now.'' 
Pence, the chairman of the Republican conservative caucus in the House, figures that of the more than 110 members in the caucus, a third are dead set against his proposal. But he estimates that a third are undecided, and a third are leaning in favor. 
Getting them and the rest of Congress to pass this proposal in time for the election won't be easy -- certainly not as simple as railing at illegal immigrants, as Republicans have been doing in their interminable hearings around the country. But if they want to show voters they can do something besides complain, there's a deal to be made. 

As I see it, Prime Minister Ehud Olmert is shooting Israel and America in the feet (and Lebanon in the stomach) each day that he continues his onslaught, with President Bush enthusiastically providing the ammunition. 
But since discussions of the Middle East usually involve people shouting past each other, let me stop harrumphing and try to address head-on the arguments of the many readers who disagree. 
It's a tragedy that Lebanese children are dying, but it would be crazy to accept a cease-fire now. That would hand Hezbollah a huge victory and return the Middle East to the impossible situation of the last few years, with rockets still raining down on northern Israel. So the U.S. has to give Israel space to get this job done. 
Look at the results so far with the job half done: some 600 dead Lebanese, and scores of dead Israelis; Hezbollah's rise to heroic status; the strengthening of Syria's hard-line regime; the weakening of moderates like King Abdullah of Jordan; a boost for Shiite militants in Iraq and around the region; the marginalization of Lebanon's democracy movement; and the further trashing of America's reputation around the world. 
Lebanese, instead of turning on Hezbollah, are rallying around it. A poll by the Beirut Center for Research and Information found that 87 percent of those surveyed supported Hezbollah's battles with Israel. That included 80 percent of Lebanese Christians surveyed. 
So with those results after more than three weeks, why will it be any different in another couple of weeks? 
It is, of course, possible that bunker-buster bombs could decapitate Hezbollah's leadership. But Israel didn't achieve a victory in the 18 years before it withdrew from Lebanon in 2000, so it's time to move toward a cease-fire -- not only to save Lebanese lives but also to get on with the business of a diplomatic solution. 
There may be a diplomatic solution, but first we have to clear out Hezbollah from southern Lebanon. Then an international force can go in as a buffer, and Israel will be delighted to pull out. 
It's fine to talk about an international force, but no country will send troops if Hezbollah objects. Otherwise, those troops will be targets, as they were in 1983. And Hezbollah and Syria won't approve unless there is some larger agreement between Israel and Lebanon -- and some benefit to Syria as well. 
How can one negotiate with those who would destroy you? Israel tried restraint and Hezbollah used the time to build up its arsenal. 
President Bush is right about one thing: We need to do more than restore the prewar situation on the Israeli-Lebanese border. There is also an opportunity here -- to achieve a landmark Lebanon-Israel peace deal. 
Edward Walker, former ambassador to Israel and former assistant secretary of state for the region, told me he thought a long-term settlement was plausible (although he acknowledged that he was also the optimistic boy who expected a pony every Christmas). France is showing leadership in pressing for such a lasting deal, and Mr. Bush should push that diplomatic effort with every administration sinew. 
Terms of a genuine settlement might involve an exchange of prisoners, Israel giving up the Shebaa Farms area (if not to Lebanon, then to an international force), and an Israeli promise not to breach Lebanese territory or airspace unless attacked. Hezbollah would commit to becoming a purely political force and to dismantling its militia, with its weaponry going to the Lebanese armed forces. Israel would resume talks with Syria on the Golan Heights, the U.S. would resume contact with Syria, and Syria would agree to stop supplying weaponry to Hezbollah (or allowing it in from Iran). Syria and Hezbollah would then pledge cooperation with a robust international buffer force along the border. Some of this may have to come in stages: for example, with Hezbollah first leaving the border area and then giving up its weaponry. 
Granted, it's odd for Israel to hand over Shebaa Farms to Lebanon, since old maps show pretty clearly that it was Syrian. But Syria, seeking to make mischief, has said that it is Lebanese, and it certainly is not Israeli. 
Israel would worry that such a settlement would be seen as rewarding Hezbollah and would encourage other militant groups. That's a legitimate concern. But such moves would also remove the raison d'etre for Hezbollah's militia, and they are probably the price for achieving calm in northern Israel. So let's stop the killing and start the talking. 

A few days later the box came. I carried it upstairs and opened it. It was like letting induced obsolescence loose in the house. I moved our former television -- 21 inches, 12 years old -- out of the way. What a squat, toadlike object it had become over the years! What a perfectly cubelike concentration of gravity! The old DVD player? Toast. The VCR? A laughably analog apparatus for dragging magnetized videotape along its sorry, bleary path. And as for TiVo, time for yet another upgrade. 
It seemed, in fact, as though the very idea of television itself was disintegrating. Televisions have always contained two devices: an apparatus for displaying the picture and a tuner for receiving the broadcast signal. And yet they have always seemed like single things, as unitary as a light bulb. You plug them in, turn them on, and there is the old familiar glow of ''Laverne and Shirley'' beaming down out of the skies. But this new television is nothing like that. It is a town square, an ecumenical gathering place for signals of all kinds. There are all the usual connections, of course, plus ports for a computer (which plays DVD's), a game controller (which plays DVD's too), a video iPod (which plays downloaded videos), and a separate port for something I have never heard of called ''Service.'' There's a tuner in the TV and also two in the TiVo box. So where, exactly, is ''the television''? 
I think the answer is that we are now the television. Think of all the devices we carry that snatch signal out of the air or intercept it as it streams past over cable of some kind or another. Think of all the possible sources of signal -- not merely network and cable but Youtube and iTunes and a million more as broadband broadens. A device like TiVo used to seem remarkable: sitting at home, watching television all day long, saving what we asked it to save or what it thought we might like to have saved. But there is no such thing as cosmic TiVo, dialed in to all the signals that pass through our lives, coordinating and saving Web sources and air sources and cable sources and personal sources, like home videos and digital photos. We ourselves are the tuner in the television set, modulating all these inputs, carrying them to the new flat-screen panel for viewing, one by one. The idea of sitting down in front of ''the television'' and watching ''what's on'' seems almost romantically archaic. Until you try it. Then it just seems archaic. 
These are my thoughts now. I have not even begun to think about the coming battle between the two new high-definition DVD formats -- Blu-Ray and HD-DVD. I'm like a lot of people with a new flat-screen television -- like anyone who bought a television in the early 1950's, for that matter. It's hard to care much what you are watching when the picture is so good. But this is a temporary state of satisfaction. I suspect it will last only a weekend.

</text>
