<text id="B26" category="" words="2001" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Coal is king but its queen is safety.' The Christian Science Monitor, 5 January 2006, p. 8; 'Opening the tap for a thirsty planet.'  The Christian Science Monitor, 22 March 2006, p. 8; 'What it took from the hearts of many people to free Jill Carroll.' T" Author="N/A" PublicationDate="5 January 2006; 22 March 2006; 31 March 2006; 2 October 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

Americans rarely glimpse their troubling dependency on an inexpensive but dirty and dangerous energy source, coal. This week's mine disaster in West Virginia that killed 12 workers points to a need for greater care to justify a rising US reliance on coal. 
Better mine safety is just one need. So, too, is less destructive mining and cleaner burning of a resource that may well serve American energy needs for two more centuries. More than half of US electricity is now generated with coal, and new technologies could soon enable liquefied and gasified coal to start replacing traditional petroleum. 
While progress on all levels of handling coal has improved (mining deaths, for instance, peaked in 1907), the public's intolerance for accidents and pollution also continues to rise. Witness the nation's heartfelt reaction this week to a communication miscue at West Virginia's Sago Mine about whether the miners were found alive. 
Coal executives and government officials should strive for better overall performance to justify a growing US dependency on coal. The nation has indeed seen sustained progress in coal-mine safety since the passage of tougher laws in 1969 and 1977, and the creation of the federal Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA). But the industry's injury rate hit a plateau in the mid-1990s, indicating a need for MSHA to find other ways to enhance inspections, training, company compliance, and technical support, especially in the more dangerous mining done underground, and mainly in the Appalachian states. 
Early reports on the causes for this week's accident indicate a need for state and federal inspectors to be given greater enforcement tools when a company shows a pattern of neglect in not taking all necessary safety precautions. The Sago Mine's safety violations rose sharply in 2005, a year when ownership of the mine changed hands. Higher fines and improved inspections will likely be required to counter such company lapses in management. 
The Bush administration and Congress should also take a fresh look at whether MSHA's $280 million budget and 2,200 employees are adequate, given the forecasts for coal usage in the 21st century. (Worldwide, coal consumption is expected to rise 1.4 percent a year until 2030, or nearly 1 billion more tons a year than present levels.) Recent MSHA cutbacks and rule changes should be reviewed by Congress. Also, the agency's internal watchdog unit will likely need more authority to correct problems. 
Nonetheless, fatal mine accidents, while serious, are not the major damage from coal usage. Pollution is considered coal's biggest killer, not to mention its likely contribution to global warming from carbon dioxide emissions. Coal pollution, however, has been greatly reduced since the 1970s due to new "clean" technologies and tougher enforcement. 
But again, the nation must expect better handling of this cheap but dirty fuel, otherwise it should increase government support for cleaner but more expensive energy sources. 
This latest mining tragedy should drive the US to look hard at the trade-offs in its coal dependency, and make sure the human and environmental costs are diminishing.

Any picture from space shows that Earth has water, water everywhere. But finding a glassful to drink is another matter. Americans eagerly grab a pricey bottle of water at even the hint that what comes from their tap might be tainted or just not tasty. 
Water is like land: Nobody is making any more of it. But, then again, there's no need. Water is never "used up": It's the ultimate recyclable, constantly changing forms and locations between glacier, cloud, river, pond, ocean, or underground aquifer. 
Of Earth's plenteous supply, only 2.5 percent is fresh water, suitable for agriculture and consumption. Still, that should be ample for humanity if it were uncontaminated and universally available. 
Yet most of the world struggles with serious aqua issues. The World Health Organization estimates that about 1.1 billion people - more than 1 out of every 6 people on the planet - don't have clean drinking water. It's also estimated that in developing countries, the average woman walks nearly four miles each day to fetch water for her family. And officials attribute more than a million deaths per year to lack of access to clean water and poor sanitation caused by water problems. 
At the turn of the millennium, the United Nations set a target to cut in half the number of people without access to clean water or sanitation by 2015. As the years tick by, that target looks more and more difficult to hit. 
To highlight water issues, the United Nations has designated Wednesday as World Water Day. This year it also coincides with the end of a six-day World Water Forum that has brought thousands of people from governments, nonprofit groups, and businesses in more than 100 countries to a conference in Mexico City. 
This World Water Forum seems to be (pardon the expression) a watershed moment for finding solutions. 
In some countries, municipal water systems lose up to 40 percent of their water on the way to households because of leaks in canals and pipes or illegal connections. Government mismanagement has prompted a big push in recent years toward privatization in some parts of the world. 
But turning water supplies over to foreign corporations has also backfired, especially in Latin America, where "water wars" have emerged. After peasant protests, Bolivia sent French company Suez packing for failing to provide promised fresh water and sewage systems. Water privatization protests have raged in Argentina and Uruguay, too. 
The challenge for citizen activists now is to find creative solutions that include watchdogs on whoever provides service. And privatization may still prove effective in other settings. 
Expensive water projects, such as massive dams, need honest vetting to ensure they will be cost-effective. The need for mega- projects will diminish if wasteful practices in farming, which consumes 70 to 90 percent of humanity's water use, can be reduced. Meanwhile, small projects at low cost can have big benefits: Moving taps closer to villages increases school attendance as children no longer have to fetch water. 
Some activists want access to water to be declared a "human right." It's clearly a human need, one that no one should be denied. And it's a precious resource, one that needs our best stewardship.

Ah. The sweet taste of freedom. Journalist Jill Carroll, released Thursday after nearly three months in captivity in Iraq, is savoring it. So are her family, and her colleagues here at the Monitor. But we also know this: freedom doesn't come without commitment. 
As a newspaper, the Monitor is committed to freedom of the press. Information, independently reported, is key to understanding. That principle is exactly what motivated Jill when, on assignment for this newspaper Jan. 7, the freelance journalist was kidnapped in Baghdad, and her translator, Allan Enwiya, killed. 
Jill devoted herself fully to communicating the complex story of Iraq. She learned Arabic. She worked appropriately in Iraq, dressing as a Muslim woman would. 
She is also one of many journalists the world over who prove their commitment to a free media by putting their lives on the line to report from dangerous places. 
With 60 journalists killed in Iraq so far, that country has been the deadliest for the media in the past decade, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists. This is not the first time a reporter working for the Monitor has been taken hostage. 
In 1995, during the Bosnian war, staff writer David Rohde disappeared as he reported on his Pulitzer Prize winning investigation of the massacre at Srebrenica. In 1970, while covering the Vietnam War, Elizabeth Pond was captured in Cambodia by the Viet Cong, North Vietnamese, and Khmer Rouge. Through persistent prayer and effort, both were released. 
That same persistence was absolutely vital to securing Jill's release. As soon as she was captured, many, many people swung into action with tireless commitment. Monitor editors and reporters, along with Jill's family, pursued all possible avenues for assistance. Late at night and early in the morning, from the start of this ordeal until its end, they were aided by US, Iraqi, Jordanian and other government officials, as well as private organizations, such as Reporters Without Borders. 
The Iraqi and Jordanian media also provided vital assistance. Individuals, too, persevered, with countless people praying for Jill every day. 
It takes courage to stand for freedom - for freedom of expression, freedom of religion, freedom of association, and for lives free from oppression and violence. Certainly, it took courage for Jill herself to hold out hope during captivity. 
It took strength for her parents to calmly and resolutely demand her release in countless television interviews, not knowing when, or if, their pleas would reach Jill's captors or pay off. 
And in a region which seems to drink in violence like mother's milk, it took courage for Muslim clerics to go against the grain of radical Islamist thinking and publicly and consistently denounce hostage taking and killing as a means to an end. Where does this courage come from? It can only result from a faith in freedom's enduring value as a God-given right, an ever-present condition that liberates individuals and societies, allowing them to walk on the path toward limitless possibilities. This is what makes hope more than just an empty gesture. 
The wonderful thing about freedom is that the more people experience it, the more committed they become to it. And that is why hope for other hostages in Iraq and elsewhere is not in vain.

Federal and state regulators have been slow off the mark to control an expanding slice of the mortgage business that lures many borrowers into thinking they can afford a home when they can't. After many warnings from Alan Greenspan and others that so-called "exotic" mortgages may be a threat to the housing market - and the economy - the first set of new rules for this type of dangerous debt finally came down Friday. 
Aimed first at banks (the more high-flying mortgage brokers will get their regs later), the federal rules aim to rein in abuses in types of mortgages that have loose standards or are simply too complex for an average person to understand. Such loans go way beyond the usual fixed-rate or traditional adjustable-rate mortgages in their level of riskiness or detail. A Government Accountability Office study released last month found most lenders "did not fully or clearly discuss the risks and the terms of these products." 
More than 30 percent of loans are now exotic, up from 10 percent in 2000. They include "interest only and no down payment" loans or "payment option" mortgages that come with teasing low-interest rates but can later expand into loan obligations greater than the worth of a home. 
While these exotics have helped create near-record homeownership (68.7 percent), the recent weakening of the housing market has led to a rapid rise in foreclosures and delinquencies in payments, mainly among those with such risky mortgages. 
State and federal regulators have been scrambling to come up with better requirements on what a lender must disclose. "Marketing materials for these loans often emphasize their benefits and downplay or omit the risks," Sandra Thompson, director of supervision and consumer protection at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, told Congress last month. 
A controversial aspect of the new rules - some expected in a few weeks - would require banks and the more than 90,000 mortgage companies to make a credible analysis of a borrower's capacity to repay a loan. In the fierce competition of this industry, many lenders of exotics do not do that scrutiny very well. But the mortgage-broker industry rejects the idea that it can determine if a borrower will falter on payments over the life of a loan. 
Nonetheless, the level of fraud among mortgage brokers doubled last year, with a $1 billion cost to the economy. Many brokers, if caught by state regulators, simply flee to another state. (An interstate remedy for that is in the works.) The industry needs a shake-up and better licensing to improve its professionalism.

</text>
