<text id="C03" category="" words="1993" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'LAUGHS STOP BEFORE HBO'S COMEDIES DO' Los Angeles Daily News, 11 June 2006, p. U12; ''FASTEST' RIDE OF A LIFETIME' Los Angeles Daily News, 13 February 2006, p. U13; 'P.T. BARNUM STORY NEEDS A MUCH BIGGER BIG TOP; Los Angeles Daily News, 3 March 2006, p. " Author="David Kronke; Bob Strauss; Katherine Karlin; Bob Strauss" PublicationDate="11 June 2006; 3 February 2006; 3 March 2006; 6 October 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; All" WebAddress="Factiva">

As season three of "Entourage" opens, "Aquaman" -- the movie that promises to transform Vince Chase (Adrian Grenier) from B-lister to megastar -- is opening nationwide imminently. Through the three episodes of the series that HBO made available for review, we discover the film's box-office fate, but what we don't learn is whether "Aquaman" is actually any good or not. 
There's no audience reaction at the premiere, nor any mention of the film's reviews, nor is the Valley audience with whom Vince and his hangers-on watch the movie on its opening weekend allowed to offer any opinion.
This could be because the show's writers are being coy, or because the real-life James Cameron -- portraying the fictitious James Cameron, director of "Aquaman" -- played along with the producers and they didn't want to suggest he made a junky movie. 
Or it could be yet another industry-insider joke in a series chockablock with them -- whether the movie is good or awful is irrelevant; it's all about the box office, baby. 
"Entourage" kicks off a most curious block of comedies debuting on HBO tonight -- its sleek polish segues into the lowbrow posturing of comedian Louis C.K.'s sitcom deconstruction "Lucky Louie," which will find favor mainly with nonreligious fans of "Blue Collar TV." That, in turn, gives way to the amorphous absurdities of stand-up comic Dane Cook, whose material amuses younger audiences but scarcely anyone over, say, 30. 
So the evening lacks what broadcasters would call "flow." Or, more to the point, it's almost pathologically schizophrenic. 
Back to "Entourage" for a moment. As Vince threatens to blow up big-time, the show itself has assumed a becoming modesty. In tonight's episode, Vince beseeches his neurotic mother (Mercedes Ruehl) to fly in to be his date for his potential blockbuster's premiere. Next week, an unfortunate series of events directs Vince and the gang to a high-school graduation party in Northridge, where they give a boost of self-confidence to the class nerds. After spending the entire episode railing against the lowly San Fernando Valley, Vince's brother, Drama (Kevin Dillon), begrudgingly admits the place ain't so bad. 
And in the third episode, a caustic buddy from the gang's past reappears, threatening rifts in the close-knit pack of horndogs. 
Even Ari (Jeremy Piven), Vince's evil-genius agent, cavorts with less vitriolic swagger than usual. 
Why HBO thinks "Entourage's" fan base will likewise embrace "Lucky Louie" is anyone's guess. Louis C.K. -- who has written for Conan O'Brien and Chris Rock and is a decent stand-up in his own right -- has reimagined "The Honeymooners" as a vehicle for masturbation jokes. 
But rather than parody the sitcom, he's stripped the genre of nuance: Whereas Art Carney's Ed Norton worked in New York's sewer system, here, that's where everyone's mind is. Studio audiences guffaw every time characters say naughty words or express naughty thoughts or engage in naughty activities. 
"Lucky Louie" opens with a typical sitcom moment -- a beleaguered dad (C.K.) sits with his eternally curious daughter, who challenges his every statement with a plaintive "Why?" After a protracted sequence, an exasperated Louie blurts out, "Because God is dead and we're alone," satisfying her inquisition but, nonetheless, seeming a long way to go for that mild laugh. 
Moreover, the show's writers are unburdened by the notion of character development. Tonight, Louie and wife Kim (Pamela Adlon) haven't had sex for months; next week, they're upon one another like ferrets. Tonight, Louie's pot-dealing pal is divorced; in a future episode, Louie tells him, "If you ever get married..." 
The show's plots and performances ape particularly lame sitcoms - - some moments are genuinely embarrassing -- which means the only real "joke" is that the studio audience is laughing at such rote material. 
HBO declares the show to be "the end of the sitcom as you know it," but does so with a pride that the show itself does not merit. 
After that comes "Dane Cook's Tourgasm," a lazy, home-movie-type show focusing on people who are clearly confident that they're far more inherently interesting than they actually are. Comics are needy types in the first place, so those Cook -- who comes off as an affable guy if not a particularly incisive comedian -- has recruited are particularly adept at mugging desperately for the cameras. 
For his comedy tour, Cook brought three other stand-up pals along for the ride. Only one, Gary Gulman, betrays any talent; the brief glimpses of his live performances are uniformly entertaining. 
The other two just seem like jerks -- Bobby Kelly is fairly hostile; Jay Davis is pretty whiny. The series follows the guys as they reconnoiter the country, with staged bits (scooter races, horse rides, faux-rock climbs) added to alleviate their tour-bus claustrophobia and to wring some vestige of "drama" from the proceedings. 
"Years down the line, I'm gonna look at this and it's going to be very close to my heart," Cook explicates earnestly. Well, that makes one of us. 
David Kronke, (818) 713-3638 david.kronke@dailynews.com 
Vince's (Adrian Grenier) neurotic mom, played by Mercedes Ruehl, flies out to be his date for the big "Aquaman" premiere on the hit "Entourage." 
Dane Cook takes his comedian pals on the road in "Dane Cook's Tourgasm." 
Pamela Adelon and Louis C.K. star in "Lucky Louie," which ought to amuse viewers who laugh when they hear naughty words on television. 



NO DOUBT Burt Munro was a great guy. 
A real character, the New Zealand motorcycle nut spent what appears to be the majority of his long life sleeping in a cinder- block shed with his mechanics' gear and his beloved 1920 Indian Twin Scout. In the 1960s, he finally got it together to cross the ocean to L.A. and travel overland to Utah's Bonneville Salt Flats, where he and the equally ancient bike eventually set a speed record. "The World's Fastest Indian" is about that journey. 
According to Roger Donaldson, who wrote and directed the movie (and met Munro in the 1970s), Burt was so gosh-darn lovable that even his neighbors in the small, South Island village of Invercargill forgave his revving motors at all hours and urinating on his lemon tree. The unattached elderly ladies of the community found him irresistible, but Burt was wedded to his dream of racing at the legendary proving grounds. 
Hopkins pours on the optimistic charm, of course. But Burt Munro is little more than a fantasy figure for the elderly in "The World's Fastest Indian." And however great it must have felt for the bloke to follow his dream, Hopkins seemed to be having a much better time back when he was stalking entrees to go with fava beans and Chianti. 


'BARNUM" IS a big musical with big numbers about a big man. So how does director Josh Prince adapt it to the little stage at NoHo Arts Center? 
Not too well. 
In this scaled-down production, bright ladders and streamers suggest a three-ring circus, and the players are in the audiences members' laps (literally, for one unlucky woman). 
This can-do spirit would work if "Barnum" had a strong narrative, but Mark Bramble's expository book would fit in a couple of typed pages. The composer Cy Coleman, who created his best work when inspired by a great lyricist, teamed with Michael Stewart here to create a mostly unmemorable score. 
The story centers on the opposites-attract relationship between the brash eponymous showman and his no-nonsense Yankee wife, Chairy; she disapproves of his hucksterism, but she's a good sport and is generally supportive. Even when Barnum falls into the arms of Jenny Lind, the "Swedish Nightingale," at the close of the first act, we find he has returned to his senses and his forgiving wife by the opening of act two; any canoodling seems to be have been done during intermission. The only remaining tension is to wonder when Bailey will turn up. 
To succeed, "Barnum" needs razzle-dazzle, and this tight space prohibits it. A recent evening was fraught with mishaps: dropped props, on-mic backstage noise, and (G-rated) wardrobe malfunctions. The young and energetic cast performed bravely; it wasn't their fault. This is simply too much show. 
If you're going to spend a couple of hours in the theater, however, you could do worse than to gaze at the startlingly beautiful Yvette Lawrence, who plays Chairy. She's got a pleasant voice, too. As Barnum, James J. Mellon executes chin-ups and treads a balance beam, but he just doesn't exude the larger-than-life quality that brought us the Greatest Show on Earth. The versatile Robert Mammana plays a number of supporting roles with chameleonlike efficiency, and Emily Kosloski sings a gorgeous "Love Makes Such Fools of Us All." 
On the evening under review, standby Jacquelyn Levy stepped in to sing the bluesy "Black and White" seamlessly. 


For a movie that isn't actually porn, "Shortbus" sure has a lot of real sex. 
All flavors, too. Straight. Gay. Single participant. More than two participants. More than 20. Electronics-enhanced. Voyeur- assisted. 
Dominatrix-guided. "Star Spangled Banner"-accompanied ... graphically so. 
OK, now you should know whether you can sit through "Shortbus." The rest of this review is for those who think they want to. 
Witty, funny, brave 
John Cameron Mitchell's follow-up to "Hedwig and the Angry Inch" is, basically, a sex farce that emphasizes the key element that's rarely depicted in film, if at all. And "Shortbus" is well-stocked with witty lines, funny situations and credible, intelligent character insights. It's acted spectacularly and bravely, by a cast of unknowns. If you can swing with it, "Shortbus" is a lot of fun. 
Until it shifts into a probably unavoidable serious mode. 
That's when Mitchell and his actors -- who developed the script together during a series of improvisational workshops -- take stock of their characters' lives, loves and libidos. They all come to honest conclusions but, by nature, some of their realizations can't help seeming a little trite. A movie that, for the longest time, is as original as it is uninhibited -- and you'll see things you never have in a movie before -- ends up feeling just a little square. 
The title refers to a salon in lower Manhattan where people go to share and discuss art, music, film, politics ... and then take off their clothes and jump all over one another. Sofia (Sook-Yin Lee) is a sex therapist who has never had an orgasm with her husband (Raphael Barker) or anyone else. She hears about Shortbus from a pair of gay clients and checks it out. Soon Sofia becomes a cause celebre for an assortment of sybarites, lesbians, sadomasochists and singer-songwriters, among other club patrons. 
Even Shortbus' snippy host/ess Justin Bond takes a shot at making Sofia happy. S/he's played by, well, Justin Bond, who's apparently a big name in New York's trans- 
entertainment scene. Bond initially comes off as a smart- 
mouthed stereotype, but listen to his snippy epigrams; they're rich with canny cultural observation and deep ache. 
Oh, how to choose 
As for that gay couple, former child actor Jamie (PJ DeBoy) and ex-hustler James (Paul Dawson) want to "monogamously" experiment with a third party -- problem is, there are several candidates. 
Furthermore, James isn't as into the idea as his partner is. This leads to tears, and perhaps far worse -- but also some pretty wacky encounters. And like everybody's quest for emotional and physical fulfillment in this movie, it yields hilarious dialogue that also manages to say a lot. 
I guess Mitchell is trying to comment on repression in the post- 9/11 world, and he's made it as specifically about New York as he can (panoramas of the city are rendered in blocky, color-saturated computer animation). But despite what many would call its peculiarities, the film really makes a universal statement. 
Who, after all, hasn't tried to find themselves through pleasure? Maybe not in the ways "Shortbus" gleefully depicts, but in ones that have nonetheless left us feeling naked, uncertain and at least a little bit satisfied.

</text>
