<text id="C06" category="" words="1999" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="BOOK REVIEW Man's noblest ideas began as response to fanatical worldviews.' The Arkansas Democrat Gazette, 22 July 2006, p. 41; 'BOOK REVIEW Wallflowers' ideas help 'un-women' get into the dance.' The Arkansas Democrat Gazette, 24 June 2006, p. 45; 'HOT S" Author="Arthur Paul Bowen; Rosemary Boggs; Melissa L. Jones and Vance Jordan" PublicationDate="22 July 2006; 24 June 2006; 15 January 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

"Perhaps every generation believes that it has reached a turning point in history, but our problems seem particularly intractable and our future increasingly uncertain." This cheery observation is the first sentence of The Great Transformation: The Beginnings of Our Religious Traditions by British historian/theologian Karen Armstrong. 
Armstrong, who has written numerous books on various religious topics including Islam and the rise of fundamentalism in the East and West, examines in her latest book the period of human history between 1600 B.C. and 200 B.C. This period (at least the portion from 800 B.C. forward) was described as "the Axial Age" by the German philosopher Karl Jaspers. 
According to Jaspers, it was during this period of time that the fundamental conceptions that underlie modern civilization came in four separate regions and gave rise to Confucianism and Taoism in China, Hinduism and Buddhism in India, monotheism in Israel and philosophical rationalism in Greece. 
The word axial comes from the German word "achse," which means "axis" or "to pivot on an axis." The Axial Age produced what Armstrong describes as the "axial sages" such as Confucius, Buddha, the Old Testament prophets, Plato and Aristotle, among others. According to Armstrong, rabbinical Judaism, Islam and Christianity are "the latter day flowerings of the Axial Age." To greatly oversimplify, this age was characterized by certain "axial moments" in which each of these regions was forced by political turbulence or other extreme widespread cultural anxiety to confront a response of "militant piety" (or just plain militant behavior) in the culture. This militant piety tended to compress complexity and reality into oversimplified categories of good and evil. The response of the axial sages was to turn away from religious formalism, tone down the violent rhetoric in the writings and rituals, promote social justice and urge self-examination and introspection. 
Armstrong takes us through each stage of this Axial Age from an introduction to the pastoralists of the steppes of southern Russia, who called themselves the Aryans (not to be confused with the Germans) and who later settled in India, to the rise of rabbinical Judaism in Israel. Along the way, Armstrong offers numerous fascinating observations such as her interpretation of Yahweh's cryptic response ("I am what am.") to Moses' otherwise sensible question, "Who are you?" "This enigmatic phrase was a Hebrew idiom of ... Mind your own business!" Armstrong writes. "In the ancient world, to know someone's name meant that you had power over him. God was not to be controlled and manipulated in this way." Armstrong makes clear that the Axial Age had a profound impact on our modern religious thinking. Despite the fact that none of these "axial peoples" had the foggiest notion that the others existed, all four regions produced their own versions of the Golden Rule long before it was articulated by Jesus. And yet, apart from the Israelites, none of these axial reformers was particularly religious. 
Buddha and Confucius taught that the transcendent was to be found within. The Greek philosophers, for the most part, were more concerned with science and politics. Indeed, Buddha found speculation about Creation and/or God as "not useful" and likened such inquiry to a wounded man refusing medical treatment until he found out the name of the man who shot him with the arrow and what village he was from. 
In the final chapter, "The Way Forward," Armstrong turns to a discussion of Islam, which is a recurrent subject of her work. She points out that, contrary to popular belief, Islam is a religion of ethics and peace. According to her, the basic message of the Koran is "a command of practical compassion" which requires compassion for the poor and treating all people, including "the people of an earlier revelation" with dignity and respect. 
She also states that the much bandied-about word jihad does not mean "holy war" as the misinformed in the East and West believe. It means "struggle." The Koran contains violent imagery, as does the Bible. And yet, Armstrong points out that although the Koran permits violence as a response to a violent provocation, the concept of jihad prefers negotiations over war. And in the case of war, strict rules of engagement apply: A pre-emptive strike is not allowed, civilians are not to be slaughtered and the response must be proportionate to the provocation. 
Further, jihad requires that the struggle be maintained by negotiation once hostilities cease. While this is fascinating stuff, it hardly comforts one to know that we in the West are not alone in misinterpreting Scripture. 
It is clear that Armstrong believes that we are confronted by an axial moment in human history. The world is a smaller, more dangerous place. Our environment is threatened due to our viewing it purely as a resource and not as something "holy." A militant piety is in the ascendant mode here and abroad. 
In the end, Armstrong urges a return to the values of our Axial forebears and their common articulation of the Golden Rule as the lodestar. Her test is simple: "If people's beliefs - secular or religious - make them belligerent, intolerant and unkind, they are not `skillful,'" she says, using Buddhist terminology. 
"If, however, their convictions require them to act compassionately and to honor the stranger, then they are good, helpful and sound." Suffice it to say The Great Transformation is a lot to unpack. Armstrong collapses a breathtaking amount of human history into 399 pages. The narrative is leavened with 25 maps, approximately 800 or so footnotes, a glossary and a bibliography. However, despite its many pleasures and insights, I could not help but detect a certain whiff of condescension in her writing style which I occasionally found distracting. Armstrong knows more about this subject than pretty much anybody, and she is not afraid to let you know it. 
No matter. This is a sober and penetrating analysis of a critical subject. Armstrong has much in common with the Old Testament prophets she so obviously admires. In an earlier book, The Battle for God, she sounded the alarm about Islamic fundamentalism and foreshadowed, if not predicted, the militant piety culminating in the tragic events of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. In The Great Transformation, Armstrong, like Amos and Jeremiah before her, has sounded the alarm again. 


Author Angela Thomas' book When Wallflowers Dance is written for women. Or to be more specific, for women who have (through no real fault of their own) become "un-women." The un-woman usually begins life as a wallflower, standing on the sidelines at the dance of life. Not wanting to draw attention to herself, she constantly struggles to avoid the pain of her unhappy, unfulfilled existence. The un-woman hides. She works to blend in. And she keeps everyone out, including God. 
Early in the book, Thomas describes her journey into unwomanhood. She grew up in a solid, if somewhat dysfunctional, family where there was always plenty to eat and church attendance was mandatory. She was very naive, sheltered and trusting, and got energy from making other people happy. 
Thomas' need to please people wore her out, and she eventually came to realize that you can never make anybody happy. Major burnout followed, topped off by a divorce after four children and 14 years of marriage. 
Adding up the years and events of her existence, she looked back over a life of pride, pretense, stress, lies, worry, doubt and fear that led her to become the un-woman who just wanted to go through the motions of life while watching the world go by. But she became determined to change that. 
If you've ever experienced feelings like Thomas', and you aren't content with staying that way, When Wallflowers Dance will uplift and encourage you to not just live with God, but step off the sidelines and onto the dance floor. The difference between living and dancing, Thomas says, is spiritual maturity. 
It's a choice you have to make by accepting God's invitation to dance; He'll never force you. 
The subtitle of this book is "Becoming a Woman of Righteous Confidence," and Thomas works very hard to lead the reader toward that end. She first offers to take you by the hand, provides a heartfelt prayer for you to read, and then uses her life lessons, or "hard knocks" as some would call them, to help you improve whatever situation you are facing. 
One of the f irst things Thomas asks the overextended and worn-out un-women to do is to slow down their bodies so their souls can catch up. In our busy world it seems almost crazy to think we can slow down at all, but with God-based reasoning, it should become clear to most readers that what Thomas is saying makes sense. How can we experience healing and find God's divine plan for our life if we won't stay still and listen long enough to hear what He's saying? 
And no, slowing down our body does not mean shirking the commitments we have to our families, jobs and general well-being. It's more a matter of working to store up and replenish our inner being so we can stop feeling empty or tired because we've taken on activities or responsibilities that are beyond our reasonable limits. Using her own slowingdown experience as a guide, Thomas outlines her simple plan to help us get headed in the right direction. First and foremost, she urges us to continue with our mandatory commitments and to complete prior obligations. Then make it your goal to stop taking on extra responsibilities for the length of time you determine will be sufficient for restoration. 
If friends and family look at you strangely at first, make sure to explain the reasoning behind what you're doing and stand your ground. But don't allow the slowing-down process to become a time for distancing yourself from those around you. And don't use it as an excuse for becoming self-absorbed, egotistical or selfish. Use the time wisely by becoming more dependent on God, who gives us permission to do what we need to do to restore the health of our souls. 
Throughout the book, the author discusses many aspects of stepping out of the darkness and into a light-filled life of conviction and joy. Her suggestions include living intentionally and having a purposeful life. Have a plan. Call on good friends for strength and comfort, restore your home and body without overdoing it physically, keep a clear conscience and choose victory over your thoughts. And never, ever be afraid to ask God for what you want for your life. 
Thomas also asks you to realize how beautiful you are to God (who did create you, after all), to enjoy God's gifts, to love your family well, to continually find time to pray and to find time to laugh whenever you can. 
When Wallflowers Dance isn't a one-size-fits-all antidote for every woman, and there are probably varying degrees of un-womanhood. But the book offers a wealth of Bible-based ideas from the author's own experiences to help you learn to dance with God - but let Him lead. 

Prince of Persia has been a fail-safe title for Ubisoft and its latest offering, The Two Thrones, lives up to its predecessors. 
I thoroughly enjoyed the game play. Some of the fight sequences are just amazing. The environment changes so drastically that you keep playing just to see what's next. But the most appealing part of this game to me is the storyline. Ubisoft has hung its hat on creative storylines and this time they've outdone themselves. After battling through the Sands of Time, the previous Prince of Persia, the prince returns to Babylon expecting peace. What?! Babylon peaceful? 
OK, I know that was a stretch, but the real twist to this game is that you play the role of the good prince and his evil dark side. Their fighting styles, their purposes and their methods are completely different. Trying to master both styles of fighting keeps the game fresh and original.

</text>
