<text id="C08" category="" words="1995" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'3: Little girl lost in the palace at Versailles' The Atlanta Journal - Constitution, October 20 2006, Page E1; 'a sense of majesty: Louvre Atlanta thrills despite its faults'  The Atlanta Journal - Constitution, 13 October 2006, Page F1; 'JUST OUT / BOOK" Author="ELEANOR RINGEL GILLESPIE; CATHERINE FOX; ELAINE MARGOLIN" PublicationDate="20 October 2006; 16 October 2006; 17 October 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

The verdict: A bon bon with a melancholy aftertaste.
The prettiest movie of the year so far, "Marie Antoinette" is also one of the most thrillingly original.
Sofia Coppola follows up her Oscar-winning "Lost in Translation" with a film that has a similarly rigorous intelligence and sense of dislocation.
For underneath its gilded artifice and cornucopia of pastries and court protocol is the very human story of someone as flummoxed by her circumstances as Bill Murray was in "Translation's" Japan. And he didn't have to worry about rioting peasants who wanted his head.
Folderol and fancy gowns aside, what you're watching is a tragedy.
Marie (Kirsten Dunst) is all of 14 when she's shipped off to France by her mother, the queen of Austria, to marry the Dauphin, Louis XVI (Jason Schwartzman). The world she once knew vanishes as soon as she crosses the French border. "Now you must say farewell to your party and leave all Austria behind," she's told by one of her new keepers, the Comtesse de Noailles (a severe Judy Davis with collarbones that could rip open a FedEx package).
She means it. Not only is Marie completely stripped, but her beloved pug, Mops, won't be coming to Versailles, either. In a wonderful throwaway moment, Marie's face crinkles up like any adolescent who's had her pet doggie taken away.
Upon her arrival, the current ruler, King Louis XV (a randy Rip Torn), asks a courtier about her bosom. His son, however, seems more interested in rejoining his hunting party. Still, in short order, she and Louis XVI are married. Seven years later, the marriage is --- finally --- consummated.
Initially, Marie's put off by the servants beyond counting and the dozen or so courtiers gathered in her bedroom every morning before she's even out of bed. And then ... she spoils before our very eyes. We see her grow used to the incessant pampering --- how she comes to like it and eventually demand it. Coppola skillfully charts her heroine's transformation from an innocent and overwhelmed girl to a woman comfortable in her authority and accustomed to having her every whim obeyed.
She even gets a new pug.
The finery and foolishness are, the film hints, also one way to cope with a life lived entirely in public. Louis and Marie may be the only two at the breakfast table --- typically festooned with pheasants or pyramids of prawns --- but behind them, the members of the court whisper and mill about incessantly. At Petit Trianon, her rustic retreat, she and her friends may play at pretend dairy maids, but they're surrounded by retainers awaiting their every order and royal vendors who show them the latest in shoes while "I Want Candy" is heard on the soundtrack.
Coppola mixes contemporary music (Gang of Four, the Cure, New Order, the Strokes) with traditional harpsichords and lutes. Versailles, she suggests, wasn't all that much different from a posh private academy --- Mean Girls in powdered wigs. As the new kid, Marie is initially treated badly. Catty comments about Austrian apple strudel and the like. Says one aristocrat, arching her eyebrow, "I think she's delightful. She looks like a little piece of cake."
"Marie Antoinette" is particularly concerned with female matters --- and troubles. Her sexless marriage isn't just a matter of court gossip, it's a matter of life and death. No heir, as her mother keeps reminding her in spiteful letters, perhaps no more queen of France.
The flaw in "Marie Antoinette" is that in achieving the Brechtian remove she desires, Coppola distances us from the characters in a manner more suitable, perhaps, to a satire than the hermetic complexities of this film. Marie's lamentable end hits us intellectually more than emotionally; in a sense, the movie is too smart for its own good.
It's a credit to the picture's tone and cast that the dazzling costumes and set designs, which are almost guaranteed Oscar nominations, never overwhelm the acting. Torn, Davis, Asia Argento as Louis XV's impudent royal mistress, and Steve Coogan as a loyal courtier are all strong.
Schwartzman delivers an exquisitely sly performance. He doesn't make Louis XVI a fool or a buffoon, but rather, distracted and somewhat obtuse. More than anything, he's simply "miscast" as the king of France --- or anywhere. At dinner, he stares at the food on his fork as if he's not quite sure where it goes.
Dunst carries the picture on her slim, gorgeously garbed shoulders, and she does it with style and a slightly poignant touch of a little girl lost. Marie is swallowed up by a society she can barely fathom, let alone lord over. She's in over her head (sorry), and the lavish jewels and other trappings are as much props as anything else --- things to put her at ease (at first) and then to perpetuate her head-girl status.
But her essential isolation remains, and Coppola emphasizes it throughout the film. In one stunning shot, Marie stands on a balcony at Versailles, and the camera pulls back and back and back until she looks like a prettily coifed paper doll silhouetted against the most massively elaborate dollhouse imaginable.
Her first morning at Versailles, as the women flock around and fuss over her, Marie mutters in some distress, "This is ridiculous," and the pointed response is, "This, Madame, is Versailles."
It is ridiculous, Coppola tells us, and it is Versailles. And it is, ultimately, all very sad.
A QUARTET OF QUALITY FILMS: Fall's early doldrums at the cinema are forgotten with these four major movies opening today, all drawing high marks from our critics.

he verdict: Short-comings notwithstanding, Louvre Atlanta's inaugural exhibitions deliver in bringing exceptional works of art from one of the world's greatest museums.
Even with three years of exhibitions, Louvre Atlanta, which opens Saturday at the High Museum, can hope to offer only a fraction of the great Paris museum's vast collection. So organizers have devised the series as a sort of tasting menu: a sampling of the Louvre's character and breadth that also tells the museum's history, from royals to revolution to republic.
This first course, so to speak, focuses on the collections built by the French kings and how they shaped the Louvre's core holdings. It uses an audio guide and labels to provide a depth of information.
For most folks, however, the art is the thing, and this first installment of Louvre Atlanta --- 115 drawings, sculptures and paintings --- is a mixed success. It stumbles with some puzzling choices, including what feels like a skimpy selection of paintings. Yet the quality of the paintings that are here is beyond impeccable, and the thrilling moments throughout the exhibit outweigh the disappointments. On balance, Louvre Atlanta's debut is not to be missed.
Unfortunately, the regiment of marble and bronze sculptures arrayed in the Anne Cox Chambers Wing lobby gets the show off to a disappointing start.
Yes, the portrait busts are lovely. Those depicting artists whose works are on view upstairs are particularly engaging, and lining them up facing out the window is a clever turning-the-tables conceit. But the rows of sculptures behind them lack any explanation of their importance or history, and without it they just seem to be filling up the room by default. (Which in a way they are, because the glass box can't be used for light-sensitive work like painting or drawing.)
Architect Renzo Piano intended the transparency as a way to entice visitors, but because of the reflections on the glass, you can barely see what's inside as you approach the building. The sculptures' Piano-designed pedestals, split into "legs" for transparency's sake, are distracting, and the way the pieces are lined up is rather odd. (One visiting critic thought the grouping was a conceptual piece.)
In contrast, the drawings exhibition on the second floor is everything it should be and more: abundant, exquisite and intelligently chosen to reflect variety in subject, style and artist. The low light and sometimes faint marks require your attention. You will be rewarded by discovering the many wonderful artists represented who are not household names, as well as getting up close and personal with some of the most revered old masters.
And personal it is: Drawings --- sketches, studies for paintings, exercises --- are the most intimate form of art-making, and most of these were not intended for public consumption. Neoclassicist Nicolas Poussin's ink and wash landscape drawings suggest a more romantic side, while Antoine Coypel's gridded drawings demonstrate the process of preparing an image for transfer to a wall for a mural.
Yet the subtlety and detail of these works reveal the artists' commitment to their craft and their pleasure in it. Although the woman in Charles Le Brun's study was likely an extra in the multi-figure painting "Massacre of the Innocents," he took care in limning, in an elegant, economical line, both her supplicating pose and the distress in her face.
The sculptures on the Chambers-wing skyway are far more engaging than what's in the lobby. Jean-Louis Lemoyne's portrait bust of Jules Hardouin-Mansart, architect of Versailles, is a marvel of skill and psychological acumen. The bewigged Hardouin-Mansart exudes the vaguely pompous confidence of a royal favorite. Gorgeous bronzes suggest the kings' predilections for antiquities, Baroque excess and copies of admired works they couldn't own, like Michelangelo's "Night" and "Day" from the Medici tomb in Florence, Italy.
Then comes the show's climax: masterworks by Raphael and Rembrandt facing each other across the room --- oh, and a Velasquez portrait on the adjacent wall, opposite Baroque Italian masters.
It's not the names, of course; it's the power of the paintings themselves. The humanism and confidence of the Renaissance is embodied in Raphael's portrait of his friend Castiglione, a poet and diplomat whose calm and steady gaze suggests a thoughtful man at peace with himself. Painted in looser strokes and bathed in burnished tones, Rembrandt's soulful "St. Matthew and the Angel" gives form not just to the interior process of thought and inspiration but also the wisdom and grace with which the artist endowed the paintings of his last years.
The exhibit's last gallery looks a bit empty, and the paintings are not of the caliber of those in the other gallery. It will fill up in June with four important 18th-century paintings. But that's not much consolation for visitors until then, especially those who arrive between Jan. 21 and March 3, when the second floor is closed to take down the drawings and install the decorative arts exhibit.
Despite its disappointments, the exhibit delivers on the promise of its basic premise. It is an armchair traveler's Louvre --- an opportunity, for instance, to see in one room masterpieces that would require a trek through the mother ship, and to view art with an intimacy not likely amid the distractions of sheer quantity at the Louvre.
In this spare environment, you can commune with great works of art --- and discover the difference between looking and seeing.

The verdict: Throwing a party as performance art.
You have to wonder what Amy Sedaris was like in high school. Was she a geek or a jock or a renegade chick? One senses that the ironic comic was always a chronicler of sorts --- most comfortable alone in the basement of her suburban home creating fantasy parties for invisible guests.
In this unusual, lavishly decorated and funny book about the art of becoming a domestic goddess, Sedaris --- sister of David --- riffs on the multitude of absurdities that surround our social rituals, while simultaneously offering genuinely sound advice.
In a tone that often resembles a whacked-out, hyped-up Martha Stewart, comedian-actress Sedaris ("Strangers With Candy," "Sex and the City") keeps you utterly off balance. In the middle of making suggestions about how to introduce dinner guests to one another, for instance, she urges readers to avoid comments like, "This is Barbara. She can't have children," or, "Matt's on mood stabilizers."

</text>
