<text id="C09" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="TV REVIEW / Strangers and family caught in Tsunami / Fictionalized drama boasts first-rate cast but second-rate script' Houston Chronicle, 9 December 2006, Page 10; 'A wild corner of the literary landscape / Edward Abbey's correspondence echoes the honest" Author="VIRGINIA HEFFERNAN; BRAD TYER; CHRISTOPHER HAWTHORNE" PublicationDate="9 December 2006; 26 November 2006; 24 September 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; End" WebAddress="Factiva">

The television miniseries has long served to popularize historical tragedies for American audiences. In 1968, "The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich," on ABC, inaugurated the form; Alex Haley's renowned "Roots" came nine years later. "Holocaust," which starred Meryl Streep, appeared in 1978.
But in recent years the networks have begun to lose faith. When ABC televised "The Path to 9/11" in September, the controversial drama played to mixed - well, mixed everything.
With the networks newly chastened, then, it's not surprising that responsibility for event television has fallen to HBO, which continues to zig where others zag. "Tsunami: The Aftermath" is billed upfront as a "fictional drama" that is nonetheless "inspired by actual events" and "based on interviews and research." Presumably, this mealy preamble is designed to give the film authority with an audience that these days knocks back its news documentaries straight, no chaser. Led by Sheila Nevins since 1979, HBO's documentary division has come to provide a rubric under which the cable channel has shown its most incendiary and raunchy material.
Compared with the real documentaries, though, Tsunami doesn't stint on tonic, and it may even include pia colada mix. In spite of the research that went into it, it's a melodrama, with an ominous score, misty close-ups and strong elements of Jaws and Lost. By way of dialogue, the characters one by one survey the wreckage and whisper, horror-struck, "Jesus Christ."
Within the confines of this stylization - and the natural hurtling forward of a story we all know from the news - the performances are heroic and even lifelike. It's certainly a first- rate cast, one that includes Toni Collette, Sophie Okonedo and Hugh Bonneville. Tim Roth, as a jerky photojournalist, seems to get top billing; he's a favorite, apparently, and he's been out of the limelight for a while. (Indeed, the first line spoken to him in this movie is, "You got your job back." I like it when movies do that.)
But it's really Chiwetel Ejiofor's film. In an understated, slow- burning way, Ejiofor as Ian Carter, a tourist in Thailand and one of the survivors of the tidal wave, brings to the screen an ethical ferocity that the script alone doesn't express. Briefly put, Ian can't get his mind off his own family: first his wife and daughter, who are missing, and then, when his wife is found, his daughter. Periodically he evinces rote or guilty sympathy for others and slight curiosity about their suffering and the general situation of Asia, but - though he's called on for heroism over and over - in general he's impatient with his duties to other people. Who wouldn't be? He just wants to reunite his own family.
Ian's situation mirrors the film's extremely potent concern about just which people any of us care about in a disaster like the tsunami. As Nick, Roth is a journalist charged with finding out, almost exclusively, what's happening to the Westerners. He believes he has his first scoop when he finds that some of the dead are being burned by Buddhist monks. His Thai partner (Will Yun Lee) - whose name, Chai, Nick uses far too often, in the way of dialogue-poor scripts - tries to stop Nick from taking pictures at a crematory, on the grounds that posthumous incineration is a Thai custom, consistent with good health practices and expressive of the doctrine of reincarnation. Nick argues that it's not right for Westerners' bodies to be burned without first being identified and photographed.
And in the persuasive argument between Chai and Nick you get the sense that, in death, human lives develop very different values to different communities, and that those interpretive communities - those "families" - coalesce quite decisively. In fact, as soon as the Westerners were evacuated, it seems the United States developed more problems of its own, and the story of one of the deadliest natural disasters in recorded history, which killed around 230,000 people two years ago, started to fade from memory.


POSTCARDS FROM ED: Dispatches and Salvos From an American Iconoclast. By Edward Abbey. Edited by David Petersen with a foreword by Terry Tempest Williams. Milkweed Editions, 296 pp. $24.95.
ED Abbey wasn't born in the American West, but as awed immigrants to certain other mythic landscapes like to say, he got there as fast as he could. It was 1944 and Abbey was 17 when he found his geological soul mate in the Four Corners region of the desert Southwest. He stayed, working his way through a master's degree in philosophy at the University of New Mexico, and signed on as a seasonal ranger at Utah's Arches National Monument, from which experience he mined 1968's Desert Soltaire: A Season in the Wilderness. That book rooted him to his chosen place and established the lasting Abbey persona: prickly intelligence combined with fierce advocacy for the possibilities of innocent wonderment at the natural world.
In 1975 he published his best-known work of fiction, The Monkey Wrench Gang, about a group of friends whose response to environmental degradation is to spike timber, chop down billboards and blow up dams. He subsequently saw his literary reputation sideswiped by a boiling-point environmental movement that the novel either spawned or satirized, depending who you ask.
Before his death, in 1989, Abbey had published nine novels and 14 works of nonfiction and settled into a wild corner of the literary landscape lit by the adulation of Earth-First!ers and essayers of the outdoors.
But one gets the sense that Abbey was never entirely comfortable with the size of his corral. He had a classicist's disdain for the cultural detritus beloved by his crunchy fans - Bob Dylan and Susan Sontag notably - and it's tempting to think he kept harping on his unpopular anti-immigration ideas just so no one would confuse him with a hippie. He had a contrarian streak a mile wide.
"How could anything non-controversial be of intellectual interest to grown-ups?" he wrote to Vermont naturalist Edward Hoagland.
But Abbey had more than contrarianism going for him. He had a talent for cutting to the nut of an idea with earthy clarity, and he had a hawk's eye for intellectual dishonesty.
"Anyone who says he loves the Universe, or God, or Life, is probably neglecting his wife," he wrote to a California philosophy student. "If he has one."
That's one among many deceptively comic one-liners in this generally fruitful sampling of letters to friends, family, admirers, fellow writers, walking buddies, literary agents and, inevitably, newspaper editors. These missives - arranged chronologically, 1949 through 1989 - show their author through a multitude of keyholes. Stubborn but loving letters to a son and daughter show a man fully engaged in his biological legacy; self-effacing but stern letters to his editor show a writer equally concerned with his literary afterlife.
With younger writers Abbey is gentle and generous. With critics he is piercing.
With fools he is withering.
With contemporary authors - especially Hoagland, who seems to have been terrorized by Abbey's aggressive needling - he likes to taunt and tease. Reading over his shoulder as he harasses fresh-to- Montana novelist Tom McGuane for failing to hitch his hobby horses to the environmentalist bandwagon is as much fun as throwing water- balloons at cats out a third-floor window.
Faced with authority, Abbey preferred to provoke. Thus the first line of his letter to the New York Review of Books: "The reviewof Gary Snyder's Turtle Island by Mr. Irvin Ehrenpreis is stupid." The letter went on, of course, to make a convincing case.
Abbey distrusted the gatekeepers of the East Coast literary establishment and resented the lack of attention they paid him. As a "Western" author he mocked what he saw as merely suburban ambition in writers like John Updike and John Cheever, and he had little interest in the ethnic-identity obsessions of Philip Roth and Saul Bellow.
Along the way, Ed Abbey became almost certainly the only human ever to compare Bellow to Reagan-era land-rapist James Watt: "Two of a kind, those fellas, in many ways, alike in their malignant politics, their hatred of environmentalists and their creepy eschatologies."
You could say someone had to do it. But nobody else did, and that willingness - that eagerness - is what made Abbey the iconoclast he was.
Iconoclasm can be costly, though, and all that peppery contrarianism came back at him in the form of pigeonholes: sexist (he was oft-married, and no fan of his era's androgynous leanings), racist (the anti-immigration stance), regional (the fate of more than one staunchly non-New York writer). Happily, Abbey viewed confrontation as good, clean fun, and employed humor to resist attempts to fence him in.
"I am a comic writer," he wrote to an interviewer, "and the generation of laughter is my aim."
One suspects that's hardly the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. But if it's a joke, as always with Abbey, there's definitely a kernel of something hard and true in there.
Early on, Larry McMurtry anointed Abbey "the Thoreau of the American West,"a label that Abbey, characteristically, wore uncomfortably. The comparison caught a corner of Abbey's oeuvre, but the cranky curmudgeon Mark Twain is a more apt precursor.
"Any honest writer," Abbey wrote to one correspondent, "is bound to become a critic of the society he lives in, and sometimes, like Mark Twain or Kurt Vonnegut or Leo Tolstoy or Francois Rabelais, a very harsh critic indeed. The others are sycophants, courtiers, servitors, entertainers."
Abbey was certainly no sycophant. He was a harsh critic indeed, of pop-culture fads and fuzzy-headed romanticism, of effete East Coast liberalism and hidebound Western exploitation. But foremost, as illuminated in even his most tossed-off of postcards, Edward Abbey was a painfully honest writer, fully deserving of the cult of personality he maintains, even 17 years after his death, in America's psychic - as opposed to strictly geographical - West.


The role of Wright's gay apprentices seems highly relevant to any depiction of life inside his studio. The architect, after all, had what can only be called a flamboyant personal style, sweeping through rooms in flowing capes; but he also projected an aggressive masculinity, digging shirtless in the fields with the apprentices, bragging into his 80s about how often he and Olgivanna were having sex and dismissing personal enemies with gay slurs. It is hardly a stretch for a scholar to look for connections between that seeming ambivalence and Wright's career-long effort to strike the perfect balance between Sullivan's flowery, elaborately ornamented buildings and a more muscular, self-reliant style.
In the end, it's the pages and pages of material on Gurdjieff, who visited Taliesin only occasionally, that prove tangential and salacious - and, more to the point, rather unproductive in defining, or redefining, Wright's work. The book promises important evidence of Gurdjieff's influence on Wright's architecture but never really delivers it.
Still, it's not hard to understand why Friedland and Zellman viewed Gurdjieff as the pivot around which the whole story turns. He's certainly a crucial character in the soap opera of it all. And so the shakiest but also the most original part of their thesis is the notion that he and Olgivanna helped Wright open up to a mystical sensitivity that made possible his surprising late burst of creativity.
Thanks to Gurdjieff and Olgivanna, the authors argue, Wright's architecture came to reflect his awareness of his own "cosmic importance" - particularly the Guggenheim, whose spiraling forms they see as a mystical abstraction, floating free of the nature- based symbols that ground much of his other work.
It's an odd twist, perhaps, that as Zellman and Friedland continued to pile up evidence of Olgivanna's zeal for manipulation and Wright's heartlessness and megalomania, both men fell under Gurdjieff's spell.
"At the beginning of our research I had a level of skepticism about Gurdjieff that was limitless," Zellman said. "But by the end I'd come to the conclusion that he's the most reasonable person in the whole book."

</text>
