<text id="C11" category="" words="1983" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'The tall really do have edge Book Review' International Herald Tribune/The New York Times,  4 November 2006, Page 8; 'The Meaning of Night BOOKS/Fiction'  International Herald Tribune/The New York Times, 20 September 2006, Page 5; 'Reporting BOOKS / Nonf" Author="Scott Stossel; Janet Maslin; Peter Hamill" PublicationDate="4 November 2006; 20 September 2006; 19 May 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

To the many indignities visited upon shorter than average males lower incomes, disadvantage in mate selection, cut rates for their deposits at the local sperm bank has now been added this one: short people are stupider than tall people. That's the finding of a recent study by two Princeton economists who conclude, painfully for those of us who are south of 5 feet 9 inches, or 1.7 meters, that the reason taller people make more money is that they are smarter.
That finding was published too late to make it into Stephen Hall's provocative book, but it's in keeping with the litany of obstacles arrayed against short men that he documents in "Size Matters." Consider the very word "stature." Its primary definition refers to physical height, but it can also connote everything from presence and charisma to virtue and importance; on a metaphorical level, height and worthiness of esteem are linked in the human mind. "Nobility of soul accompanies tallness of body," wrote one 18th- century German physician, reflecting the conventional wisdom of the time. Repeated studies in the modern era have shown that people unconsciously ascribe positive qualities to the tall: in addition to being deemed more intelligent, tall people are automatically considered more likable, more dependable and more commanding. It seems that benefits accrue to the tall beginning almost from birth, and then keep accruing, leading to what is, generally speaking, a society where the tall lead and the short follow an "altocracy," as Hall puts it. The association of height with cultural desirability and even existential value has deep historical roots. The Roman historian Tacitus, writing in the first century A.D., associated height with both strength and moral virtue. Drawing on Tacitus and his successors, King Frederick William of Prussia became obsessed with recruiting and breeding an army of behemoths in the early 1700s. His so-called Potsdam Giants regiment was led by a man reported to be more than 7 feet tall, and included at least one mercenary well over 8 feet; none of the Giants was under 6 feet. Other militaries emulated Frederick (taller soldiers had longer strides, could thrust their bayonets farther and had an easier time reloading their long rifles) and Hall argues that it was at this point that the market value of height first became institutionalized.
As a man of a mere 5 feet 5 and three-quarters inches himself, Hall is on something of a quest, seeking not just to understand the science and culture of stature but also to come to terms with what the cartoonist Garry Trudeau has called his "inner shrimp" that distinctive "I'm smaller than the rest of the world so I hope I don't get beaten up" outlook that is imprinted at an early age and never dispelled, no matter what our final adult heights. Mixing science reporting with personal anecdote, Hall ranges widely across popular culture and the scientific literature to explore such issues as what the average height of a population can reveal about culture and society (Why are the Dutch so tall? And why are Americans becoming relatively shorter?), and how the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's approval of human growth hormone as a "treatment" for undersize children in 2003 changed the politics and science of height. Here's an interesting philosophical question: If what matters psychologically is relative height, by treating short children with growth hormone, aren't we creating a whole new class of undersize "victims," the untreated kids they surpass in height? Have we launched an arms race of avoiding shortness? As Hall puts it, height matters because "it clearly has an impact on social perceptions, romantic interactions, workplace hierarchies and our self-perception long after we've stopped growing."
As a formerly Very Short Person, I found two of Hall's arguments especially interesting. The first is that how tall you end up as an adult matters less than when you grow. Hall cites a wealth of evidence suggesting that how much you are paid in adulthood is determined by how tall you were at age 16. Everything that happens during the crucible of adolescence is emblazoned deeply into consciousness, and stays there. The other appealing argument Hall makes is that there is evolutionary and moral value in being puny. Darwin himself intriguingly suggested that while there is a general evolutionary bias toward greater size, survival-of-the-fittest pressures on our ancestors, who were smaller than their primate competitors, may have led to the development of human intelligence. Or, as Hall speculates, "the relative smallness and weakness of smaller human ancestors might be responsible for nothing less than the birth of civilization." Speaking from his own experience, Hall surmises that being short as a boy forced him to develop not only greater mental quickness and wit but also greater empathy and understanding.
And made him also, perhaps, a more appealing mate than his alpha male competitors. Hall is happily married to a woman almost four inches taller with two kids. 



In the midst of a 36-page deposition that appears two-thirds of the way through "The Meaning of Night," one of the book's character pauses to reflect. "Having put pen to paper, it has surprised me to find how difficult it has been to confine myself to the salient points," he writes. "So many things push themselves forward in my mind for attention."
That comment can be interpreted in several ways. Perhaps it speaks for Michael Cox's own writing. Perhaps it is meant to mimic the windy Victorian style in which Cox's novel has its roots. Perhaps it slyly toys with the conventions of that genre, or perhaps it's just plain windy. Whatever the truth may be, Cox is not eager to vouchsafe that truth speedily to his readers.
Instead, he is eager to use words like vouchsafe as liberally as possible, so that "The Meaning of Night" has the ornate, curlicued linguistic niceties of a Dickensian period piece. Such affectations have the potential to be either voluptuously pleasing (as they were in Michel Faber's "Crimson Petal and the White" and Sarah Dunant's "In the Company of the Courtesan") or arduously contrived (Elizabeth Kostova's "Historian"). But in Cox's version they are oddly colorless. Images like that of "the usual metropolitan bustle, the familiar panorama of unremarkable people doing unremarkable things," are captured all too well.
To be sure, Cox assiduously tries to ensure that it will not be thus. He endows his magnum opus with Latin chapter headings, erudite footnotes, ardent bibliophilia and a gratuitous framing device. The effect of all this is to gild the garden-variety lily that lies beneath.
Cox's effort to write this book has been Herculean. He began assembling material for "The Meaning of Night" 30 years ago and completed this volume in the shadow of serious illness. The task he undertook was daunting, and surely he knows that. Daunt is the name of the novel's villain, too.
The name of the hero is less definite. His last name changes several times in the course of this long story. But his first name remains Edward, and there is a secret about Edward's origins: Edward discovers that he is the true heir to the fortune of Lord Tansor. But Lord Tansor has designated the louche and wicked Phoebus Daunt (from whose putative poetry the book takes its title) as his heir.
Unattractive as Edward's covetousness might be, it becomes the book's motivating force. It is supposedly mitigated by the contention that Edward's desire to inherit Evenwood, the Tansor estate, stems from the wondrousness of Evenwood's library.
The reader need not even know such bibliophilic terms as "fifteeners" (ultra-rare books from the 15th-century infancy of printing) to understand the library's allure or Edward's outrage at the prospect of its falling into scheming Daunt hands.
Cox succeeds in his initial mission: to write an opening sentence that will be quoted in every single review of his book. Here is it, in all its eagerness to stop traffic: "After killing the red-haired man, I took myself off to Quinn's for an oyster supper." A footnote on the same page explains that the title of this introductory chapter, "Exordium," means introduction.
At this rate, Edward's quest for his patrimony can ensue through 700 more pages. It doesn't help that Edward has a quasi-unsavory side. The novel promises a kinky streak that never materializes. But he kills off the above-mentioned red-haired man as a pre-Daunt training exercise. And in a supreme feat of Victorian envelope pushing, he searches for proof of his heritage in the most taboo place imaginable.
This is a rare, perhaps parodying transgression from a character whose usual mode is dithering. "I found that I had not the least idea what to do next," he typically says.
During the convoluted course of his adventures, Edward inevitably fixates on an unattainable woman. "I have loved you from the very first moment," he tells her blandly. And he courts her in ways that, like so much of "The Meaning of Night," are oddly blank despite their seeming specificity.
When Edward takes her to the zoo, everything and nothing happen simultaneously. "She laughed at the hippopotamus, which suddenly plunged into its bath, liberally soaking everyone close by with cold water," Cox writes, "and clapped her hands in amusement at the pelicans being fed."


Ezra Pound was a crackpot on social and political issues, but he knew what he was talking about in matters of the written language. In 1934, in "ABC of Reading," he said, "Literature is news that stays news." In that sense, this collection of articles by David Remnick can stand as literature.
Since 1998, Remnick has served as the editor of The New Yorker, certainly a full-time job. Getting out any weekly magazine requires many hours of reading, choosing, discarding and thinking beyond the obvious. But from the beginning of his editorial duties, Remnick has continued working as a reporter and writer. In the modern era, not many editors make such a choice.
"I was the opposite of a specialist," he writes of his apprenticeship at The Washington Post, starting in 1982. So it is no surprise that these 23 pieces from The New Yorker are the work of a proud generalist, avidly curious about the many enigmas of the world. The articles in "Reporting" range from patient, careful visits with Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn (in Vermont exile and after his return to the new Russia he helped create) to the ravages of Hurricane Katrina. Katharine Graham is here and so is Mike Tyson, shrinking into what Remnick calls "a ghetto kid's fatalism." We visit with Palestinian exiles and true believers. The earliest article dates from 1994; the latest was reported from Israel and Gaza within days of the Hamas victory in the January 2006 elections. As a writer, Remnick practices a classic journalistic style: concrete nouns, active verbs, graceful sentences, solid paragraphs, subtle transitions. A sly wit often punches up the prose, and he is hip in the original sense of the word, which was "knowing," not "fashionable." One measure of his accomplishment is what he avoids: jargon, prophecy, slang that instantly grows moldy, those ugly words that come out of sociology or Washington ("proactive," "impact" as a verb). The engine of his published work is, of course, reporting. Every reporter inhales skepticism. You interview people and they lie. You face public figures, diligently making notes or taping what is said, and they perform their interviews to fit a calculated script. The truth, alas, is always elusive.
The newspaper reporter's daily struggle is against deadlines and column inches, time and space, which is why so many decide to move on as Remnick did after returning from the Soviet Union in 1992 to write better about less. He published longer pieces in The New York Review of Books, Vanity Fair, Esquire and The New Republic, and in 1992 he was hired at The New Yorker by Tina Brown, his predecessor as editor.

</text>
