<text id="C12" category="" words="2000" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="TV Review: Celebrity and Its Discontents' The Wall Street Journal, 29 December 2006, Page W4; 'TV Review: The Longest Journey' The Wall Street Journal, 20 October 2006, Page W5; 'TV Review: This Is the Funny One' The Wall Street Journal, 6 October 2006, P" Author="Dorothy Rabinowitz" PublicationDate="29 December 2006; 20 October 2006; 6 October 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

DIRT," the slick and entertaining new FX series (begins Tuesday, 10-11 p.m. EST) about life at a gossip tabloid, has a lot on its mind -- too much perhaps, in which category you can count its forays into female psychology, sexual dysfunction, the vanity of ambition and other silliness. Even so, by the time episode one has puffed to its end it's clear that "Dirt" is about to become irresistible, not least for its picture of the celebrity world and its strange relationship with the tabloids that can wreak such havoc on careers with their reports on scandals false or true, exclusives about stars secretly carted off to the drug rehab center, and much, much worse. They can, in their way, also promote careers.
Tuesday's pilot introduces, among others, Holt (Josh Stewart), a once serious young actor and now a has-been hungry for work who agrees to deliver the deepest-held secret of a hot starlet (and close friend) to the editors of the tabloid (named "Dirt") in exchange for career-burnishing coverage for himself. The starlet's life turns to ashes, and -- thanks to the puff piece about him -- her betrayer is soon scoring job offers. It's not exactly "Rosemary's Baby," of course -- Holt is quickly undone by paralyzing guilt. Moreover, the devil to whom he sold his friend is a woman, the beautiful, single-minded killer of an editor in chief, Dirt's Lucy Spiller, a character Courteney Cox portrays with her usual glitzy, if depthless, charm.
This isn't, to be sure, an enterprise concerned with depths, Lucy's or those of anyone else -- it's a broad, sharply drawn take on the struggles to the death for celebrity pictures, stories and fresh scandal that are central to the lives and success of the tabloids.
Episode two regales us with the plight of an unbearable Hollywood glamour couple. Blair Marshall and Logan Hix, apparently about to become parents of a newborn wonderfully named -- whether by the pursuing reporters or parents to be isn't clear -- "Blogan." No couple has ever been so controlling about their pregnancy pictures, Lucy and staff complain amid the growing media frenzy. (Ms. Cox had her own experience with packs of photographers focused on her pregnancy and so brings a certain authority to this part of the story.)
Amid all the fun here, there is a strange thread of preachiness woven around and about the character of Dirt's editor in chief, who has focused her life's energies and all her passion on success at her job -- a woman not especially concerned to have it all, or have, indeed, anything not related to her primary concern. Namely, business.
After one not entirely successful sexual encounter, she sends the unhappy man off with a kiss, despite his entreaties to stay, pointing out that she still has hours of work left to finish. "You're just like a guy," comes his bitter judgment. Another angry male tells her he imagined her alone in her expensive home, "with nothing to hold but your latest issue." Topping all that off, the series' creators also make plain the kind of sexual defect that results from drives to succeed like Lucy's. Plenty of punishment here, in short, for a woman whose work and success obsession is just like a guy's. At the end of episode three, the moment of her highest professional triumph Lucy is not surprisingly shown wandering forlornly around her empty, expensive house -- there's nothing subtle about this -- just as the angry male envisioned.
That moment of highest triumph has been secured through the wondrous character who holds this series together -- Lucy's chief soldier, agent of deception and expert sneak photographer, Don Konkey, masterfully portrayed here by Ian Hart.
Don is supposed to be a schizophrenic, a functioning one, as he informs people -- a role Mr. Hart informs with so much skill and variety it's hard to wait for his next scene. His success in carrying off this derangement of many colors doesn't altogether make up for klunky spots in the writing -- there are those pointless and persistent visions that appear to him, of a dead actress -- but Mr. Hart's Don manages to get past those, too, with minimal trouble. He's at his best relating to his dead cat, which he does with dignified, if tormented, sincerity -- and at feats like getting into the impossibly well guarded hospital quarters of a star in hiding and snapping her picture. All this he can accomplish under bombardment from hallucinations, with voices nattering in his head, and after mixing all his medications at will. His character could conceivably bring objections from the mental-disability establishment, but it should bring nothing but gratitude from the producers of this series, toward whose likely success he will have contributed mightily.

AMONG ITS DISTINCTIONS, and there are many, "To the Ends of the Earth" ("Masterpiece Theatre," Sunday, 9-10:30 p.m. EDT on PBS; check local listings) can claim a visceral impact unequaled in recent memory. By the time the first episode of this three-part series based on William Golding's sea trilogy ("Rites of Passage," "Close Quarters" and "Fire Down Below") is over, indeed, viewers may find themselves grateful for the feel of solid ground beneath their feet, and also a touch queasy. And this is just the beginning of the perilous sea journey that is the setting of this marvelously layered drama of caste and class -- a combination morality tale and high adventure as crew and passengers struggle to survive the storm-lashed route taking them from the safety of England to Australia.
Which may as well be, in fact, the ends of the earth given the impossible length and torments confronting these early 19th-century travelers crammed into an old warship converted to passenger service, and relentlessly buffeted by storms. A ship that has begun to come apart, literally, at its seams.
No one will come away from this production (adapted by the late Leigh Jackson and Tony Basgallop, directed by David Attwood) without deepened appreciation for the misery of sea-sickness, captured here in all its depth and variety, not to mention duration.
Golding (1911-1993), a naval commander during World War II and winner of the 1983 Nobel Prize for literature, began his career with "Lord of the Flies" (1954) and ended it, in the 1980s, with the sea trilogy. Its youthful hero, Edmund Talbot -- portrayed by Benedict Cumberbatch with a fine-tuned mix of innocence, verve, and the assurance befitting an aristocratic young Englishman -- is first shown here on a carriage ride amid England's serene landscapes, a powerful suggestion of the vastly different circumstances in which he is soon to find himself, none of which include serenity. Now on his way to Australia to take a government job procured for him by a powerful godfather, young Talbot is startled to find himself on a Royal Navy ship from hell -- one whose dangers and discomforts, both physical and moral, will prove the sort no manservant can appease, equipped though he is with one.
In episode one -- "Rites of Passage" -- particularly, moral discomfort weighs heavily on Talbot, for reasons not quite clear to him: A lack of clarity that makes all the more fascinating -- and horrifying -- the plight of another passenger, the dauntlessly eager Parson Colley (Daniel Evans), bent on spreading the word of God and improving the spiritual lives of his fellow passengers. This episode isn't called "Rites of Passage" for nothing, and neither is it for nothing that its central scene, in which the parson is made a target of pitiless torment, evokes something of the anarchic world of "Lord of the Flies" -- except that here the inhabitants running amok are men, not boys, and their society is one ruled, supposedly, by strict codes of behavior.
The architect of the parson's torment is the ship's commander, Captain Anderson, played superbly by Jared Harris ("The Notorious Bettie Page"). One look at the Captain's eyes, aglimmer with calculation, and that grim visage says worlds, none of them good. Still, there is more to know about this authority, as there is about Talbot's unconscious part in the outrage -- as there is about every key figure in this story, the parson decidedly included.
Episode two takes young Talbot through heavier storms, both those whipped up by the seas, and those that can roil the heart. Talbot is to fall instantly in love -- a passion to go unrequited -- when his ship connects with another becalmed English vessel that he and fellow passengers at first feared might belong to the French. The passengers and crews of both ships unite in celebration, whose high point is an extraordinary, spine-tingling rendering of "God Save the King" -- a scene that renders all else about this party forgettable.
Young Talbot's travels and his ship's adventures finally come to an end after the most fearful of frights and tests of endurance, made supportable by plenty of drink and the occasional bond of fellowship. It has been, from the start, a magnificent journey.


HE CURIOUS MAY wonder, when "30 Rock" begins (Wednesday, 8-8:30 p.m. EDT), how NBC came to mount two shows -- the other being "Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip" -- about backstage life at a TV show bearing strong resemblances to "Saturday Night Live." Such time spent wondering is likely to be short because, two minutes past "30 Rock"'s opening, the curious will be, like everyone else, in thrall to its brazen wit.
The creator and star of this enterprise is Tina Fey, "Saturday Night Live" veteran, in the role of Liz Lemon, a proud professional whose plum job as chief writer on a live TV program in New York is quickly doomed. The trouble arrives with company man Jack Donaghy (Alec Baldwin), a new network chief with monstrous creative ideas of his own -- a character who's shown up in every workplace sitcom ever set at a TV or radio station, including, memorably, "The Mary Tyler Moore Show."

The difference here -- "30 Rock" being a far cry from your mother's sitcom -- is that the new boss doesn't soon see the light, go home to his oil wells, or otherwise get written out of the script. This one, whose rise to the top creative spot is credited to his success in the microwave oven business, is there for good, bloated with confidence as he proceeds to retool the show -- a role Mr. Baldwin carries off with great poker-faced panache, never more so than when delivering lines like the kind he gets to throw at Liz. "I like you," he tells the enraged, 30ish head writer. "You have the boldness of a much younger woman."
Chief among the things enraging Liz is the boss's decision to add a wild character called Tracy Jordan to the show, a comedian whose race-based riffs have won a following. The boss figures he'll do better than the show's current star, Jenna Maroney (Jane Krakowski). "The blond, big-eyed girl," as the focus groups refer to her, turns out to be "popular with women and older gays." Not good. Off goes a frantic Liz, dispatched to persuade Tracy to join the show.
The ensuing scenes, set first in a Harlem eatery and later in a strip joint, are, in the comedy department, pure gold -- and that's the department that matters. Tracy Jordan is played by Tracy Morgan ("Saturday Night Live") dead-on as the psychopath/comic, radiating warmth -- "Where's the love?" he beams -- followed in an instant by homicidal rage. He's proud of what he is, too -- "straight-up mentally ill" -- and he knows who is responsible for all the troubles confronting blacks and creative people. One of those he fingers is Karl Robe. Did you say Karl Robe, Liz wants to know? Of course he did. On the action goes as Tracy drags the desperate Liz -- the show is supposed to open that night -- to his favorite strip club.

</text>
