<text id="C17" category="" words="1992" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Heroine by a Hairbreadth; Before the Pulitzer, her book was a goner. It's back.' Newsweek, 12 June 2006, Page 76. 'Inside the Hero Factory; Clint Eastwood's 'Flags of Our Fathers' asks hard questions about the way governments sell our wars.' Newsweek, 23" Author="David Gates; David Ansen; Lorraine Ali" PublicationDate="12 June 2006; 23 October 2006; 4 September 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

Last year Claudia Emerson, a poet who teaches at Virginia's University of Mary Washington, published a collection called "Late Wife": one of those quarter-inch-thick volumes whose spines you cock your head to read on the six-foot shelves. Louisiana State University Press gave it a lovely cover, which went on a tiny number of copies. The poems had appeared in magazines ranging from small but prestigious--Southern Review, Shenandoah--to obscure: Smartish Pace, Tar River Poetry, Visions International. "Late Wife" is such a smart, intense, satisfying and approachable book that readers will return to it for decades. But you probably would never have heard of it--and certainly not be reading about it here--if it hadn't won this year's Pulitzer Prize. When the news broke and the book was in demand, "Late Wife" was already long gone from the stores.
Last week you could finally get a copy of the book at a Borders in Manhattan. (Two, actually, the day we went in. The next day, the other was gone.) Emerson's publisher won't give figures, but allows that the post-Pulitzer run was 20 times as large as the first printing. Emerson says it's reprinted 14,000, so--quick math here--this gives us a first printing of ... 700 copies? Given the expectations for poetry, that was probably realistic. Some poets must think it's a hell of a note that it takes a Pulitzer just to get their work read. But Emerson, 49, knows the drill. "I just accepted that a long time ago," she says. "We could have a broader audience, but I think people have gotten afraid of poetry. I met a woman in my hometown [Chatham, Va.; population: 1,338] who said mine was the first book of poetry she'd ever read. She was excited because she understood it, and she asked me to recommend another one."
It was there in far western Virginia that Emerson, who'd once been an English major at U.Va., started to write while running a lonesome used bookstore and driving a rural mail route in her Chevy S-10 pickup. ("Red and white. With a sign on the back.") Her poems are intellectually and emotionally complicated, but the language is plain and untricky. Here's the end of one, about a bat in a bedroom: "So you killed it with the broom,/cursing, sweeping the air. I wanted/you to do it--until you did." The complication: it's titled "Metaphor," and is part of a sequence about a failing marriage. So OK, great. Thanks to a good Pulitzer jury and probably some luck, "Late Wife" will get at least some of the readers it deserves. But it makes you wonder what you might be missing.


Clint Eastwood's tough, smart, achingly sad "Flags of Our Fathers" is about three anointed heroes of World War II--three of the men who appeared, backs to the camera, in the legendary Joe Rosenthal photograph of six soldiers hoisting the American flag on Iwo Jima. It was an image that electrified a nation at war. The military wanted these men to be larger than life to raise desperately needed money for the war effort by selling war bonds. So the government, sensing, as one character says in Eastwood's film, "that a picture can win or lose a war," plucked them off Iwo Jima, where the 35-day battle was still raging (and where the other three men in the photo had been killed), and paraded them in front of cheering crowds. It was all for a good cause, but it was pure PR, and it ate away at the insides of these media-proclaimed heroes, who believed that the men who deserved the glory were the ones who had given their lives.
Watching Eastwood's harrowing film, which raises pointed questions about how heroes, and wars, are packaged and sold, it's hard not to think his movie is a commentary on today. Images of Jessica Lynch pop into your brain. And when Sgt. Mike Strank (Barry Pepper), the unit's leader, is killed by friendly fire, your thoughts turn to Pat Tillman, the ex-football star whose death was initially rewritten to suit the mythical role the military, and the media, had decided he must play. "When people ask me if this movie is applicable to today," Eastwood told NEWSWEEK, "I say, 'Well, you know, everything is ... Everyone's distorting things, just as they distorted them then'."
Eastwood wasn't thinking about Lynch when he re-created Iwo Jima's brutal battles on the black sands of Iceland, but he acknowledges the aptness of the analogy. "That poor girl. She was just a teenager. The military and their publicity people decided she had to be Wonder Woman, gunning down tons of people with her machine gun, when she didn't fire a shot. They desperately wanted her to be that." Eastwood, the former Republican mayor of Carmel, Calif., is no dove, but he does question the premise behind the American undertaking in the Middle East. "I'm not one of those idealistic people who think democracy has to be for everyone," he says. "That's naive on our part. I don't know if they want democracy."
"Flags of Our Fathers," an epic both raw and contemplative, is neither a flag-waving war movie nor a debunking. It's an investigation into the nature of heroism, real and manufactured, and of our deep-seated need to avert our eyes from the horror of war by gazing up at the more comforting vision of the heroic. It ponders the way images are used to manipulate reality. (Eastwood's "Letters From Iwo Jima," which will be released in February, follows the Japanese side of the battle--largely in Japanese, with subtitles.) Working from an intricately structured screenplay by Paul Haggis and William Broyles, Eastwood crosscuts between the present, where the survivors are still haunted by the war's deadliest fight, to the battle for Iwo Jima itself, where more than 20,000 Japanese and 6,821 Americans died, to the banquet halls and football stadiums where Navy Corpsman John (Doc) Bradley (Ryan Phillippe), 19-year-old Rene Gagnon (Jesse Bradford) and Native American Ira Hayes (Adam Beach) are wined, dined, celebrated--and ultimately discarded.
The most famous member of the trio, Hayes (whose life was made into 1961's "The Outsider," with Tony Curtis), was the most tragic. Subjected to the constant, casual racism of the day, tormented by guilt at being singled out when he believed he should be fighting alongside his buddies, he descends into alcoholism and self-destructs before our eyes. Eastwood's movie arrives at a complex conclusion about the blurry intersection of war and propaganda. Perhaps Winston Churchill expressed the ambivalence best: "In wartime truth is so precious that she should always be attended by a bodyguard of lies."
The practice of turning wartime exploits into convenient fictions (or warriors into gods) is hardly a recent invention. There's the Iliad, for one. But Achilles, as far as we know, didn't have PR handlers. The great American country-boy celebrity of World War I, Alvin York, was a true hero, but his sharpshooting exploits were wildly embellished in serialized magazine articles. (It's no coincidence that when Gary Cooper immortalized him in 1941's "Sergeant York" we were on the brink of another war.) The deeper into the bloody century we went--as photography, film and television increasingly entered into the equation--the more inextricably the war machine and the public-relations machine became entwined. But if the wheels meshed smoothly in World War II, they ran off the tracks in Vietnam, where the pictures flooding in--self-immolated priests, a naked girl fleeing from a napalm attack--turned a country against the war. The great lesson the military learned was the importance of controlling the images of combat. Hence the heavily sanitized aerial-view depiction of the gulf war, an "impersonal" videogame war waged by mythical "smart bombs." Then came the strategy of "embedding" journalists with the troops in Iraq, which both controlled the reporters' access and made them feel part of the military effort. Images of returning coffins were initially banned.
After the embarrassing revelations of the fictions surrounding Private Lynch--and after the mother of Pat Tillman waged her angry fight against a recalcitrant Pentagon to find out the truth about her son's death--the administration has retreated from the business of selling heroes. The iconic images that were meant to stir a nation, such as the toppling of Saddam's statue, had short shelf lives. Or, in the case of the president's "Mission Accomplished" strut across a battle-ship, they have been used against him.
It hasn't been a conflict in which photographers or network-news producers have captured the "picture that can win or lose a war" in Iraq. It was a shutterbug soldier who thought it would be cool to document the fun and games at Abu Ghraib. What the Pentagon didn't foresee, and couldn't control, was the rise of new media--the unfiltered images popping up on the Web, the mini-DV cams put in the hands of soldiers that emerge in the recent documentary "The War Tapes." We don't see much of the real war on network TV, but the unauthorized documentaries--"The Ground Truth," "Gunner Palace" and many more--come pouring out. Just as more people think that they get a straighter story from Jon Stewart's mock news reports than from traditional outlets, it's been the "unofficial" media that have sabotaged the PR wizards in the Pentagon. The sophistication of the spinners has been matched by the sophistication of a media-savvy public.
It was easier to control the way we looked at war back in the days of "Flags of Our Fathers." Eastwood himself was "raised on '40s war movies," most of which were propaganda. But that was a fight that united us as a nation. Now an administration that seems to create its own reality is discovering that reality bites back.

It's three in the morning and thick clouds of dust roll across the rural Mexican dirt road like New England fog. Nearby, strings of bare-bulbed lights illuminate an outdoor fiesta where dozens of Tecate locals in cowboy boots and chunky heels dance to the rowdy ranchero band Los Incomparables. But not everyone's having fun. A cameraman on the perimeter of the set has had it with all the errant chickens underfoot. "Get the f--- out of here!" he orders, but this chicken doesn't speak English. "¡Silencio, por favor!" yells a stage manager from the other side of the clapboard fence, and the bird stops in its tracks.
Communication breakdowns and cultural rifts drive Alejandro González Iñárritu's "Babel," a film that spans three continents, seven languages and many leagues' worth of buried emotion. It's his latest in a trilogy that includes "Amores Perros" and "21 Grams," but this time, the Mexican director's overlapping stories have gone global. Two Moroccan brothers testing their dad's rifle accidentally shoot an American tourist named Susan (Cate Blanchett), and in an instant dozens of lives are intertwined. Susan and her husband, Richard (Brad Pitt), are forced to rely on rural villagers--and each other--as she fights for her life. The Arab boys' humble family pays the price when the shooting is interpreted as a terrorist incident with international implications. Meanwhile, the American couple's children are supposedly safe at home in California, except that their Mexican nanny, Amelia (Adriana Barraza), has taken them to Baja for her son's wedding, where she runs into trouble at the border, thanks to her smart-mouthed nephew Santiago (Gael García Bernal), who's chauffeuring her around. In Tokyo, the deaf-mute teen Chieko (Rinko Kikuchi) and her father, a businessman who once gave his rifle away to a local on a Moroccan hunting trip, are perilously drifting apart after her mother's suicide. "I kept saying to myself, 'If this doesn't work, it will be one of the most horrible disasters in film history'," says Iñárritu. "It's four short stories that have nothing to do with each other. There's no one apparent connection, so it all could look like a National Geographic special on global cultures."
Iñárritu has been resting easier since "Babel" won best director at Cannes this past May.

</text>
