<text id="D16" category="" words="1959" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Updated" Author="Updated" PublicationDate="Updated" SampledFrom="Updated" WebAddress="Updated">

It's the End of the World
(And I Feel Fine)
The second in a series for Advent and Christmas
THE APOCALYPTIC literature
of the Bible, which includes
most notably Daniel and the
Book of Revelation, exists in
the popular consciousness as a sort of
hitchhiker's guide to the end times, chockfull
of predictions of the historical events
that will lead to the end of human history.
Given the highly metaphorical
language the writers use, the
specifics can be difficult to pin
down, but that ambiguity only
feeds speculation. On various
Web sites contributors weigh
whether Revelation 13's "Beast,"
frequently referred to as the
Antichrist, might be Vladmir
Putin (revelation13.net), George
W. Bush (seattleweekly.com) or
Barack Obama (www.
unfogged.com). On raptureready.
com, one can find endtimes
resources like: the
Prophetic Top 10 - current
events that suggest the imminent
end of the world; "Left Behind
Letters" supposedly penned by
those who anticipate being taken
up in the Rapture to help those
who will be left behind; and chat
rooms in which participants are
discussing, among other things,
whether the Gog/Magog war
mentioned in Revelation will
come before the Rapture and
whether the proposed national identification
card might be the prophesied "mark
of the beast."

Such ways of thinking are not as
unusual as one might think. Tim LaHaye
and Jerry B. Jenkins have written more
than a dozen novels imagining the events described in the Book of Revelation,
books that have sold more than 60 million
copies. On Web sites and television programs,
such popular evangelists as Jerry
Falwell and Pat Robertson discuss apocalyptic
topics, including what form the
Antichrist might take and the place of the
United States or Israel in the Last Judgment. And the popular press regularly
churns out "documentaries" and other
programs like the recent NBC mini-series
"Revelations" that present biblical prophesy
as a sort of scriptural Da Vinci Code
indicating the world's future course and
conclusion.

Such interpretations completely misunderstand
both the meaning and the
value of apocalyptic literature. While apocalyptic texts do include end-of-theworld
scenarios, usually in wildly imaginative
terms, their primary concern is not to
predict the future, but to help people survive
in their own troubled times. The texts
are not historical reports, "visions radioed
in by means of a time machine," in the
words of the Jesuit theologian Karl
Rahner, but stories proclaiming
humanity's imminent deliverance.
Evil may rule the day in certain
respects, but we should live with
confidence nonetheless, because
God has already won the war. Both
in the midst of our own world's current
conflicts and anxieties and in
this Advent season, apocalyptic texts
have much to offer us. 

Apocalypse Then and Now

Although today the word "apocalypse"
is synonymous with
Armageddon, an end-times disaster
of human or divine making, that is
far from the biblical sense of the
term. Derived from the Greek word
apokalupsis, "apocalypse" literally
means "revelation," usually "revelation
about the future."
Apocalypticism, broadly defined, is
the belief that God has revealed the
imminent end of the ongoing struggle
between good and evil in history.
The Book of Revelation begins:
"The revelation of Jesus Christ,
which God gave him to show his servants
what must take place; he made it known by
sending his angel to his servant John" (Rev
1:1). The latter half of Daniel, too, is characterized
by visions and divine beings such
as the angel Gabriel, who comes "to give
you wisdom and understanding" (Dan
9:21).

In apocalyptic literature, as the biblical
scholar John J. Collins puts it, an other worldly reality is revealed to a human person
through a divine mediator, often an
angel. The term "otherworldly reality"
has two meanings here. First, it is the
heavenly realm in which the speaker finds
himself. The speaker of Revelation
describes himself in a bejeweled cosmic
throne room "with one seated on the
throne! And the one seated there looks
like jasper and cornelian, and around the
throne is a rainbow that looks like an
emerald. Around the throne are twentyfour
thrones, and seated on the thrones
are twenty-four elders, dressed in white
robes, with golden crowns on their heads.
Coming from the thrones are flashes of
lightning, and rumblings and peals of
thunder" (Rev 4:3-5).

Second, the reality revealed in apocalyptic
literature is what the seer is shown
once he gets into the heavenly realm,
namely our human destiny. Once in heaven,
the seer hears or witnesses a decision
made about earthly matters, generally a
decision in the people's favor. Couched in
highly symbolic language, the decision
often involves a cosmic battle between
God's emissaries and foes that the army of
God wins. In Rev 12:7: "And war broke
out in heaven; Michael and his angels
fought against the dragon. The dragon
and his angels fought back but they were
defeated." Likewise, in Daniel 2 the speaker
describes "a stone ... cut out, not by
human hands" that strikes down a statue
with feet of clay and "became a great
mountain and filled the whole earth."
Whether the vision is a prediction of a
future event or an explanation of a past
series of empires that have fallen (as here
in Daniel), the point remains always the
same - God is vindicated, God is triumphant
over all, God is Lord.

The imagery of violent conflict that
pervades apocalyptic literature is difficult
for us to appreciate today. Taken out of
context, the depictions reinforce a common
understanding of the God of the Old
Testament as a being of wrath and judgment.
But like much of the mythological
language of Revelation and Daniel, this
imagery emerges out of well-defined concepts
of the writers' own times. In the
ancient world, one's status as king was
obtained and confirmed through battle.
Thus many ancient Near Eastern stories
of creation involved a fight between two
different gods. The loser of that battle would often become the substance out of
which the earth and/or human beings were
created; the winner was, by virtue of his victory,
understood to be God the Most High.

In the ancient world, then, being God
meant, by definition, being a victorious
warrior. One of the bold innovations of
Genesis 1, in fact, is that Yahweh rules over
creation without ever engaging in battle.
The sea - a primeval image of chaos and
destruction - God gathers without difficulty;
sea monsters, which in other stories
might have been God's opponents, are in
Genesis 1 God's creation: "God created the
great sea monsters and every living creature
that moves" (Gen 1:21). The underlying
assertion is that unlike the gods of Babylon,
Persia or Assyria, the God of Israel is so
powerful that nothing can legitimately
challenge him. From the beginning everything
is under his control, subject to his
whim.

The writers of Revelation and other
apocalyptic texts return to battle imagery
because invading armies, idolatrous
Israelites or other hardships have challenged
this notion of God's kingship. The
Temple lies defiled (Daniel); Christians
suffer persecution from the Romans (Revelation); and the world no longer
seems under God's control. Drawing such
historical conflicts into the cosmic context
of a war between good and evil from which
God emerges victorious, these stories
acknowledge the evil and suffering in the
world but discount its ultimate significance.
God remains the king who will rescue his
people.

Though seemingly wild-eyed and fanciful,
apocalyptic texts have a concrete pastoral
purpose. They were written to
respond to that gap between what the faithful
believed - that God is a deliverer who
redeems the faithful and punishes the
wicked - and their ongoing experience of
persecution and suffering. Apocalyptic
writings intend to exhort and console.
Believers may feel powerless and beleaguered;
yet viewed from a cosmic perspective,
as Daniel Berrigan, S.J., writes regarding
Daniel, that sense of powerlessness is
transformed from a cause for grief into a
reason for hope:

Let the human know its limits,
God's word seems to say - and
thus its salvation. Neither we nor
any human striving, no matter how virtuous, nor any system nor political
amelioration - no human
effort can usher in the era of justice
and peace known as the realm of
God.... Neither believer nor unbeliever
is able to bring the end to
pass.

But the visions of apocalyptic literature
remind us, God can do this and has
done it. Ultimately we will witness a radically
different and better situation. As the
last chapter of Revelation begins: "I saw a
new heaven and a new earth; for the first
heaven and the first earth had passed away,
and the sea was no more" (Rev 21:1).
Apocalyptic Writings Today: So What?
The topic of apocalyptic lierature is particularly
relevant this December because of
both the Advent season and the state of our
world. Social questions, political divisions
and terrorism challenge our faith in God
and in one another. Yet if Revelation imagines
God's kingdom as sometime in the
future, the readings for Advent and
Christmas bring that expectation to the
present. "The days are coming," says God
to Jeremiah in the readings for the First Sunday of Advent, "when I will fulfill the
promises I made" (Jer 33:14). The Gospel
for the second Sunday suggests that day is
now; it presents John the Baptist as the fulfillment
of Isaiah's prophesy of the one who
will come to prepare the way. On the third
Sunday we hear that "The King of Israel,
the Lord, is in your midst" (Zeph 3:15), and
that we should "Rejoice!... The Lord is
near"(Phil 4:4). The final Sunday presents
signs and wonders - this liturgical year, the
baby leaping in Elizabeth's womb; in other
years, the angel's visitation to Mary or
Joseph's dream - each a further indication
that God's promise is being fulfilled right
now. At midnight Mass on Christmas Eve,
the moment arrives: "The people who
walked in darkness have seen a great light,"
writes Isaiah (Isa 9:1). In the Gospel the
angels announce to neighboring shepherds
that "this day in David's city a savior has
been born to you, the Messiah and Lord"
(Luke 2:11). Using apocalyptic themes and
imagery, then, the Scriptures of Advent,
Christmas and Epiphany point to the birth
of Jesus, as God acting conclusively in history
for our salvation.

They also teach us something about
what our salvation looks like. Living in a
culture saturated with "Left Behind"-style
interpretations of Revelation, one might
expect deliverance to involve wars, meteor
showers and lots of drama. Instead, in
Advent we hear that it begins with small,
largely unseen events - a strange, bug-eating
preacher wandering around in the
desert, a baby moving in its mother's womb
and the birth of a child in some sleepy corner
of the universe. Contrary to our expectations,
the world the day after Jesus' birth
looks pretty much the same as it looked the
day before. Yet we believe it has fundamentally
changed.

In the face of forces that trouble us
today, whether terrorism, natural disaster,
our own mortality or persistent divisions in
our church and government, we are tempted
to doubt or - another form of despair - 
to take matters into our own hands. If God
is not coming to save us from evil, we will
have to save ourselves.

Apocalyptic literature offers a needed
corrective. Reading Revelation or Daniel,
we discover that we are hardly the first to
struggle mightily against forces that we
cannot overcome on our own. These texts
also exhort us to remember what we
believe - that God acts in history, promises to redeem our suffering and is faithful - 
and to proceed accordingly. We do not see
our troubles coming to an end, but the
kingdom of God now grows in our midst.
Though its timeline remains unknown - 
we "know neither the day nor the hour"
(Matt 24:42) - the conclusion to be drawn
is clear: we are being delivered by God into glory, and we are called to proceed in hope
out of that faith.

</text>
