<text id="E20" category="" words="2004" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Remodelling Magazine: Anger Management; Double Duty ; Security Resolutions ; Got It? Flaunt It ; Profile: Ketih Alward ; Second Look " Author="Leah Taylor ; Stacey Freed ; Joe Stoddard ; Stacey Freed; Leah Thayer ; Nina Patel" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.remodeling.hw.net/customer-satisfaction/anger-management.aspx  http://www.remodeling.hw.net/porches/double-duty.aspx  http://www.remodeling.hw.net/computers/security-resolutions.aspx  http://www.remodeling.hw.net/remodeling/profile-keith-alward">

Anger Management
Nobody enjoys being confronted by angry clients, but avoiding them "is absolutely the worst thing you can do," particularly if you're in their home nearly every day, says Beverly Koehn, a consultant to remodelers and builders. "The minute you start avoiding them, you dig yourself into a deeper hole."
Rather than hoping the problem will go away, show you care about their concerns, Koehn says. Her shorthand strategy is called LAUGH:
Listen: "Let them vent," Koehn says. Turn off your cell phone, take notes, and offer your undivided attention. Never interrupt or object.
Acknowledge: Make eye contact. Nod your head, soften your stance, and otherwise use positive body language.
Understand: "Don't allow your own emotions to control the situation," Koehn says, particularly if the two of you have clashed before. Try to see things from their point of view.
Five suggestions/options: Apologize for the inconvenience, and ask how they'd recommend moving forward. Never make demands or use the excuse of company policy.
Humanize the situation: "Remember, we're all human beings," Koehn says. "Tell yourself that this is one of the nicest people you've ever met, and you're dedicated to responding to their concerns."
If the client remains angry and becomes abusive, don't engage them by saying nobody talks to you that way. Instead, Koehn says, make a softening statement and define your parameters: you want to work this out, but you won't participate in that kind of language. Suggest a five-minute break, and exit professionally. They'll probably return ashamed and cooperative.
These strategies work for all field staff, including laborers and others in day-to-day contact with homeowners. Pass them on.
Double Duty

The owners of this Madison, Wis., Cape Cod, wanted a second garage and a screened porch that was attached to the house (to replace the screened gazebo out in the yard). Designers at Architectural Building Arts (ABA) could have converted the existing one-car garage into a screened porch and added a detached two-car garage. "But that would mean taking down three big oak trees," ABA owner Steve Larson says. "The clients didn't want that."
Designer Stephanie Mueller came up with a novel approach that creates flexible space. Since the owners didn't mind leaving their car outside during the warm months, ABA added a 12- by 20-foot garage beside the existing garage, which would double as a screened porch. The only glitch was getting the zoning board to issue a variance because laws allowed only for a detached garage. This would be impossible because the back of the house is only 3 feet from the property line. Board members allowed the attached garage once they saw ABA's solution.

When is a garage not a garage? When it's a screened porch. The garage door is hidden under a false ceiling. Screen panels, stored below the small, upper window on the side, are easily bolted in place. The solution satisfies clients and zoning board.
The new garage/screened porch combo has a brick floor to give it a finished look. To cover stains from the car, the owners use a rubber mat in the summer that rolls up in the winter. Single-pane storm windows with divided lights pull out and can easily be replaced by screens. In front, the garage door slides up into a false ceiling so that people inside don't see it when they look up. Three screens connect to a framed wall that is attached by throw bolts in the top, bottom, and sides. The back is a glass wall in winter and three screens, as in the front, in warmer months. The wall system, glass, and screens can be stored in space created above the garage. "We got our clients their summer eating place, their winter car storage, and we saved their oaks," Larson says.
Security Resolutions

Even though we're already into 2006, it's never too late to work on your game plan. Here are three resolutions for data safety and security for the new year. I'll expand on these topics throughout the coming year, so stay tuned.
Backup, Backup, Backup: Without good backups (and a plan to recover what you backed up) all bets are off. Ask the businesses wiped out by natural disasters last year.
Resolve to back up your data every day and keep a copy off site  -  preferably way off site, as in a data center in a different part of the country. Online services like Connected.com (www.connected.com) and Xdrive (www.xdrive.com) fit the bill for remodelers.
Connected.com is strictly backup, whereas Xdrive gives smaller contractors a "hard drive in the sky" you can use day to day.
Think "Rapid Recovery": Remodelers spend way too much time and money diagnosing and fixing computer problems. Software tools like GoBack (www.symantec.com/goback) give you and your users the ability to turn back the clock when they goof.
For more serious problems, Acronis TrueImage (www.acronis.com) allows you to "image" and restore an entire hard drive in less time than your "computer guy" takes to pick up the phone.
Understand the real threats online in 2006: A pimply kid "hacking" into individual computers is so last century. Today's bad guys are big business. They trick you into installing all manner of "malware" (worms, viruses, spyware), which "phone home," turning unsuspecting users into an army of zombies to do their dirty work: sending SPAM, "phishing" corporate networks, or the latest scam  -  generating phony "clicks" to rip-off legitimate online advertisers.
Your best defenses against this kind of hostile takeover? Get behind a quality router/firewall, scan your systems daily using up-to-date anti-virus and anti-spyware software, and, seriously  -  buy your kids their own computer. The Web sites teens and tweens frequent are the worst offenders.  - Joe Stoddard is a process/technology consultant to the building industry. Reach him at jstoddard@mountainconsulting.com.

Got It? Flaunt It.

I use 10% of what Excel will do, and the average person probably uses 2%," says Ed Castle, owner of Ed Castle Construction, a design/build firm in Kensington, Md. Castle creates fairly sophisticated spreadsheets and uses the software, which is a part of Microsoft Office, as a project manager system. He has eliminated what he calls "redundant clerical work" by inputting administrative information such as name and address of homeowners and suppliers only once but having it appear on all necessary documents.
At Donatelli Castillo Builders in San Jose, Calif., Excel is used for everything from estimating, creating financial reports, organizing historical workers compensation information, and reconciling the year-end audit for insurance and vacation days to collating results on employee reviews, job progress notes, and reports to the National Association of the Remodeling Industry (NARI) board.
Kirk Van Camp at Mark IV Builders, Bethesda, Md., says he uses Excel every day in some capacity  -  for preliminary and contract budgets as well as for tracking and monthly flash reports. "It's a powerful program," Van Camp says.
Getting from a simple spreadsheet to charts, graphs, and "what if" calculations takes some time and patience, but it's worth the effort, and, once learned, using the software is not difficult. Van Camp suggests reading Estimating With Microsoft Excel: Unlocking the Power for Home Builders by Jay Christofferson. "It comes with a CD and shows you a lot of tips and tricks, how to make macros and set up formulas," Van Camp says.
Chris Donatelli says his staff learned Excel by "seat of the pants and the help menu," which is a good resource that links you to the Microsoft Office Web site. There are also various Web sites, as well as local colleges and high schools that offer tutorials, often free. Dave Alpert of Continuum Marketing, an expert user who works with many remodeling companies, suggests sitting down with someone using it for a similar business. However you learn best, it's worth spending the time to get the most out of something you most likely already have on hand.
These charts show what Kirk Van Camp, estimator for Mark IV Builders, Bethesda, Md., calls a "30,000-foot-view" of your business. An administrative assistant creates them using Microsoft Excel 2003, included with Microsoft Office 2003 Professional Edition. To create a chart: Import from a database or manually enter the information you want to chart into a blank Excel worksheet. Then, insert a second empty worksheet and use the "Insert &gt; Chart" command to create a chart. When specifying the data range for the second chart, use the data you entered in the first worksheet. Charting leads, design agreements, and contract signings helps Mark IV visualize sales and marketing strategies' effectiveness. Including a data table with your chart offers more specific information that doesn't distract from the "big picture" view.
Breakdowns, such as where leads and sales come from, give insight into fine tuning marketing and sales processes. Separate pages avoid clutter and confusion. Excel also integrates with other Microsoft products, such as Microsoft Streets and Trips  -  which was used to generate the map  -  and Microsoft SQL Server, the database software Mark IV used to track this data.
Profile: Keith Alward
Good parents encourage their children to welcome responsibility, think for themselves, and take risks. Good employers do the same with employees. Having nurtured some of his 36 employees through 20-plus years of progressive growth and responsibility, remodeler Keith Alward (Big50 2002) believes in the value of autonomy and self-reliance. "You give them something to do with the faith that they can do it," explains the owner of Alward Construction, Berkeley, Calif. "Then you stand back and let them do their best. You're not there to micromanage."
Alward's commitment to personal development for employees is rooted in his own. A product of the working class, he worked in construction for years before forming his company. Along the way, he got a Ph.D. in developmental psychology. These varied experiences and insights, Alward says, "gave me an understanding of how difficult work is, and how intelligence makes its way into even simple work like hauling or stacking. There's a real dignity in physical labor," he says. "It's very honorable and should be nourished."
One way Alward nourishes labor is by assigning a graduated skill structure to field employees, whom he calls builders. The general goal, he says, "is for everybody to matriculate up the ladder," from apprentice to master.
Excellent pay and benefits attract and retain field crews, which operate autonomously. Alward also encourages continuing education and pays "for anything that increases knowledge related to work," including language classes for employees just learning English.
He personally conducts performance reviews for new hires at three and six months and for all employees annually. "I'm looking for signs that they've been growing and developing," Alward says.
He also fosters a family spirit, which means recognizing employees' families as well. The company's annual holiday party is held at his home and attended by employees and their families along with architects, clients, subcontractors, and other company friends. "We buy and wrap gifts for all the kids, and I quietly and surreptitiously hand out bonuses," which sometimes top $4,000. "It's a lovely party," he says. "I want everybody to be treated with integrity."
Second Look: Dana and Scott Jurak

After 25 years of remodeling in Plano, Texas, Dana and Scott Jurak (Big50 1991) have left the United States for the crystal beaches of Turks and Caicos. After visiting the Caribbean islands during a scuba diving trip, the couple built a two-unit villa on the island of Providenciales. Their plan was to pursue their scuba diving hobby and rent it to other vacationers. But the pull of the islands was strong. "We decided to take on an adventure and try our hands at doing the same thing that we have been doing here for so long ... on an island," Dana says.
Scott moved to the island first, almost one year ago, to set up a new company and build a townhouse that would serve as their home and a model home for their 19-unit speculative development.
Meanwhile, back in Texas, Scott's brother Dean has taken over as president of Jurak Remodeling.

</text>
