<text id="E26" category="" words="2005" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Making an Indie Film.' PC Magazine, 08888507, 5/23/2006, Vol. 25, Issue 9" Author="Cade Metz" PublicationDate="May 23, 2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.lancs.ac.uk/ehost/detail?hid=8&sid=970691c3-e5a1-4f07-90a0-98829387d559%40sessionmgr4&vid=8&bdata=JnNpdGU9ZWhvc3QtbGl2ZQ%3d%3d#db=a9h&AN=20985458">

From casting to cameras to postproduction, the all-digital making of The Insurgents redefines the meaning of "low-budget"
IF YOU KNOW YOUR MOVIES, YOU KNOW The Blair Witch Project. Shot largely with a Hi8 video camcorder and promoted with ingenious thrift over the Internet, the 1999 indie thriller was widely bailed as a triumph of modern technology. First-time filmmakers Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sánchez made Blair Witch for less than $25,000, and in the wake of a now famous midnight screening at the Sundance Film Festival, the film went on to gross more than $140 million in the U.S. alone.
The rub is that Blair Witch doesn't look like a feature film, and its not supposed to. That's part of its charm, but there's no forgetting that it was made on the cheap. The image is shaky and imprecise, the lighting harsh, the performances less than professional. At times, you can even hear the crew laughing in the background. Without its self-referential premise, Blair Witch is just another poorly made amateur film.
The real revolution starts today. Eight years after Blair Witch, digital technology has improved to the point where you can make a true Motion Picture  -  with a cinema-quality image, bona fide special effects, even name actors  -  for little more than Myrick and Sánchez spent on their run-and-gun indie.
This winter, Web designer/writer-director Scott Dacko proved it with The Insurgents, a political thriller starring Mary Stuart Masterson (of Fried Green Tomatoes fame), NYPD Blue's Henry Simmons, indie up-and-comer Juliette Marquis, and veteran character actor John Shea. Shot in New York City under the new Ultra-Low Budget Agreement introduced by the Screen Actors Guild last July, it was financed for less than $200,000 in cash. But thanks to today's technology, you'd never know it.
The Insurgents has all the earmarks of a big-time feature. It's photographed in the kind of panoramic widescreen format you associate with trips to the local movie theatre. Its editor. Bob Reitano, has cut several pictures for Nora Ephron, including Sleepless in Seattle. Masterson and Shea are veterans of Oscar-nominated projects. It's quite a feat  -  and it's all due to new technology.
Making Films Without Film
Scott Dacko took The Insurgents from script to full-blown movie in little more than nine months, and every step hinged on tools of the digital age. The project began with a laptop and a Web browser in Dacko's New York apartment. The final cut came together on a Macintosh G5 just blocks away. And in between, you can point to countless other steps that would not have been possible only a few years ago, from the PC Card hard drives used for recording sound to the GPS boxes used to track down shooting locations.

All of this new technology was instrumental in and crucial for completing the project quickly and inexpensively. But the tool that made the movie possible in the first place  -  and that elevates The Insurgents above ultra-low-budget films of the past  -  is high-definition digital photography. With hi-def, you can shoot at low cost and still create an image that competes with good old-fashioned 35mm film.
Make no mistake: Hi-def photography can't duplicate the classic film image. It can't capture anywhere near the same range of light  -  you lose a full 12 f-stops  -  which eliminates anything too dark or too bright. And in the minds of many film enthusiasts, if you project onto a large enough screen, HD can still look, well, digital. "It masks nothing. It smooths nothing. It eases nothing," says Reitano. "Film still does all that."
But HD offers resolution and color depth comparable to 35mm. Some even argue that it's a step ahead in these respects. Whatever the case, to the average Joe, HD looks like the real deal, and with so many filmmakers now shooting in the new format, including big names like George Lucas, the movie establishment is finally beginning to embrace it. Today, all the major movie festivals offer digital projection, and, more than ever, an HD film has a shot at widespread distribution.
This means that someone like Dacko can cut costs on photography without losing too much production value  -  the stuff that turns a movie into a Movie. You have not only the extra money you need to attract name actors, you have the cinema look and feel you need as well. Of course, signing actors isn't easy, and a good movie depends on more than production values. But HD gives you a chance.
A New Way of Networking
By the middle of last year, Dacko was tired of asking other people to make his movies. On the strength of several screenplays, he signed with an agent. One screenplay was optioned by an independent production company and another made some noise in one of the bigger indie writing contests. But the wheels were slow to turn, and when he finished writing The Insurgents, be decided it was time to make a movie on his own.
The first thing he did was open his Web browser.
Armed with a screenplay and a few thousand dollars of his own money, he logged on to mandy.com, a kind of craigslist for the film and television industries. He posted two ads: one for a cameraman and one for a line producer, someone to oversee logistics. The first responses arrived within minutes, and over the next few days, be received dozens of calls from producers and countless DVD "reels" from cinematographers. He even heard from an Oscar winner.
Within days, Dacko hired a line producer, and the project snowballed from there. Originally, he planned to shoot the entire film using only the money on hand. But through this initial hire, Dacko attracted a trio of New York-based producing partners. In exchange for equity  -  a cut of the film's profits  -  all three partners contributed money and services.
Angel Baby Entertainment, a production company whose credits include the upcoming Vanessa L. Williams vehicle My Brother, provided legal services and many of the important industry connections. Mary Stuart Masterson came on board after Angel Baby's John Gallagher, a writer-director in his own right, arranged a call to her mother, actress Carlin Glynn.
Another production house, Full Glass Films, took over as line producer. The third, Offhollywood Digital, handled postproduction, including color correction, special effects, and sound editing. With these three on board, the budget nearly doubled.
They joined the project because they liked the script, which takes post-9/11 fears and turns them upside down, following four Americans as they plan to detonate a bomb on U.S. soil. "The script had a vibrancy I knew would attract good actors," explains Angel Baby's Greg Segal, "and after the success of films like Syriana and Good Night, and Good Luck, I liked the timeliness of the political story." Of course, Segal and the rest wouldn't have read the script if not for mandy.com.

Widescreen on a Slim Budget
The extra money wasn't spent on film. From the very beginning, Dacko was set on HD, and as the budget grew, he never even entertained the thought of shooting on film. After ten years as a Web designer, he's comfortable with all things digital. He knew HD would give him more control.
"I'm a digital guy." he says. "I knew chat if I shot in digital, even if I ran out of money halfway through. I could take the source files and edit them myself, color-correct all on my own. There was so much more that, in a pinch, I knew I could do bootstrapped."
Plus, if he switched to film. Dacko wouldn't have much money left for cast and crew. The typical 35mm indie uses around 100,000 feet of film, and each foot costs nearly 50 cents. That's $50,000 for film stock alone. And then you pay for processing. Shooting in HD, Dacko paid around $20 for each 33-minute digital tape, using about 50 tapes over the course of a three-week shoot, and his processing costs were nonexistent. That freed up precious dollars for hiring the likes of Mary Stuart Masterson, Henry Simmons, and Bob Reitano.

What he did do is work to ensure that his HD image was as close to film as possible. Together with his cinematographer, Learan Kahanov, a veteran of six features, he decided to shoot with the Panasonic Varicam. The Varicam uses a lower resolution than its main competitor, the Sony HDWF900  -  1,280 by 720 versus 1,920 by 1,080  -  but it offers a "film rec" mode that, in Dacko and Kahanov's opinion, comes closer to that intangible thing we call cinema.
Moreover, the two opted for widescreen, an image with an aspect ratio of 2.35 to 1. "Choosing widescreen was a way of differentiating this project from all the other low-budget films out there."
They considered using an anamorphic adapter, a device that attaches to the front of the camera and converts the standard HD image to widescreen without losing resolution. But the adapter added 9 inches to the camera, making it all the more difficult to shoot in the film's tight New York locations. Instead, Dacko and Kahanov went with state-of-art digital lenses, Zeiss DigiPrimes, getting as much detail into the image as possible before cropping the image in postproduction to attain the widescreen look. Yes, that loses precious lines of resolution. But, after tests in a small theater before the official shoot, they were confident this ad hoc widescreen image would retain its detailed look when projected for an audience.
A Movie Set Is a Movie Set
The shoot wasn't all that different from a traditional film shoot. Because HD captures a limited range of light, Kahanov lit The Insurgents a bit more carefully than he would have if he had been working with film. But he used everything from stationary camera setups to dolly shots and Steadicam. Primary sound was recorded on camera, via boom mic.Production assistants (PAs) ran around with walkie-talkies. A craft services table was never far away.
Kahanov set up each shot using an on-camera LCD monitor with a built-in waveform. "The waveform acts as a kind of light meter," he explains. "I know if things are clipped at the white end of the spectrum or if things are too dark. I'm not staring at it like it's a hard-and-fast rule, but it gives me an idea of where I stand with the light." Then, off camera, he cheeked composition, focus, and color on a 14-inch HD monitor. This showed the full l,280-by-720 image, while Dacko watched on his own 9-inch monitor, where the shot was masked to show the final widescreen image.
Image and primary sound were recorded to HD tapes, each carefully cataloged by a PA. And across the set, tapping into a pair of wireless mics clipped to the actors, a sound mixer recorded backup sound to a 5GB PC Card hard drive.
The biggest difference is that Dacko was free to keep the camera rolling. HD tapes are so cheap, be didn't need to worry about filling them. This meant the actors were more relaxed, and in the end, the shoot was more efficient. "On a film set, as soon as you yell 'cut,' everybody stops working," says Dacko. "When shooting digitally, you don't have to cut. I can shoot in series. It allows for more takes, and it allows for actors to rehearse on the fly, which is invaluable on a low-budget independent production."
Postproduction on a PC
Dailies were available within 24 hours, and Reitano cut the whole film in less than four weeks. After each day's shoot, PAs shuttled tapes to Offhollywood Digital, and technicians slipped them into a Varicam "deck" that streams footage onto a G-RAID bard drive via FireWire cable. From there, the footage was compressed and burned onto DVD. Before going to bed each night, Dacko watched the dailies on his home television.
Meanwhile, the same G-RAID drive was plugged into a dual-G5 desktop where Reitano edited the picture using Apple's Final Gut Pro.

</text>
