<text id="E27" category="" words="2006" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Discs Stage a Comeback.' Farm Industry News, 08928312, Nov2006, Vol. 39, Issue 10. 'The New Recruits.' Farm Industry News, 08928312, May/Jun2006, Vol. 39, Issue 6." Author="Jodie Wehrspann" PublicationDate="Nov 2006, May/Jun 2006" SampledFrom="All, Beginning" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.lancs.ac.uk/ehost/resultsadvanced?hid=8&sid=0b82129b-5118-4dd3-8a93-ff1212f61b37%40sessionmgr12&vid=7&bquery=(JN+%22Farm+Industry+News%22)&bdata=JmRiPWJ1aCZjbGkwPUZUJmNsdjA9WSZjbGkxPURUMSZjbHYxPTIwMDYwMS0yMDA2MTImdHlwZT0xJ">

New disks are made to handle tougher corn residue
IN THE MIDST of a cyclical downturn in tillage sales, there's one tool that is gaining ground: disks. Growers are adding disks, or disk harrows, to their toolbox to tackle tougher corn residue, a growing problem on Midwest farms.
"One of the trend lines we are seeing is residue management," says Larry
Kuster, marketing specialist for AGCO Sunflower. "And we can debate about strip-till, no-till and other farming practices, but we are all working with genetically altered crops now."
Kuster says that while genetically altered crops produce higher yields they also leave more residue. The average amount of residue on a 200+ bu. cornfield today is 5 tons/acre compared to just 2 to 3 tons/acre less than a decade ago.
The plant cell walls contain lignin, a chemical compound that holds the plant cells together. The lignin in genetically modified hybrids doesn't break down over winter as easily as the lignin in conventional hybrids. "We started seeing the problem eight years ago with Roundup Ready beans and Bt corn," Kuster says. "Farmers were complaining that residue wasn't passing through their harrows, and they wanted us to adjust the implements. We quickly found we were dealing with a different plant."
In addition, farmers are growing more continuous corn acres as opposed to using the old corn and bean rotation. The end result is a growing stockpile of stalks and stems that can interfere with planting and form a hotbed for disease.
Break it down
To deal with the different and tougher plant, growers have started using disks again. "In the past there hasn't been as much need to size the residue," says Kail Schoen, marketing manager with Landoll Corporation. "Farmers used to do more standard ripping or chiseling in the fall and then hit the field with the cultivator in spring."
Unlike other tillage tools, disks are specifically designed to cut residue down to manageable chunks and mix it into the top 4 to 5 in. of soil. Wide rows of circular blades do the cutting and mixing. The top few inches of soil form the zone where soil microbes are the most active to allow for decay.
"We like to reference a wooden fence post," explains Jamie Meier, Landoll's ag division sales manager. "Where does a fence post rot? Always right below the soil surface because there is air, soil and moisture, which make the microbes most aggressive."
For the residue to decompose, it must be incorporated in the ground before the soil temperature drops to 40 ° when microbes go dormant. Disks are sized wide, covering 30 to 40 ft. in a pass, allowing you to meet that window. "Compared to a smaller ripper-type tool, you can get in the field and cover a lot of acres quickly, which is especially important further north in the Corn Belt," Meier says.
Manufacturers recommend you disk as soon as possible after harvest before the soil temperature drops. Once the residue starts breaking down, the soil gets a kickback in nitrogen. The available nutrients on an acre of 200-bu. corn translate to 77 lbs. of nitrogen, 12 lbs. of phosphorus and 116 lbs. of potassium if the residue is sized and incorporated in the soil. The additional nitrogen can help offset the cost of fuel required to make a disk pass.
Cuts across classes
Disk usage is bridging all tillage classes -- from conventional till to no-till. "The disk harrow is one of those tools that no matter what your tillage beliefs are you are probably still going to have a good disk harrow," says Tom Evans, vice-president of sales for Great Plains Manufacturing, a company specializing in conventional and vertical tillage tools."Even if you are a firm believer in vertical tillage, you can still disk afterward or use a disk prior to subsoiling without changing the soil density."
Evans says disking is one of the fastest and most efficient ways to chop residue and smooth out combine ruts.
Landoll's Meier says conventional tillers are doing a disk pass prior to running the traditional coulters, chisels or disk rippers. No-till farmers, on the other hand, are using the disk as their only tillage pass.
"To give you an example, we just talked to some no-till guys who are looking at buying a disk to get rid of residue," Meier says. "They plan to disk in the fall and plant on a stale seedbed. They still consider themselves to be practicing no-till because they are not making a secondary pass in the spring."
He says disks can help no-tillers with other challenges, too, like slow soil warm-up and uneven emergence, by leveling the ground and incorporating the residue so the planter can penetrate the ground more evenly.
Downsides of disking
On the downside, disking may not work equally as well in all soil types. It also leaves less residue cover than no-tilling, which makes the soil more susceptible to erosion. However, tillage manufacturers say that, in this new cropping environment, no-till farmers, including those who are switching to strip-till, will need to do something to handle residue, especially if they are looking at using a corn-on-corn rotation.
Disking also does not address soil compaction, which occurs deeper in the soil profile. Growers concerned about compaction will have to make a separate pass with ripper-type shanks to fracture compacted layers.
David Benson, spokesperson for Krause Corporation, says that, because compaction is an issue of many farms, disk ripper combination tools also have been a hot item this year for his company.
"When talking with customers about their fall tillage needs in cornstalks, I advise there are basically two scenarios depending on your soil management needs," Benson says. "One is if you have deeper compaction you'll need to size and incorporate residue and address the compaction with some type of deep tillage. Then I recommend a one-pass combination primary tillage system like the Krause Dominator. If sizing and incorporating residue is the main goal, then a tandem disk harrow is the higher speed, higher productivity way to go."

Demand for specialized labor is increasing on Midwest crop farms.
JUSTIN RAHN OF MT. CARROLL, IL, COULD HAVE worked for an agricultural retailer in Carroll County after graduating last March with a degree in agricultural production management. Rahn, 20, was named Outstanding Student of the Year at Kirkwood Community College, the No. 2-rated two-year ag college in the country.
Instead, he took a job as crop and livestock assistant on his parents' farm, where he'll apply his skills in site-specific farming. "Since GPS came out, my grandpa and dad have not incorporated it into their operation," Rahn says. "I went to school for it, and I'm trying to bring it into the operation. Technology pays, but it costs, too." Rahn will be in charge of data collection, hardware and geographic information software.
He represents a new breed of "specialized" labor being called to work on Midwest farms. These new recruits are wanted for skills or knowledge that owners don't have the time to learn but are nonetheless required on today's large crop farms. Machinery repair, computer electronics, agronomy, commercial trucking, terracing and commercial chemical application are all areas these workers cover.
On-farm specialists
Farm owners have historically relied on local ag retailers, implement dealers or custom help to do many of these jobs.But as operations get bigger, timeliness becomes more of a factor. Owners may not have the time to wait for the next available service person. To bypass the crunch, large-acreage farmers are buying their own commercial equipment.
"Five years ago, farmers expected the farm supply business to do their fertilizer spreading," says Steve Rice, president of Agri-Tech Personnel, an ag recruiting company. "Now many have bought equipment to do the work themselves.That is shifting the labor burden from farm suppliers, which had to keep its equipment staffs up, to these large farmers."
Seed and chemicals are their own new beast. Genetic engineering and advancements in chemistries require an agronomist's level of understanding. As a result, agricultural recruiters across the country are reporting an increased demand for farm employees who have these advanced skills.
Advanced training
Colleges and vocational schools are providing many students like Rahn with specialized skills. In the last five years, enrollment in Kirkwood's ag production program has jumped 25%.
The college has upgraded its curriculum and added more technology classes to meet demand, according to Dean of Agricultural Sciences Jerry Bolton. All students are now required to take courses in GPS and GIS in addition to crop production classes. The college also has invested in the latest equipment to give students hands-on training.
Applied chemistry also has been added to the program. "For years ag production curriculum in Iowa functioned with very little chemistry," Bolton says. "But because of the herbicide concentrations used today, the chemistry component is becoming more important."
The college continues to offer students certification for commercial pesticide licenses and commercial driver's licenses."Those two things are always in demand," Bolton says. "More farmers are marketing and hauling their own grain with tandem-axle trucks or commercial semis and are required to have a commercial license."
Bolton says half of Kirkwood's ag graduates get jobs with ag retailers and the other half are hired on farms.
Can you afford?
Job titles for these workers are broader than their specialties because they are required to perform other functions as well on the farm. Common titles include assistant farm manager, farm foreman and farm technician.
AgriCareers, an ag recruiting company in Massena, IA, publishes an annual farm salary survey for two crop positions:crop manager and cropping assistant. According to Gary Maas, managing partner with the company, the salary for a specialist would depend on the level of management required.
"A crop manager is described as operating on his or her own, eventually reporting back to the owner," Maas says. "A crop assistant is more of an operations person and would not have anyone reporting to them." The average salary for crop managers is $41,000 plus benefits, while the average for crop assistants is $29,579.
Hiring a specialist for each function is cost prohibitive for most farmers. But at the same time, hiring a generalist to fill all roles is an old model that no longer works, says Gary Little, president of Agra-Placements, Lincoln, IL. "Farming has changed dramatically in the last 30 years," Little says. "And you can't expect a generalist working on a farm to know everything about all of it."
The right ratio
Little suggests that, instead of hiring one person and thinking he or she will be able to do it all, you should look at hiring two with complementary specialties. "For example, you could look for one person who is knowledgeable in seed, chemicals and fertilizer and another who is good at machinery maintenance," he says. If the operation has livestock, a separate specialist should be appointed.
The exact number you can support largely depends on the size of your operation and whether your current method lets you get work done on time without crop yields affected. "For example, operations that are 2,000 to 5,000 acres almost demand at least one specialist devoted to your farm to ensure timeliness," Little says. "And with that many acres, there will likely be things for that person to do all year."
Farms with 8,000 acres may require two to four specialists, including one to haul equipment across counties and another to buy seed at volume discounts. On the other hand, an operation with 1,000 to 1,500 acres plus livestock may not be big enough to warrant one specialist for crops and another for livestock, Little adds.
If that's the case, specialists with commercial licenses can be hired out to do custom work during downtime. Another alternative is to form a hiring cooperative with other farmers. "Set up a co-op where you have three to four specialists that four operations employee jointly," Little says. "So when Operation A isn't busy, the specialists would be directed to go to Operation B."

</text>
