<text id="F05" category="" words="1993" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Ebony. Bush's Insane Approach to Cuba. Tipping Point:  Something about wine The Turntable Podcast" Author="Mark Saywer , Kelsey C. Blackwell " PublicationDate="2007" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.ebonyjet.com/Templates/DetailsView.aspx?id=3955  http://www.ebonyjet.com/Templates/DetailsView.aspx?id=928&terms=2006 http://www.ebonyjet.com/Templates/DetailsView.aspx?id=4353&terms=2007">

Bush's Insane Approach to Cuba
trying to save Cuba or trying to save votes?

By Mark Sawyer 
 
Albert Einstein once defined insanity as "doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results." George Bush recently in making a speech on Cuba policy and in many ways reflecting on his failed attempt to bring democracy to Iraq, lapsed into just this form of insanity. Bush in a seemingly high minded speech on October 25 affirmed support for the destructive decades long blockade against Cuba as the prime strategy for destabilizing the Cuban Revolution and bringing democracy to the island 90 miles to the South of Florida.
Regardless of how one feels about Fidel Castro or the Cuban Revolution, the US embargo against Cuba is insane. It hurts the people it purports to help. Most dissidents on the island do not support it, and it hurts Black Cubans the very most. Further, the blockade is counter-productive. Everyone knows that interaction and engagement lead to change over time while hostility and isolation maintain the status quo as it has for over forty years. Even a card carrying Communist knows that the number one way to destabilize the regime is to allow Americans to travel there freely, for Cubans to come and go freely to the United States, to allow Cuban athletes to compete in professional baseball and boxing without defecting, and to open up opportunities for trade and economic engagement with the small island. We trade with communist China and Vietnam where 58,169 Americans lost their lives. We now have friendly trade relations with both countries and basketball star Yao Ming can be seen by both Chinese communists and American citizens in the NBA. Why the difference?
It all comes down to Florida and the critical Cuban American vote. Cuban American exile leadership demands that we punish Castro and Cuba, but meanwhile their community members send money home to support their families. This policy insures the status quo. Money from Miami means Cuba will never get poor enough or engaged enough to begin to change or collapse, and the exile leadership keeps Castro as the main issue allowing them to dominate exile politics.
But let's get to the crux of the issue. If Cuba were to collapse the number one fear of the Bush administration and the Cuban exile leadership is that one million mostly black and brown Cubans would show up at our doorstep in Florida. These people will not look like Ricky Ricardo but more like Haitian boat people, with the caveat of being educated, sophisticated and concerned about racism and inequality.
The current system helps to undo one of the advantages of the revolution  -  the reduction of disparities in income and infant mortality, and an increase in life expectancy and literacy. Cuban blacks have the longest life expectancy of any black population in the world. That is in sharp contrast to pre-revolutionary Cuba where inequality reigned.
That same population of now Miami-based Cubans who governed over black poverty and illiteracy later in Florida also denounced Nelson Mandela as a terrorist and embraced the apartheid regime as heroes for standing up to Castro. An infusion of Black people with different attitudes about politics, religion and everything else under the sun is not something they desire.
These Cubans of African descent will likely challenge the prevailing attitude that casts Cuban Americans as the "model minority" that overcame communism to become the ultimate Hispanic success story, in stark contrast to their darker fellow Latinos --Mexicans, Puerto Ricans and Dominicans. While this perspective ignores the millions in government subsidies given to Cubans to build businesses and commerce in Miami, it plays an important function. It maintains the myth that Cuba is a "white" country and it helps the Republicans make the argument to other Latinos that if they would just vote Republican they too might taste the kind of success that the Cuban American leadership has seen.
So perhaps my opening is misstated. Bush's embargo is designed to keep Afro-Cubans poorer, punish them disproportionately for not overthrowing the Castro regime and most importantly, keep them in Cuba. Thus, the Bush speech was not really about Cuba and the Cuban people at all. The speech was designed to satisfy rabid Castro haters.
A sensible policy to bring "democracy" to Cuba would recognize the progress made by the revolution and create dialogue with American groups of all political stripes. The Bush brand of bringing democracy, fortunately for Cuba, is not as radical or as tragic as his failures in Iraq. But it is equally cynical and yes, in Einstein's definition, perhaps insane. We need a Cuba policy that focuses on the needs of the Cuban people, real change, and recognizes the realities of the world we live in. That, I suppose, is a lot to ask from Bush.
Mark Sawyer is Associate Professor of African American Studies and Political Science at UCLA. He is the author of Racial Politics in Post-Revolutionary Cuba (Cambridge Press, 2006)
Tipping Point: 
Something about wine 

Selecting a good wine, for me, has always been a fairly random matter. The bottle I take home isn't chosen for its year or varietal but rather an intrinsic sense that, for this night, it's the one. The few sensibilities I do have are the result of serendipitous circumstance, though what I've taken away in no way classifies me an oenephile. I know, for example, boxed wine is not suitable for dinner parties and Chianti tastes like piney-leather. Pinot Noir masquerades as a tough guy but is really peppery grape juice, and White Zinfandel is grape juice. Very dry wines may double as window cleaner but are lubricants for intellectual conversation. And after four glasses of anything, none of my convictions hold any water.
I've romanced on becoming a part of the oh-so-educated wine crowd - those who can rattle off a course-by-course list of perfect pairings based on the days produce selection. But, it's all a bit beyond me. That swirling, sniffing and gurgling seems too elaborate an affair for a drowsy buzz. And the adjectives used to describe wine - fruity accents, hints of oak, chocolate? A pretentious show. My wanton aisle wandering has served my wine selection process just fine, thank you. But still I've been curious. Could I be missing out on something? 
With a diverse selection of wines and a most-unpretentious sommelier, I decided to do my own research. I compared my untrained wine impressions to those of Rodney Alex, owner of Juicy Wine Company in Chicago and five-year certified wine expert. I read little about the wines before sampling and based my impressions solely on my immediate experiences. Before pouring, Rodney lined the samplings stylistically from lightest to fullest to give me -- and my taste buds -- a little traction.
We started with a 2006 Riesling from Esterlina Vineyards in northern California. After a color examination, which I'm still unclear on the importance of, and a swirl (to release the scent) I gave the wine a good gargle. Let me here note drinking with a sommelier is at once enlightening and intimidating. After this first wine, it became clear Rodney and I were going to have wildly different experiences and while I didn't want to fake any fruity notes, my tasting abilities were on the line. "This wine is very simple," he said. "I'm getting Maui gold pineapple - a touch of this petroleum thing which is very typical of Riesling. It has this Singer sewing machine oil thing going on. It's not a bad."
Hmmm . . .  Maui pineapple? Petroleum? I got sweet, very close to White Zinfandel without the box. I liked it, but was wondering if I was doing something wrong. How could I get petroleum? That's when I learned the magic of wine is that no one is expected to have the exact same experience. Particular varietals do have defining characteristics - Pinot Noir is plumy, Cabernet Sauvignon is cherry - but along with this, is personal association. For Rodney, all Rieslings taste faintly of petroleum. For me, this Reisling was Zinfandel minus the cardboard.
We moved to a 2005 Chardonnay also from Esterlina vineyards. "It's very complex. It's toasty. The first thing I get is warmth," he said. "There's definitely wood. Maybe a little bit of that fruit cocktail juice.  Smells a bit like canned cream corn."
I got the wood and the Chardonnay was certainly not as sweet as the Riesling but my analysis ended there. Rodney explained Chardonnays differ from Rieslings because their grapes have thicker skins and take longer to ripen on the vine. Because Chardonnay hangs a little longer, the grapes have a higher sugar content leading to a higher alcohol content. (I could get into how this all goes down, but it'skind of a snoozer). Anyway, look for Chardonnay when you want a healthy buzz. I didn't get the cream corn, but at least I was getting an education.
Things didn't change much when we moved to the reds. We looked at a 2004 Cabernet Sauvignon from Black Coyote Vineyards in Napa Valley. Rodney immediately got eucalyptus, bell pepper, dried herbs and black cherry. This wine certainly wasn't as sweet as the whites but I wasn't getting any peppers, maybe (maybe) an herb or two. After a good swish I came away not with eucalyptus but a puckered, sticky mouth. This, I learned, was the result of tannins in the wine, which basically give it its texture (like the finishing spices on a meal). 
We then tried 2005 Zinfandel from the Brown Estate in Napa Valley. "It smells very spicy but in the mouth I'm getting raspberries and black raspberries. There are bright fruit tones coming up over the glass like raspberry sweet tarts." At this point it felt like he was showing off, but I could tell Rodney was sincere. I was exasperated considering my palette seemed to only extend to what was sweet and what was not.
We finished with a Viognier from the Rideau Vineyards in California. "Viognier is an esoteric grape varietal. It's a wine lovers wine. It's a wine growers wine." And, apparently, it was my wine. With that disclaimer I wasn't expecting results, but what came through was sweet (of course) and then citrus like oranges or grapefruit. It was light and juicy, absolutely wonderful. "Anyone can do this, all you have to do is sit and think about the wine," Rodney said. While I don't really know about that, I did take away a few things from this experience.
1. Wine is all about balance between sugars and acidity. A good wine has good balance. It's as simple as that.
2. Rieslings are our friends. They're light but complex making them a great option for your next dinner party (no more White Zinfandels).
3. Select a wine based on what you're going to do with it. Is it a cocktail, or is it going with a specific meal? Find a vendor you trust and ask their recommendations.
4. Don't be afraid to experiment. If one wine is too sweet and the other too tart mix 'em together. Viola.
5. Your experience is your experience. Be it cream corn, petroleum, butterscotch or just plain sweet, nothing is incorrect..
Launch the slide show to get the full experience.
I know next time I'm wandering for wine, I'll have more than my gut to the lead the way.
The Turntable Podcast
Favorite Sounds of 2007

2007 was a good year for Black music. Check out The Turntable as we rundown some of our favorite sounds from 2007. 

Favorite CDs from 2007 
(no particular order)
Finding Forever- Common (recommended tracks: "I Want You" and "Black Maybe")
Kero One Presents: Plug Label- Kero One  (recommended tracks: "Yagotta" and "Summer in the City")
Moon Bossa- Julie Dexter &amp; Khari Simmons  (recommended tracks: "Moon Bossa", "The Dove" and "My Baby Don't Love Me")
Wine &amp; Spirits- Rahsaan Patterson (recommended tracks: "Stop Breaking My Heart" and "Feel Good")

</text>
