<text id="F12" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Futurist: Raiding the Past: What Future for Antiquities? ; Homosexual Relationships; The Nanotech Gold Rush" Author="Lane Jennings ; Cynthia G. Wagner ; Patrick Tucker" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.wfs.org/trend2mj06.htm  http://www.wfs.org/trendmj06.htm  http://www.wfs.org/trend3mj06.htm">

Society
Raiding the Past: What Future for Antiquities? 
by Lane Jennings
Who has the right to own, display, or sell historic objects? 
It's an old story, and a sad one. In humanity's mad rush to build a proud future and make the present more secure, many grand achievements of the past are tossed aside, left to disappear forever. History is full of cases where pillagers and vandals tear down or carry off the monuments of a defenseless or undervalued past. 
Not only do conquering armies seek plunder, but so do individuals. Ordinary people, struggling to survive in poverty near sites where powerful and wealthy peoples once flourished, treat the relics of past glories as raw material for new construction, or simply a potential source of cash. 
Serious efforts to protect ancient monuments and to collect and preserve artifacts for careful study effectively began in 1798 when Napoleon Bonaparte brought a team of scientists along with his army invading Egypt. Over the next two centuries, U.S. and European governments, universities, museums, and wealthy collectors financed many expeditions to discover, record, and acquire (sometimes for money, sometimes by force) ancient objects, human remains, works of art, and even entire buildings. 
Today, it is easy to dismiss such "fieldwork" as simply acts of arrogance toward peoples too poor or too weak to resist effectively. Certainly many governments, museums, and research institutes have changed their policies. And some have now begun restoring certain items and apologizing for past actions. But there is another side to this kind of looting. 
The foreign institutions and collectors who are accused of stealing many ancient objects often saved them from destruction or slow decay. And the true significance of many sites and artifacts might never have been known without the careful handling and study they received from Western experts. 
Respect for local heritage has spread and deepened as more nations have gained independence and a sense of common identity. Yet, even today, wherever ancient peoples once lived, worked, and buried their dead, individuals and organized bands are digging for objects to carry off and sell. In the process, they may obscure or completely erase the history of the objects they uncover. 
Now and then a treasure hoard of precious metal objects or a large statue may be uncovered by professional archaeologists in the field or offered at auction. But most of the antiquities trade today involves individuals of relatively modest means who simply want a small piece of the past to show off and admire. 
Through online sites and mail order catalogs, art and antiquities dealers offer everything from Egyptian mummy beads to Roman coins, from Mayan pottery to African masks. Serious collectors and casual shoppers alike can buy an ancient Greek wine jar or an Etruscan vase as easily as any modern painting or print. Past efforts to stop looting have included guarding important sites, banning the sale or export of ancient artifacts and major works of art, and using customs authorities and police to check that buyers, sellers, and collectors all display reliable documentation to prove they are not in possession of stolen goods. 
But none of these measures has been fully effective. As art and cultural reporter Roger Atwood states in his recent book, Stealing History, "The biggest obstacle to stopping the looting of the ancient world is overcoming the feeling that it is inevitable . . . [that] as long as there are rich buyers, there will always be poor looters willing to supply them." 
Given the present rate of worldwide looting, Atwood calculates that, within decades, only a handful of tourist-thronged, highly publicized, and heavily protected ancient sites will remain. "The day is not far off," he warns, "when an archaeologist can go through an entire career without seeing a single unpillaged site." 
To avoid this future, Atwood urges coordinated action by international agencies, national governments, professionals in the antiquities trade, museums, and private collectors. His specific recommendations include: 
•	A five-year global ban on the sale of any antiquity not clearly proven to have been legally obtained before 1970 or officially licensed for export from its country of origin. 
•	The indefinite suspension of all trade in undocumented objects made of gold and silver. 
•	Emergency import restrictions by the U.S. Congress to prevent wholesale looting of antiquities from countries in turmoil. 
Atwood argues that such efforts would be made more effective if museums and governments in antiquities-rich countries would agree to "surplus" some of the interesting but relatively common items they often hold in permanent storage. Selling some of these items - fully documented - to dealers and collectors could help fund local archaeology and preservation work. It would also effectively set a new world standard for legal documentation in the antiquities trade. Too often, blanket laws preventing any work of art or ancient object from ever leaving its country of origin simply encourage looting, smuggling, and black-market dealing. 
Still another way of preserving artifacts for future generations suggests itself: To safely satisfy those people who buy antiquities primarily as decorative objects, some museum stores and galleries already sell licensed reproductions. This approach could be expanded so that modern crafts workers would be trained to recreate ancient artifacts, even using traditional methods and materials. This would not only supply more beautiful and useful objects of ancient design, but also revive the practical skills and ingenuity of ancient artists. 
And why does any of this matter? Perhaps because the true significance of past events and cultures cannot easily be grasped if all we have to make them real to us are words and images - nothing to touch or feel. After all, look how hard it is for many people to think seriously about the future, which no one can see or touch. 
Homosexual Relationships
by Cynthia G. Wagner 
Institutional support might bring more-stable relationships among gays. 
Conflicts come to most couples, over most of the same things: Whose turn is it to clean the tub? How much was spent on that new jacket? Whose family should we spend the holidays with? And couples sometimes break up.
As society looks to the question of allowing same-sex marriages (or banning them), more research is being done on the nature and quality of gay and lesbian relationships, and whether they differ from heterosexual relationships. Researchers hope to learn how to predict the success of relationships and how to improve them, enhancing the quality of people's lives. Researchers also want a better understanding of the differences that are often cited to support different treatment of homosexuals under the law. 
Do gay and lesbian couples have as good a chance at maintaining stable and satisfying unions over the long term as do heterosexuals? So far, psychological research on homosexual relationships has been too scant to provide clear answers to such questions, but some conclusions may be drawn, according to Lawrence A. Kurdek of Wright State University. 
From his meta-analysis of studies that have been made of gay and lesbian couples, Kurdek suggests that there may be more similarities than differences between homosexual and heterosexual relationships. The issues that matter to a couple are often the same, such as division of household chores, sources of conflict and satisfaction, and the need for a supportive social network (family and/or friends). And the factors that will predict the success or failure of the relationship are also similar: personality traits, level of trust and respect, and ability to communicate and resolve conflicts. 
"Although members of gay and lesbian couples do not divide household labor in a perfectly equal manner, they are more likely than members of heterosexual couples to negotiate a balance between achieving a fair distribution of household labor and accommodating the different interests, skills, and work schedules of particular partners," Kurdek notes. 
Conflict resolution may also be more effective among homosexual partners. Whether due to biology or acculturation, men and women tend to perceive the world differently, creating a source of conflict that does not affect a same-sex couple. Kurdek cites studies showing that gay and lesbian partners tend to begin discussing their problems with a more positive attitude than do heterosexual couples, and they develop more possible solutions and compromises in the course of the discussion. 
Despite this more-civil approach to resolving problems, homosexual relationships are more likely to dissolve than heterosexual relationships, Kurdek notes. In studies of married heterosexual, cohabiting heterosexual, gay, and lesbian couples, the least likely to have dissolved their relationship after 18 months were married couples (4%); the most likely were lesbian couples (18%). 
Because the dissolution rates were roughly similar for all couples who cohabited, whether gay or straight, and were consistently higher than for married heterosexual couples, Kurdek believes that it is the institution of marriage itself that may help keep the relationships intact over time. A study in Norway and Sweden found that state-sanctioned unions for gays and lesbians did reduce the break-up rates for couples, though they were still higher than for married heterosexuals. 
Marriage (or other legally sanctioned union) has a positive influence on relationship outcomes, both because it is a culturally supported institution and because it simply makes breaking up harder to do, says Kurdek. Without the backing of society and their own social networks (supportive family and friends), gay and lesbian couples have an uphill battle in maintaining their relationships. 
The Nanotech Gold Rush
by Patrick Tucker
A technology researcher outlines the future of molecular engineering. 
Though still a largely unexplored area of science, nanotechnology, or the manipulation of objects less than one-billionth of one meter in size, has already infected the popular consciousness. The result: curiosity, suspicion, and irrational exuberance. 
According to David M. Berube, author of Nano-Hype, some of the most fantastic depictions of nanotechnology in popular culture - such as swarms of killer nanobots and mind manipulation through microscopic machinery - belie the technology's real near-term applications. These include the construction of stronger, more-versatile materials. 
"It is abundantly clear that the applications of nanotechnology will likely be both numerous and far-reaching," Berube writes, "but don't expect a nano-industry per se to develop. Nanotechnology enables products of another industry to be improved or enhanced." 
By 2015, the market for nanostructured materials will reach $340 billion. For electronics and information related equipment it will reach $600 billion, and for nanopharmaceuticals, $180 billion, Berube's research suggests. He sees nanotechnologies working their way into a broad constellation of products with commercial applications falling into the following six categories: 
• Manufacturing and materials. These will make up "the single largest application of nanotechnology." Berube describes a number of companies at the forefront of this research and development, such as QuantumSphere Inc., a leading manufacturer of metallic nanopowders used in fuel cells, hydrogen generation cells, and air-breathing systems. 
A Drexel and TRI/Princeton team is also working in materials R&amp;D. They've developed a method for filling single-walled carbon nanotubes with polar and nonpolar liquids. According to the team, this produced "magnetic nanostructures with applications in memory devices and wearable electronics." 
A recent NanoSonic project has resulted in a new material that the company describes as "metallic rubber, which flexes and stretches like rubber but conducts electricity like a solid metal." 
• Food and agriculture. A number of large food conglomerates, such as Denmark's Friesland Foods, are investing heavily in nanoscience. Friesland is researching ways to control flavor release and component breakdown in cheese. Meanwhile, researchers at the Norwegian Institute of Technology are experimenting with ways to improve the shelf life of food by incorporating nanoparticles into food packaging. 
• Electronics and computing. Carbon nanotubes could provide nonvolatile, high-speed, high- density memory that both is resistant to radiation and uses relatively little power. Success in this area could provide for better multiplatform computing and drastically increased capability, particularly for future generations of handheld devices. According to the NanoMarkets newsletter, "The market for nano-enabled electronics will reach $10.8 billion in 2007 and $82.5 billion in 2011." 
• Health care. "Demand for nanotechnology health-care products in the United States will increase nearly 50% per year, reaching $6.5 billion in 2009," according to the Freedonia Group.

</text>
