<text id="F38" category="" words="2033" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The World's Greatest Wine Estates: A Modern Perspective   " Author="Robert M. Parker Jr" PublicationDate="2005" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://books.simonandschuster.com/World's-Greatest-Wine-Estates/Robert-M-Parker-Jr/9780743237710/excerpt">

6.	The ability to display a singular personality. When one considers the greatest wines produced, it is their singular personalities that set them apart. The same can be said of the greatest vintages. The abused description "classic vintage" has become nothing more than a reference to what a viticultural region does in a typical (normal) year. Exceptional wines from exceptional vintages stand far above the norm, and they can always be defined by their singular qualities -- their aromas and their flavors and textures. The opulent, sumptuous qualities of the 1982 and 1990 red Bordeaux, the rugged tannin and immense ageability of the 1986 red Bordeaux, the seamless, perfectly balanced 1994 Napa and Sonoma Cabernet Sauvignons and proprietary blends, and the plush, sweet fruit, high alcohol, and glycerin of the 1990 Barolos and Barbarescos, are all examples of vintage individuality. 
7.	The ability to reflect the place of origin. An Asian proverb seems particularly applicable when discussing the ballyhooed French concept of terroir: "Knowing in part may make a fine tale, but wisdom comes from seeing the whole." And so it is with this concept of terroir, that hazy, intellectually appealing notion that a plot of soil plays the determining factor in a wine's character. The French are more obsessed with the issue of terroir than anyone else in the world. And why not? Many of that country's most renowned vineyards are part of an elaborate hierarchy of quality based on their soil and exposition. And the French would have everyone believe that no one on planet Earth can equal the quality of their Pinot Noir, Chardonnay, Cabernet, Syrah, etc. because their privileged terroir is unequaled. One of France's most celebrated wine regions, Burgundy, is often cited as the best place to search for the fullest expression of terroir. Advocates of terroir (the terroirists) argue that a particular piece of ground contributes a character that is distinctive and apart from that same product grown on different soils and slopes. Burgundy, with its classifications of grand cru and premier cru vineyards, village vineyards, and generic viticultural areas, is the terroirists' "raison d'être." Of course, they claim they can taste a wine's terroir only if they have not seen the label. 
Lamentably, terroir has become such a politically correct buzzword that in some circles it is an egregious error not to utter some profound comments about finding "a sense of somewhereness" when tasting a Vosne-Romanée-Les Malconsorts or a Latricières-Chambertin. Leading terroirists make a persuasive and often eloquent case about the necessity of finding, as one observer puts it, "the true voice of the land" in order for a wine to be legitimized. 
Yet like so many things about wine, especially tasting it, there is no scientific basis for anything the terroirists propose. What they argue is what most Burgundians and owners of France's finest vineyards give lip service to -- that for a wine to be authentic and noble it must speak of its terroir. 
On the other side of this issue are the "realists," or should I call them modernists. They suggest that terroir is merely one of many factors that influence a wine's style, quality, and character. Soil, exposition, and microclimate (terroir) most certainly impart an influence, but so do the following: 
Rootstock -- Is it designed to produce prolific or small crop levels? 
Yeasts -- Does the winemaker use the vineyard's wild yeasts or are commercial yeasts employed? Every yeast, wild or commercial, will give a wine a different set of aromatics, flavor, and texture. 
Yields and Vine Age -- High yields result in diluted wine. Low yields, usually less than two tons per acre or 35-40 hectoliters per hectare, result in wines with much more concentration and personality. Additionally, young vines have a tendency to overproduce, whereas old vines produce small berries and less wine. Crop thinning is often employed with younger vineyards to increase the level of concentration. 
Harvest Philosophy -- Is the fruit picked underripe (with greener, cooler red fruit flavors) to preserve more acidity, or fully ripe (with darker fruit flavors and lower acids) to emphasize the lushness and opulence of a given varietal? 
Vinification Techniques and Equipment -- There are an amazing number of techniques that can change the wine's aromas and flavors. Moreover, equipment choice (different presses, destemmers, etc.) can have a profound influence on the final wine. 
Elevage (or the wine's upbringing) -- Is the wine brought up in oak barrels, concrete vats, stainless-steel vats, or large oak vats (which the French call foudres)? What is the percentage of new oak? Of these elements, only oak exerts an influence on the wine's character. Additionally, transferring wine (racking) from one container to another has an immense impact on a wine's bouquet and flavor. Is the wine allowed to remain in long contact with its lees (believed to give the wine more aromatic complexity and fullness)? Or is it racked frequently for fear of picking up an undesirable lees smell? 
Fining and Filtration -- Even the most concentrated and profound wines that terroirists consider quintessential examples of the soil can be eviscerated and stripped of their personality and richness by excessive fining and filtering. Does the winemaker treat the wine with kid gloves, or is the winemaker a manufacturer/processor bent on sculpturing the wine? 
Bottling Date -- Does the winemaker bottle early to preserve as much fruit as possible, or does he bottle later to give the wine a more mellow, aged character? Undoubtedly, the philosophy of when to bottle can radically alter the character of a wine. 
Cellar Temperature and Sanitary Conditions -- Some wine cellars are cold and others are warm. Different wines emerge from cold cellars (development is slower and the wines are less prone to oxidation) than from warm cellars (the maturation of aromas and flavors is more rapid and the wines are quicker to oxidize). Additionally, are the wine cellars clean or dirty? 
These are just a handful of factors that can have extraordinary impact on the style, quality, and personality of a wine. As the modernists claim, the choices that man himself makes, even when they are unquestionably in pursuit of the highest quality, can contribute far more to a wine's character than the vineyard's terroir. 
If you are wondering where I stand on terroir, I do believe it is an important component in the production of fine wine. However, I would argue that the most persuasive examples of terroir do not arise from Burgundy, but rather, from white wine varietals planted in Alsace and Germany. If one is going to argue terroir, the wine has to be made from exceptionally low yields; fermented with only the wild yeasts that inhabit the vineyard; brought up in a neutral medium, such as old barrels, cement tanks, or stainless steel; given minimal cellar treatment; and bottled with little or no fining or filtration. 
Terroir, as used by many of its proponents, is often a convenient excuse for upholding the status quo. If one accepts the fact that terroir is everything and is essential to legitimize a wine, how should consumers evaluate the wines from Burgundy's most famous grand cru vineyard, Chambertin? This 32-acre vineyard boasts 23 different proprietors. But only a handful of them appear committed to producing an extraordinary wine. Everyone agrees this is a hallowed piece of ground, but I can think of only a few producers -- Domaine Leroy, Domaine Ponsot, Domaine Rousseau, Domaine des Chézeaux (Ponsot made the wine for Chézeaux) -- that produce wines that merit the stratospheric reputation of this vineyard. Yet the Chambertins of three of these producers, Leroy, Ponsot, and Rousseau, are completely different in style. The Ponsot wine was the most elegant, supple, and round; Leroy's is the most tannic, backward, concentrated, and meaty; and Rousseau's is the darkest- colored, most dominated by new oak, and most modern in style, taste, and texture. As for the other 18 or 20 producers (and I am not even thinking about the various négociant offerings), what Burgundy wine enthusiasts are likely to encounter on retailers' shelves ranges from mediocre to appallingly thin and insipid. What wine, may I ask, speaks for the soil of Chambertin? Is it the wine of Leroy, the wine of Ponsot, the wine of Rousseau? 
Arguments such as this can be made with virtually any significant Burgundy vineyard. Consider Corton-Charlemagne and four of its most celebrated producers. The firm of Faiveley owns the most prized parcel atop this famous hill, and they make a compellingly elegant Corton-Charlemagne. Stylistically, it is the antithesis of the super-concentrated, lavishly oaky, broadly flavored, alcoholic Corton-Charlemagne made by Louis Latour. Again, Domaine Leroy makes a backward, hard, tough Corton-Charlemagne that resembles a tannic red more than a white wine. Domaine Coche-Dury makes a wine with extraordinary mineral components, as well as remarkable richness, unctuosity, and opulence where the oak takes a back seat to the wine's fruit and texture. Which of these Corton-Charlemagnes has that notion of "somewhereness" that is raised by the terroirists to validate the quality of a vineyard? 
Are terroirists kindergarten intellectuals who should be doing more tasting and less talking? Of course not. But they can be accused of naïvely swallowing the tallest tale in winedom. On the other hand, the realists should recognize that no matter how intense and concentrated a wine can be from a modest vineyard in Givry, it will never have the sheer complexity and class of a Vosne-Romanée grand cru from a conscientious producer. 
In conclusion, it is fundamental that no great wine can be made from mediocre terroir, and any top wine must, to some degree, reflect its place of origin. Yet wine enthusiasts need to think of terroir as you do salt, pepper, and garlic. In many dishes they can represent an invaluable component, imparting wonderful aromas and flavors. But if consumed alone, they are usually difficult to swallow. Moreover, all the hyperventilation over terroir obscures the most important issue of all -- identifying and discovering those producers who make wines worth drinking and savoring! 

8. The passion and commitment of the producers. Think it over -- the artist who produces a wine has one chance every 12 months. First is the 11 months of work leading up to the vintage. And then there is the most important decision made in the course of the year -- the date to harvest, which, once made, cannot be undone. The fruit can be too ripe or not ripe enough, so getting it perfect is their goal, but perfection is no easy accomplishment, particularly given the vagaries of Mother Nature. These producers work virtually every day of the year, either in the vineyard or in the winery. They are the custodians for the new wine in the cellar. They are groundskeepers responsible for manicuring, pruning, and taking care of the vineyard's health, its crop size, and its overall balance. These producers have to be quick learners. A chef can have a bad day in the kitchen and 24 hours later be back on his or her brilliant and creative game. A wine producer puts in 11 months of labor, but over the course of a 10-20 day harvest, only gets that one chance to prove his or her worth. 
These producers, to a man and woman, all have an enviable passion, intensity, and commitment to hard work. They refuse to compromise, and they recognize their responsibilities as the custodians of special pieces of property. Their sole purpose is to deliver to the consumer the most natural, uncompromised, unmanipulated expression of their vineyard, vintage, and varietal that is humanly possible. For the most part, the vast majority of the men and women behind great wines are humble servants of Mother Nature. 
Most of the producers in this book are, I am sure, capable of pursuing more lucrative careers in other fields of work, but they are wedded to the concept that wine is not a business but a culture that ties together man, nature, and land. It embodies civilization at its finest, and is capable of bringing together diverse people to share the joy of a beverage that has been an important component of every major civilization in the Western world.

</text>
