<text id="G20" category="" words="1998" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Ideology and the Affective Structure of Whites' Racial Perceptions' Public Opinion Quarterly 70(3) 2006" Author="Christopher M. Federico" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.swetswise.com/eAccess/viewToc.do?titleID=168440&yevoID=1813084">

The study of racial perceptions has developed into one of the most fruitful
areas of social science research on racial and ethnic attitudes. Among other
things, research on stereotypical perceptions of various racial and ethnic
groups has documented their content (Devine and Elliott 1995; Schuman et al.
1997; Sniderman and Carmines 1997), their origins (Fiske 1998), and their
impact on information processing (for reviews see Blair 2001; and Fiske
1998). More recently, researchers have also begun to take an interest in the
relationship between the positive and negative dimensions of whites' stereotypical
perceptions of blacks. Although positive and negative stereotypical
perceptions are perhaps most easily thought of as "bipolar" or "reciprocally
related" - with the acceptance of positive perceptions implying the rejection
of negative perceptions and vice versa - research differs as to whether this is always the case (Cacioppo and Berntson 1994; Levine, Carmines, and
Sniderman 1999). In many cases, whites appear to endorse both positive and
negative perceptions of blacks at the same time, suggesting a pattern of
ambivalence (Katz and Hass 1988). The purpose of the present study is to
examine the hypothesis that these deviations from bipolarity in the organization
of whites' perceptions of blacks may vary as a function of ideology, with
deviations from bipolarity being more likely as one moves to the political
right.
The Structure of Whites' Racial Perceptions
In general, what does research on racial and ethnic attitudes have to say
about the affective structure of whites' stereotypical perceptions of blacks?
Like research in a number of other attitude domains, research on stereotypes
typically assumes that stereotypical perceptions can be conceptualized
in terms of a single bipolar affective dimension, with positive
perceptions (e.g., blacks are hardworking) at one end and negative perceptions
(e.g., blacks are lazy) at the other (see Schuman et al. 1997; see also
Cacioppo and Berntson 1994; Green and Citrin 1994). As noted earlier, this
assumption implies that the endorsement of positive and negative perceptions
should be reciprocally related, with the acceptance of positive stereotypical
perceptions necessarily leading to the rejection of negative ones. In
many ways, this conceptual assumption is a product of the instruments typically
used to measure racial attitudes and perceptions. Most of these
instruments have taken the form of Likert scales or semantic-differential
items, both of which force the respondent to indicate their attitudes or perceptions
on a single positive-versus-negative dimension (see Schuman
et al. 1997). While these bipolar measures have provided numerous benefits
in terms of economy and simplicity, their use may have discouraged
researchers from considering the possibility that positive and negative stereotypical
perceptions of blacks may not always be reciprocally related: in
and of themselves, measures that force respondents to make an either-or
choice between the endorsement of positive or negative perceptions minimize
attention to situations where the two may coexist (Cacioppo and Berntson
1994; Cacioppo, Gardner, and Berntson 1999; Levine, Carmines, and
Sniderman 1999).
Despite these assumptions, a growing body of work suggests that the organization
of positive and negative racial perceptions may frequently deviate
from a pattern of strict bipolarity. At the most basic level, studies have shown
that positive and negative responses to blacks are both empirically distinguishable
and statistically independent of one another. For example, in a study
of over 4,000 high school students, Patchen, Hofmann, and Davidson (1976)
found that positive and negative attitudes toward blacks and whites fell on separate dimensions in a factor analysis and that these dimensions were
relatively orthogonal to one another. Similarly, Katz and Hass and their colleagues
(Hass et al. 1992; Katz and Hass 1988) found that measures of "pro-black"
and "anti-black" attitudes tend to load on different factors, with the
correlation between the measures again being minimal. For a sizable number
of the whites studied by the Katz and Hass group, this deviation from bipolarity
manifested itself as racial "ambivalence," or a tendency to have both positive
and negative attitudes toward blacks at the same time (see especially Katz
and Hass 1988).
At a somewhat deeper level, studies have also suggested that positive and
negative responses toward blacks and other racial outgroups may have different
antecedents. In this vein, Patchen and colleagues (1977) found that positive
behaviors toward blacks were best predicted by prior opportunities for
racial contact, while negative behaviors were best predicted by personal
aggressiveness and the racial attitudes of one's family and peers. From a
slightly different perspective, both Lipset and Schneider (1978) and Katz,
Wackenhut, and Hass (1986) have argued that positive and negative attitudes
toward blacks may have different antecedents, with positive attitudes being
rooted in humanitarianism and negative attitudes being rooted in individualism.
According to this account, humanitarian concern for disadvantaged social
groups leads to positive affect in the form of sympathetic perceptions, while
an individualistic concern for self-reliance and other tenets of the Protestant
ethic leads to negative affect in the form of disapproval. Several studies have
now provided evidence for this account (e.g., Hass et al. 1992; Katz and Hass
1988).
Interestingly, these sets of results dovetail nicely with the conclusions of a
broader line of theory and research in the psychological literature on affect,
which increasingly points toward the existence of distinguishable positive and
negative evaluative processes (Cacioppo and Berntson 1994; Cacioppo, Gardner,
and Berntson 1999). More precisely, this line of work suggests that separate
"channels" may be responsible for positive and negative responses to
various stimuli, and that these two channels may not always operate in a bipolar
or reciprocal fashion. According to this "bivariate" model, positive and
negative evaluative processes may have evolved in response to separate prerogatives
related to approach and avoidance: positive affect may encourage
the exploration of novel objects and the pursuit of survival-enhancing goals,
while negative affect may alert the individual to the presence of dangers to be
avoided (Cacioppo, Gardner, and Berntson 1999; Gray 1991; see also Marcus, Neuman, and MacKuen 2000). Additional evidence suggests that positive and
negative evaluative processes may have different neuropsychological substrates,
with positive and negative stimuli leading to higher levels of activation
in different neural circuits (see Davidson 1993; and Gray 1991; for a
review see Cacioppo, Gardner, and Berntson 1999). As such, deviations from
bipolarity in the affective structure of whites' racial perceptions may be part
of a more general tendency in the appraisal of social stimuli.
But Whose Racial Perceptions Deviate from Affective
Bipolarity? The Role of Ideology
While a variety of studies suggest that whites' stereotypical perceptions of
blacks may not always be bipolar or reciprocally related, researchers have
devoted less attention to question of whose racial perceptions are more likely
to deviate from bipolarity. In this vein, studies have repeatedly shown that
there are reliable individual differences in the degree to which whites' racial
attitudes actually do so. For example, Katz and Hass and their colleagues
(Hass et al. 1992) and Monteith (1996) have found that individuals differ in
the extent to which they endorse both positive and negative opinions of
blacks. More generally, Cacioppo, Gardner, and Berntson (1999) have argued
that a two-channel affective system may permit a variety of overall response
patterns, depending on the circumstances: some situations may encourage a
bipolar response pattern, while others may lead to a shift away from it, resulting
in phenomena like ambivalence.
So, given the potential for variability in the relationship between positive
and negative racial perceptions, how might we explain individual differences
in the structure of this relationship? One factor that may be relevant is ideology.
While this variable has not received a great deal of attention in the literature
on the affective structure of whites' racial perceptions, studies have
more generally suggested that ideology may intersect with racial attitudes in
a number of ways (Sidanius, Singh, Hetts, and Federico 2000; see also Sniderman
and Carmines 1997; and Sniderman, Crosby, and Howell 2000). Interestingly,
one of the chief conclusions of this broader line of research is that political
conservatism is reliably associated with more negative perceptions of African-
Americans (Federico and Sidanius 2002a, 2002b; Sidanius, Pratto, and Bobo
1996; Sidanius et al. 2000). While this finding appears to be relatively robust
(Federico and Sidanius 2002b), there are a number of reasons to suspect that
this emphasis on the relationship between conservatism and negative perceptions
of blacks may actually obscure a more subtle relationship between conservatism
and deviations from affective bipolarity that result in conflicting
perceptions of blacks. Among other things, this tendency may have something
to do with the racial-attitude measures used in most studies of the relationship
between ideology and racial perceptions: almost all of these measures have been bipolar in nature, forcing respondents to express either a positive or a
negative attitude toward blacks (e.g., Federico and Sidanius 2002a, 2002b;
Sidanius, Pratto, and Bobo 1996). As noted above, measures of this sort leave
little or no room for the assessment of deviations from bipolarity.
Assuming that this is true, why might the probability of having both positive
and negative perceptions of blacks at the same time increase as one moves
to the political right? Importantly, existing work on racial ambivalence and
other deviations from affective bipolarity in the racial domain suggests that
conflicting perceptions of blacks themselves may stem from deeper forms of
attitudinal conflict. As noted earlier, both Lipset and Schneider (1978) and
Katz, Wackenhut, and Hass (1986) argue that positive and negative attitudes
toward blacks may have different sources - i.e., humanitarianism and individualism,
respectively. In turn, this suggests that individuals who tend to
endorse both humanitarian and individualistic sentiments may be more conflicted
about blacks themselves: while humanitarian concerns lead them to
endorse positive perceptions of blacks, individualistic concerns lead them to
endorse negative perceptions of blacks as well (Hass et al. 1992; Katz and
Hass 1988).
In this vein, there are a number of reasons to believe that conservatives may
be more likely to approach racial matters with this critical combination of both
humanitarian and individualistic concerns. These reasons - and the implication
that they may result in more value conflict on the right - have received
some attention in race and politics literature (Sears 1988; Sears et al. 2000;
Sniderman and Carmines 1997). On one hand, the success of the civil rights
movement has made basic humanitarian concern for blacks a consensual political
norm: for the most part, both liberals and conservatives agree that unequal
treatment is a violation of basic liberal-democratic values central to American
life (McClosky and Zaller 1984; Sniderman and Carmines 1997; Sniderman
and Piazza 1993), although some studies reveal slight ideological differences
in this regard (Sidanius, Pratto, and Bobo 1996). As such, there is little reason
to believe that conservatives should be much less bothered than anyone else
by the inhumane treatment of minorities. On the other hand, public opinion
research clearly suggests that conservatives are more troubled than liberals or
moderates by the perception that African-Americans may not be doing enough
to help themselves and by black demands for what they perceive to be "special"
treatment (Sears 1988; Sniderman and Carmines 1997). So, individualistic
concerns do seem to be in stronger evidence on the right.
Taken together, these two considerations suggest that the chronic coactivation
of humanitarian and individualistic concerns needed for the emergence of
racial ambivalence may increase as one moves to the political right, leading
conservatives' perceptions of blacks to deviate more strongly from affective
bipolarity. In operational terms, this hypothesis leads to a number of specific
predictions. First of all, political conservatism should be positively associated
with various measures of the degree to which respondents' racial perceptions deviate from affective bipolarity. Second, the relationship between conservatism
and the degree to which respondents' perceptions deviate from bipolarity
should be mediated by a tendency to endorse both humanitarian and individualistic
concerns at the same time.
Although prior work thus suggests that conflict between humanitarian and
individualistic concerns is likely to mediate the relationship between conservatism
and deviations from affective bipolarity in whites' racial perceptions, it
is somewhat less clear whether conflict between these two sets of concerns
will be most influential at a general level or a specifically racial level.

</text>
