<text id="G24" category="" words="2003" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Seeing Things' Massachusetts Review 2006, VOL 47; NUMB 4, pages 694-711" Author="Marianne Boruch" PublicationDate="Winter 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=106&sid=f67579fe-2776-43af-b50f-9ce8b766d6ab%40sessionmgr111&bquery=(JN+%22Massachusetts+Review%22+AND+DT+20061201)&bdata=JmRiPWE5aCZ0eXBlPTEmc2l0ZT1laG9zdC1saXZl">

An X-ray of an X-ray. Make the familiar strange is one of the great dictums of art, past Ezra Pound's plea for the new. But stranger still to come back and see what is too close for elegant commentary in what stuns, even terrifies.
A few years ago, I was lucky, happening upon a very odd article about a guy, presumably the author, Jeffery Keel, working outside all summer, maintaining filtration pipes somewhere in Wisconsin. But the piece was really about a cat. And if one X-rayed that, it was in fact about hunger. Keel's careful observations of that animal, a former house cat - "My only companion," he writes straight out, "recently abandoned to the fields. "What fascinates is Keel's fresh eye as he watches the cat quickly adapt, beginning to stare and stalk on his own, fueled by this new thing, hunger. Struck by this transformation. Keel himself begins to fast, a kind of solidarity with the animal, and he gradually grows astonished. Sounds - "the drone of a tractor" far off, the "smell of earth, wildflowers, and moist decay," all seemed wildly amplified as he grows hungrier. "It was as if Nature had turned up the volume," he writes, "exaggerated its movements and illuminated the colors of the landscape." The climax comes a week into the fast as Keel, following the cat's stare out over the pasture - not at all the first time he's tried it, always before noticing only "a tangle of vegetation." But now he sees it, how that "tuft of grass quivered against the undulating movement of the grass." A mouse, we -  via the wise and agile cat - discover, as he runs and pounces and brings back his prey. "From that moment on," Keel writes, "the fields, which had once appeared tranquil, came alive." Until, that is, he's back to solid food again, and everything returns - "subsided" is the word he uses with genuine regret - "to within the usual realm of my senses." Subsided then, the veil in place again, opaque between these worlds, human and inhuman, the known and what is seemingly unknowable, out of reach, not even an option.
Of course hunger and visions have a long very unsecret history together in virtually any culture - the Arab stories of struggles that any poorly fed desert traveler might have with jinn, an evil spirit, or St. Teresa's famous moments of hallucinatory prayer, especially during Lent, or the Tibetan ritual of chod where a young would-be fasting shaman goes to a desolate spot to await instruction. Hours of stress in whatever bodily form loom large in this context, the Eskimo's kayakangst, for instance, described by anthropologist Weston LaBarre as "coming to the hunter out alone in his kayak in a featureless sea," a "trancelike lowering of consciousness" with a "hypnotic fixing." Other near-pathological conditions, however temporary, ignited by drugs of whatever legal or illegal stripe, are known for bringing on imaginary wonders, some angelic, many decidedly not.
But this story of a pasture in Wisconsin is not really a vision in that sense, unless we include the Arctic kayaker s "hypnotic fixing" in some way. The cat, and eventually the human teller-of-the-tale, see exactly what is, what's there, howbeit weirdly enlarged and narrowed at the same time. What this small fable does - and it has that fable feel: man and cat, hunger and the hunt, world fleshed out in abrupt, super-real detail - is move us vividly into something close to what I want to call poetic time. And not dream really, closer to daydream, the poet, I suppose, pretty much the "dreamer in broad daylight" characterized by Freud in the work he did on the experience of writers, though certainly what I mean lies under the usual wistful Walter Mitty projections of love and success anyone might bring to this. For the record, the state itself is called a "hypnagogic experience" by psychologists, one of whom, Herbert Silberer, described the daydream's two parts - "drowsiness and the effort to think, the first a passive state, not subject to the will," which is to say, one finds oneself in that slight off but quite real netherworld between utter wakefulness and sleep or between hunger and something past hunger that opens in very physical ways by means, of course, of images that remain, and haunt - the drone of the tractor in the story, say, the scent of "moist decay." The mind, then, is a kind of hovercraft. One begins to see differently, an intensification. And it's a matter of the beloved particular again, what poems are made of.
An obvious example here might be Sylvia Plath's well-known poem "Tulips," itself about illness, seeing through that curious state, by definition unsettled and between worlds, not right, the happy clockwork of well-being shot to hell. The speaker in the poem is reduced to a hospital room, the details of her stripped-down fate - the family in a photograph "their little smiling hooks," and the "bright needles" that bring "numbness" to her. "Stupid pupil," she tells us of her eye in this lockdown which nevertheless "takes everything in." And it does, but so oddly that we feel a large shock with each small adjustment of the lens. And it isn't a lockdown, of course, but a place constantly released, refigured by a key element in Plath's genius - metaphor - the speaker "a thirty-year cargo boat," or "a pebble" the nurses tend as water might. Or she is a nun, and "never so pure."
But it's the tulips, the not-so-beloved particulars here, that rise up and overwhelm and transform this troubling daydream, this very "controlled hallucination" as Robert Lowell, Plath's teacher, once defined any poem worth the name. These tulips are "too red." They "breathe" through their paper "like an awful baby." They "talk to my wound." They are finally "a dozen red lead sinkers around my neck," or worse somehow, "dangerous animals╔opening like the mouth of some great African cat." In short, "it corresponds," Plath says, but "they are subtle. "The poet's attention here is on target, frightening and exact. Yet that sideways, wayward motion of half-sleep is here too. That fuels metaphor, this leap to some wild but, yes, corresponding elsewhere, envisioned so clearly in images that surprise us out of this room, out of this specific, seemingly hopeless life, a loosening, a flight. But isn't it perfectly ordinary? These tulips in a sickroom in their cheerful gift paper? But Plath X-rays these flowers into something strange, so many things even stranger until though we are everywhere except this room, we are nowhere else but here in this poem, this genuine near-accident of thinking, with its negative and positive, fully original charge.
And to get there? To arrive at that near-accident? I can't help reading Laura Jensen's poem "I Want Some" in this light, a kind of ars poetica, the poem a place really, where we are equally distanced, but narrowed to: &lt;QUOTE REMOVED&gt; 
The desire here is meticulous and large, both willful and -  unlike Plath's poem - consciously kept-back, everything precarious in that emphatic moment of almost knowing. The speaker would enter a house, but will not; does want some, but won't ask. "I have stood/so many times... /and peered/to where a bus should return..." she tells us, the experience of watching for, of trying to see through, such hours behind her that now give reason and purpose to any imagining. Thus,".. .1 feel I know/this poor lost house - /that developed tilt, that air/of studied mystery, that appeal..." But. This small word coming next is the great creaking hinge of the hidden trapdoor in so many poems. You could, in fact, triple that here - but but but - or cast it in italics or boldface, though Jensen does not. Her tact is too great, her restraint too immediate. "I will not steal some," she insists, "before I stand and wait." And then the closure's flood, both quickened and rooted by the hammered grace of the single-stressed words and the shortest of lines, not to mention the public elegance of the couplet shape, however ghostly and interior the utterance: "I want some./Oh, how I do." It's a stance that mines how difficult it is to lift the veil, to ready oneself to pass through to that other world - not really the self anymore, not anything predictable - and find the poem that waits there.
This sense of deep process, the poem and its own how-to kit somehow embedded inside it: &lt;QUOTE REMOVED&gt; I suddenly realize this is a vital impulse in any poem I love, any poem I am witness to, hearing -  overhearing, as Auden put it - a mind thinking, Elizabeth Bishop's profound wash for poems, that they be a "mind-in-action," taking image, idea apart, putting what-it's-become together in not quite the same way. John Berger said straight out: art is a record of creation, not representation. And so it's the seeing, not so much the thing seen, that colors what is found for the page. This might be a given among neuropsychologists, of course, one of whom, Richard Gregory, stating simply that "objects are public and experience is private," a fact made clear to any of us visiting our hometown years after leaving and coming upon familiar sites -  old house, old library, old bandshell in the park - totally altered and eerily the same. Either way, we're suddenly ghosts, our small utterly dramatic history there, pure smoke.
Still, this looking again, the double take that makes memory, is something that fuels so many cherished poems. But finding that hard stare, doing that, requires the patience that darkly shines in Jensen's poem. That patience is rare, but it's everywhere and enters right into the process of making such things. I recall Ellen Voigt in an after-reading discussion once, thrown that classic bewildering question - how do you write poems? how do you keep one going through all the moves it has to make? In response, she went deep into specifics, taking up from her third book. The Lotus Flowers, the poem "Nightshade," that apparently seamless creature. But she was X-raying it back, telling us with passion but still, with considerable dismay, how the piece had stopped her cold for quite some time. Because? First half, she told us, full story: a beloved dog, accidentally poisoned by its owner's mistaken dosage though the intent - a bit of strychnine as a "tonic" - was benign. Thus the "sobbing children" so carefully presented in the piece - it was "their father" after all, their dog, their front porch under which the stricken animal had crawled. The problem? The worry some poets have about all narrative, I suppose, be the story tragic or not: its sweet, irresistible ability to contain. Because it was all used up, Ellen Voigt was saying. The story was told. Where else was there to take it?
So she let it sit; basically she gave up. And only much later, there came the brilliant readjustment of the lens. She suddenly knew how to go further, how to break that surface fact. And the seam is disguised mid-stanza, the thread picked up by a simple but profound shift in point of view. No longer is it cool omniscience, but the sudden I, first person, the claim thrilling and decisive, kept barely in place by urgent dashes, the speaker stepping forth, owning up: &lt;QUOTE REMOVED&gt; 
Two jolts then: of person, third to definite first, a fierce launch that allows the poem's second great orbit, from story toward idea, toward sweep, which profoundly disrupts the very shape of things. "Without pure evil in the world,/" she can tell us now, "there was no east or west, no polestar/and no ratifying dove." The speaker returns then to memory, to other specifics of the past soaked now in this new troubling vision. She sees the girl she was, playing piano "in the small white house for hours," caught forever after in those two endless, warring points of reference, two songs, "one in a major, the other in a sad, minor key." And so Hecht's brooding mole-colored hill comes back, sharing the deep multiplicity of any given instant when so clearly seen, a single moment that can vastly enlarge - and alter - what is both past and future.

</text>
