<text id="G28" category="" words="2007" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Strange Case of Sequoyah Redivivus: Achievement, Personage, and Perplexity' Mississippi Quarterly, 60 (Winter 2006 - 2007), 129 - 50" Author="Bryan Giemza" PublicationDate="Winter 2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=106&sid=e34a2258-d958-4b3b-bcfd-a79cc4e48305%40sessionmgr112&bquery=(JN+%22Mississippi+Quarterly%22+AND+DT+20061201)&bdata=JmRiPWE5aCZ0eXBlPTEmc2l0ZT1laG9zdC1saXZl">

It takes only one book to make a legend. George Washington never would have chopped down that cherry tree without Mason Locke Weems's "biographies," A History of the Life and Death, Virtues and Exploits, of General George Washington (1800) and The Life of George Washington, with Curious Anecdotes Laudable to Himself and Exemplary to his Countrymen (1806). The anecdote is a reminder that one cannot underestimate the importance of simply being first, when it comes to biography; how many unavailing generations of historians have labored to banish the story from texts? Now a teacher might note that the story is a myth - but it still bears classroom repetition because, after all, it is a snappy story. The annals of American biography sometimes refuse to let the facts get in the way of a good story.
Sequoyah (c. 1760-1843?) was one so vetted for greatness. Marion L. Starkey's faded landmark. The Cherokee Nation, introduces "one of the most modest of Cherokees," with some immodest praise: Sequoyah "belongs in a category beyond ordinary historical fame. His place is not far below that of those primal geniuses who made civilization possible by inventing the bow and arrow and the wheel, by discovering that fire can be kindled and controlled for pleasant purposes. Sequoia is just such another as Prometheus" (48). The official website of the Cherokee Nation seconds that notion: "Between the years of 1809 and 1821, he accomplished a feat, which no other person in history has done single-handedly. Through the development of the Cherokee Syllabary, he brought our people literacy and the gift of communicating through long distances and the ages. This one person brought to his people this great gift without hired educators, no books and no cost" ("History of Sequoyah").
Testimonies to Sequoyah's brief celebrity abound to the point of faddishness in nineteenth-century literature. In the twentieth century, many of Sequoyah's biographies have been geared toward schoolchildren, of which Janet Klausner's Sequoyah 5 Gift: A Portrait of the Cherokee Leader collects between two covers an impressively complete stock of Sequoyah legend. "His vision and boldness," writes Duane H. King in an afterword, "continue to inspire those who dream of a better future." Straight-shooting frontier icon Sam Houston, the governor-elect of Tennessee who lived among the Cherokees at various times throughout his life and became the first president of Texas in 1836, is said to have declared, "[Sequoyah], your invention of the alphabet is worth more to your people than two bags full of gold in the hand of every Cherokee" ("History of Sequoyah"). Thomas Underwood writes in The Story of the Cherokee People (1961),	"Sequoyah was probably the greatest of all Cherokees" (25). No superlative suffices for Sequoyah; his scribes are reduced to hyperbole. From the time of its invention, the mere existence of the alphabet (a bit of a misnomer, as I will explain) has been cited persistently as evidence for the general superiority of the Cherokees among the American Indian nations. In 1975 linguist Willard Walker was moved to deem Sequoyah's achievement "one of the most remarkable tours de force in American history" (Perdue, "The Sequoyah Syllabary" 118).
It is the version familiar to many of us from the date-and-fact school of history: Sequoyah, exalted hero of the most civilized tribe, was the only person to create an entire alphabet from scratch. The only problem is that the history catechism version is demonstrably inaccurate. As a matter of common sense, we know the singularity of Sequoyah's achievement to be at least improbable. The origins of most scripts are lost to antiquity and thus cannot be ascribed to a particular individual, but it beggars reason to conclude that no single person had invented a script before. So precisely what was Sequoyah's achievement? And just who was he?
My interest in Sequoyah began with what I thought would be a simple enquiry about a figure who has become emblematic of Cherokee pride. I soon realized that Sequoyah scholars run into a thicket of biographical hearsay, strange conspiracy theories, and assorted misinformation. The same might well be said of George Washington, but what is regrettable in Sequoyah's case is that he is a Native American eminently worthy of proper biography but about whom almost nothing reliable has been written. Oral tradition supports the existence of the man; written tradition seems mainly to obscure him. It may well be that this trail will always run cold, but my purposes are to set out the biographical data for which I was able to find some verification, to put Sequoyah's achievement in context and, to the extent possible, to acknowledge some of the perplexities surrounding a historical person completely overshadowed by his historical personage.
Sequoyah's Achievement
To begin with, it would be more accurate to say that Sequoyah, whose "English" name is sometimes given as George Guess, was the first widely-reported non-literate creator of a syllabic writing system. It may seem like hair-splitting, but technically Sequoyah created a syllabary, not an alphabet. A syllabary contains the symbols of a syllabic writing system. These syllables in turn are combinations of phonemes, the smallest contrastable particles of phonetic (that is, "heard") speech. Thus, a syllabary contains symbols that represent combinations of sound segments (generally the consonants around a vowel); an alphabet contains the segments themselves. For example, if we used a syllabary in English, we would have a single symbol for "wa." But English presents a staggering number of syllabic permutations, whereas Cherokee offers a relatively small set. Hence, conventionally, Cherokee is "tsa la gi," and requires just three of Sequoyah's characters to write.
So if one put it in a more qualified way, how could one describe what Sequoyah did? Prentice Robinson, in the introduction to his Cherokee Dictionary, distinguishes Sequoyah's achievement this way: "Cherokee is unique in that one of their own harnessed the tones and identified them by symbols. This is the work Sequoyah did" (ii). Even if it were true during Sequoyah's lifetime, Robinson's statement must be set against other instances of "unsophisticated inventors." According to linguist Peter T. Daniels, who studies grammatogenesis (the invention of a writing system), inventors of writing systems can be subdivided into two classes: sophisticated and unsophisticated (579). Sophisticated grammatogenists (writing system creators) are Uterate folk, generally outsiders, who possesses some knowledge of phonetics. By contrast, unsophisticated grammatogenists cannot read in any language, and they are few in number. Sequoyah belongs to this latter class.
To give an example of a "sophisticated" inventor of a writing system, we may note Samuel Pollard (1864-1915), a Methodist missionary in southern China, who invented a script for the language now called Western Hmong. Subsequently his system was adapted to about a dozen Southeast Asian languages." The case of English-born James Evans offers a much closer parallel in terms of Native American literacy. Evans immigrated to Lower Canada in 1820 and, following a camp conversion, later became a Methodist minister. As a missionary, teacher, and amateur linguist, Evans hatched an Ojibwe syllabary after abandoning the Roman alphabet, and later invented one for Cree. As with Sequoyah, his invention was credited for a rapid rise in native literacy rate, and his alphabet remains widely embraced by the Cree (Hutchinson).
Missionaries and anthropologists devised writing systems where needed, but we must remember that Sequoyah was nonliterate. If Sequoyah were unique, as some of his biographers claim, we would expect him to be the OÍITK "unsophisticated" inventor of a script. But he is not alone; in fact, he is in a small but illustrious company. A Winnebago speaker adapted a system from Fox speakers in 1884; in
1904, Silas John Edwards, monolingual and barely acquainted with script, launched a unique writing system for the Western Apache. Around the same time, Uyaqoq, more widely known by his name translation, "Neck," devised a script at a Moravian mission in Southwest Alaska. Elsewhere in the world we find other examples: early in the twentieth century. King Njoya of the Bamum tribe of central Cameroon was bemused by the literate doings of missionaries, so he invented a script after receiving a dream about it. Other historically recent examples come from Suriname and the Caroline islands (Daniels 583-85). All things considered, these "alphabets" comprise a very small set, and Sequoyah's story furnishes one of the earliest examples.
Of course, if Sequoyah follows the trend among these alphabet inventors, he may have quite literally dreamed up his alphabet. Many later accounts suggest that he was a dreamer. Many stories of unsophisticated grammatogenists point to a nexus between divine inspiration, vision, and the invention of writing: the script inventor receives divine inspiration in a dream while outside the social unit. He strives to bring heavenly benefits to his people and to allow them to emulate literate societies so that messages may carry beyond speaking distance. In Sequoyah's case, most accounts mention that he was intrigued by "the talking leaf - his term for printed pages - and, as Theda Perdue writes, "most Cherokees believed that writing was spiritual rather than mechanical, a gift of the gods rather than a creation of man" ("The Sequoyah Syllabary" 121).
Remarkably - and tantalizingly for those who would reconstruct the invention of written language - these unsophisticated grammatogenists share a set of common traits. Most inventors begin with a logographic system (wherein each symbol represents a word); all of them subsequently create a syllabary - not an alphabet. Sign order is random; similar syllables do not share graphic similarity. Indeed, Sequoyah's story marches in lockstep with the pattern, although there is some dispute over precisely how it evolved. Conventionally, he began by creating symbols for every word (a logographic system), a process interrupted when his wife, Sally Waters, cast them in the fire. In fact, many accounts suggest that Sally Waters was concerned to protect her husband from accusations of witchcraft, a charge much in keeping with the supernatural origins often associated with writing systems (Bender 30-33). Regardless, the unflappable Sequoyah, well schooled in marital diplomacy, reportedly went back to the drawing board. But he was inspired to try a more economical system. Many versions of Sequoyah's story (e.g.. Klausner and Bass) suggest that he switched to a phonetic system (one based on the sound components of language). Other accounts dispute this, and claim that Sequoyah began with a pictographic or ideographic system (wherein symbols look like what they represent, e.g., O for "sun").
In any event, Sequoyah had his work cut out for him. Ordinarily, societies acquire writing by borrowing from or elaborating upon an existing system. Viewed in this light, most writing systems are acquisitive, evolutionary, and more often than not, borrowed. Old Persian cuneiform is an early example; so too, the undocumented Korean, and more recent Cree. But, as Daniels acknowledges, "the most celebrated, and the earliest that was observed by interested outsiders" is Cherokee (579). "Interested outsiders" are the key words here. In 1823 John Pickering - a "noted philologist" according to Willard Walker and James Sarbaugh - set out to create a Cherokee writing system by building on an earlier orthography he had developed for writing native languages. The idea was that the Cherokee system should avoid the "monolingual bias that occurred when European language speakers tried to record the pronunciation of Indian language sounds . . ." (Kalter 331). Pickering later abandoned his grammar, in part because it was moot - the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions had elected to adopt Sequoyah's syllabary (Walker and Sarbaugh 91nlO). In working out his system, Pickering relied on his apprentice David Brown, a student at the Cornwall School for native missionaries. And Brown, in turn, was a classmate of Elias Boudinot and John Ridge (whose son, John Rollin Ridge, was a Cherokee writer). Elias Boudinot and Samuel Austin Worcester collectively produced the first Cherokee-language newspaper and printed materials. Moreover, it was Samuel Worcester who designed the Cherokee type font which was ultimately used to print the "alphabet." Worcester was far from fluent; he seems to have relied extensively on Boudinot, a native speaker.
In other words, a white missionary, working in tandem with his translator, was responsible for carrying the syllabary into print.

</text>
