<text id="G35" category="" words="1996" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Richard Hofstadter: An Intellectual Biography' University of Chicago Press" Author="Dan S. Brown" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.press.uchicago.edu/Misc/Chicago/076407.html">

There is a certain mystique to Richard Hofstadter. For nearly thirty years, the legend goes, he wrote the best books for the best publisher, won the best prizes, and taught in the best city, at the best school, at the best time. Among historians, The American Political Tradition, House of Knopf, Pulitzer, New York, Columbia University, and postwar America evoke a hazy attachment to a lost world of scholarly giants confident in the curative powers of the enlightened mind. This was a world raised in the collective memory of the Depression thirties, tormented by the anti-intellectualism of the McCarthy fifties, and rejected in the student wars of the radical sixties. Along the way, American society changed and historical writing changed, too. The older generation's preference for exploring the politics and ideas of elite personalities yielded before a broad canopy of studies focusing on race, class, and gender that revolutionized the academy's presentation of the past. Now, as the last great historians of the postwar period leave the scene, it seems particularly useful to candidly assess the greatest among them. Richard Hofstadter's career as a professional historian paralleled the heyday of twentieth-century liberalism (1933-68). Tracing his life reveals a complex tapestry of internal and external motivations that merged to produce a uniquely insightful mind, alert to the promise and perils of American democracy.
As the academy moved to the left, the nation's political culture lurched to the right, leaving liberals clinging to an ever-shrinking center. That Hofstadter, a symbol of the postwar consensus, is still commonly quoted in the pages of the nation's most popular general interest and political periodicals attests to his unusual hold on the public's imagination. More than three decades after his untimely death from leukemia at the age of fifty-four, legions of journalists and Internet bloggers routinely adopt social-psychological concepts - status anxiety, paranoid style, anti-intellectualism - popularized by Hofstadter. Among professional historians, only the distinguished Progressive thinkers Frederick Jackson Turner and Charles Beard and postwar notables C. Vann Woodward and Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., made as lasting impressions on their culture. Like these men, Hofstadter exhibited an enviable ability to connect with a large, critical, and politically conscious readership. He shared further their striking intellectual charisma and penchant for producing "relevant" scholarship that both reflected and shaped the course of twentieth-century liberal thought.
More than any of his peers, Hofstadter was sensitive to the increasingly urban and ethnic character of American life. Eager to embrace the future rather than commemorate the past, he rejected the conventional signposts that had for so long given direction to American civilization - a culture of capitalism, individualism, and isolationism. These established values, he knew, had long served Americans eager to define themselves as a Protestant, farming people. But the times no longer supported this vision - nineteenth-century liberalism collapsed in the 1930s. Its failure to solve either that decade's industrial crisis or the ideological schisms that prefaced fascism's war on the West and communism's hold in the East elicited from Hofstadter a sharp intellectual response. His criticisms frequently drew blood and aroused strong opposition from both conservatives and progressives. And they had good reason to worry. Unencumbered by deep roots in the native soil of his immigrant father's adopted country, Hofstadter enlisted the past to reveal the failings of a time-worn political tradition and by inference highlight the promise of what he believed was a more humane, cosmopolitan, and pluralistic postwar liberalism. Anglo-Saxonism and agrarianism were out. Ethnic diversity and modernity were in. As the old codes gave way, America's need for fresh heroes and new perspectives encouraged Hofstadter to rewrite its history as a prelude to moving its culture.
In the pages of his most popular books, Hofstadter championed a thoughtful and pragmatic social philosophy sympathetic to the welfare state reforms initiated by the New Deal. To describe his views as essentially relativistic, however, is to miss the point. Hofstadter respected history, took it on its own terms, and according to the merits of evidence, demonstrated an admirable responsiveness to rethinking earlier positions and revising earlier statements. His controversial experimentation with the social sciences in the 1950s came from an urgent desire to understand the past more fully and accurately, to expand historical inquiry beyond the economic interpretations favored by the previous generation in order to entertain a broader and yet more subtle scope of human activity. In tracing the psychology and emotional needs of his subjects, Hofstadter hoped to make history at once more complex and more clear. Above all, he delighted in lucid, unsentimental thinking and solid argumentation; indeed, they formed the foundations of his own work.
Social environment inevitably intrudes upon historical analysis, however, and so we must appreciate not simply the author's work, but also the public and personal circumstances that sustained and gave meaning to his efforts. "Before you study the history," one commentator advised, "study the historian. . . . The historian, being an individual, is also a product of history, and of society; and it is in this twofold light that the student of history must learn to regard him." Hofstadter referred to this paradox as the historian engagé - the participation of a scholar in the events he recorded. Involvement, no doubt, sacrificed a scientific pose, yet, as he knew from firsthand experience, it also provided the writer with a surfeit of fresh insights and new perspectives.
Upheaval too, can abet the imagination. Hofstadter's formative years were witness to the abrupt failure of long-established moral, intellectual, and political currents in American life. The fragility of the times undoubtedly shaped its survivors. Two world wars, the Great Depression, Nazi-Soviet pact, Holocaust, and early stirrings of the cold war served as the somber context for Hofstadter's first three decades. These turbulent days drew him into a deep and meaningful engagement with a radically altered postwar world. As the old liberalism expired in the twin failures of Hooverism and isolationism, he felt free to challenge the dominant outline of American history.
Identity played a vital and no less significant role in contextualizing Hofstadter's scholarship. Half Jewish, he was part of the first wave of intellectuals to incorporate secular, cosmopolitan, and universalist perspectives into his work; as such he served as a thoughtful agent of change in a nation rapidly moving away from its Protestant moorings. And this required a rather explicit break from the way American historians customarily handled their subject. Hofstadter found in earlier schools of historical writing a Wasp bias that favored Anglo-Saxon preferences over more nuanced and culturally diverse narratives. His rebellion against the dominant trends of prewar historiography occurred as others close to him remained committed to the inherited past. In 1942 Hofstadter's most influential graduate teacher, Merle Curti, announced his departure from Columbia's Teachers College to accept a position at the University of Wisconsin. Illinois native and Columbia colleague Allan Nevins regretted his friend's impending absence, but still congratulated Curti on a kind of moral upgrade of station by moving to the nation's heartland. He warmly extolled the virtues of Madison: "Your children will have a better community to grow up in than any in or near New York. The Middle West is our authentic America." Hofstadter never shared this opinion or the nostalgia that lay behind it. He came from Buffalo, an ethnically mixed city lacking a dominant identity, his sense of ambiguous geographical origins further sharpened by the fact that American historians traditionally came from New England or the Midwest. And this fueled his creativity. "I can never wholly identify with any collectivity," he remarked late in life. "This kind of marginality is by now a more general American experience; so today I am not an unrepresentative American."
Hofstadter's identification (and fascination) with the odd edges of his society merged with a heightened awareness of human weakness - including his own. A hypochondriac, Hofstadter, his son Dan recalls, was "a cheerful melancholic. What I mean is that he was not what is commonly known as a manic-depressive, but rather that his cheerfulness held his melancholia in solution, as salt may be dissolved in water." According to Columbia historian Walter Metzger, Hofstadter's temperamental divide informed his published work. "There was," he insisted, "a manic, slightly manic, slightly depressive quality in his writing style." Even a cursory reading of Hofstadter's books reveals that he frequently - and sometimes carelessly - overplayed his findings. This was in part a literary tactic designed to draw attention to his scholarship by garnishing it with a rhetorical bite that made it impossible to ignore. At a deeper level, however, it touched upon certain internal concerns that enlivened his work but chipped away at the scholar's quest for balance. In weak moments he lost sight of the American stage altogether and projected the great evil of his day - fascism - across the national landscape. His critical (and funny) portrait of Theodore Roosevelt in The American Political Tradition made TR into a kind Mussolini lite. In The Age of Reform he accentuated with too few qualifications the anti-Semitic side of midwestern populism, and in 1964 described the uber conservative Barry Goldwater's winning of the Republican Party nomination in language that evoked the coming to power of Adolf Hitler: it "gives him a strong position from which to form a new kind of political union, which will be based on jingoism, economic ultra-conservatism, and racial animosity." These examples - and there are many more - make it hard to escape the impression that beyond the playfulness there was a slightly erratic and perhaps slightly paranoid side of Richard Hofstadter that surfaced in his work.
The historian H. Stuart Hughes believed that Hofstadter's apparent premonition of an early death explained his anxieties. "One has the impression that there are some people who have a pessimistic attitude towards life and their own health that suggests that they are destined to die young, and I think this was true in Dick's case. There was a very deep running pessimism in his attitude." Dan Hofstadter adds that "the death of his mother and then of my mother, left him in a state, I believe, of unresolved discomforts, none of which were imagined - he was simply aware of his bad heredity and bad luck. He seemed at times to feel dogged by a malign providence." And this doubt spilled over into his scholarship. Reading Hofstadter, one quickly notes his lack of faith in the public's commitment to political pluralism and intellectual freedom. It was an astute rather than crippling judgment that aligned with his way of looking at the world. "Dick had a strong sense of human limitations and was not at all sentimental about human fate," noted William Leuchtenburg. "One day he and I were walking across the Columbia campus on 116th Street. I was talking enthusiastically about how psychotherapy can change people for the better, and Dick shook his head and cited [the psychoanalyst Otto] Fenichel to me as demonstrating how our lives are irrevocably shaped by the cards we are dealt in infancy."
Hofstadter's cultivated, necessary detachment found an important counterbalance in his scholarly vocation. "He was a very fragile, not very brave person, who became brave in his work," Dan Hofstadter maintains. "He struck a workable truce with his fears." The juxtaposition between interior and exterior could be confusing. "When you met him," one Hofstadter student remembered, "you didn't have a sense that this was Richard Hofstadter. You didn't have the sense that you were in the presence of a distinctive mind whose work had really changed the face of American historiography." In fact, he played different roles before different audiences. A talented mimic, he entertained brilliantly at intimate social settings, impersonating comedians, politicians, and the more starchy historians he encountered at professional gatherings. This was neither a precious nor private talent. Hofstadter openly communicated a genius for fearless exposure, perceptive play, and bold commentary through his scholarship. A quiet and in some ways distant man, he came alive in the motion of performance, and this included the liberating freedom of the open page.
This biography is naturally an extended conversation with the formal writings of Richard Hofstadter.

</text>
