<text id="G62" category="" words="1988" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Blood Brothers: Among the Soldiers of Ward 57' Henry Holt and Company" Author="Michael Weisskopf " PublicationDate="October 2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.bookbrowse.com/excerpts/index.cfm/book_number/1884/Blood-Brothers">

The army convoy rattled through Al-Adhamiya like a carnival roller coaster, each turn as blind as the next. Not that the soldiers could see much anyway. Night had fallen on the old Baghdad quarter, a byzantine maze lit only by kerosene lamps flickering from rugged stone houses. We moved warily in the darkness, patrolling for insurgents in blind alleys custom-made for ambushes and narrow passages perfect for concealing roadside bombs. Only the piercing wail of a minaret's call to prayer broke the silence. It was anyone's bet who faced a more dire risk, the hunted in terrorist cells or the hunters in Humvees, along with whom I was riding under a half moon this December 10, 2003.

I was in Iraq to profile the American soldier as "Person of the Year" for Time magazine. It was a dream assignment, a chance to escape Washington and work in exotic environs on a big story. I had teamed up with another reporter, Romesh Ratnesar, and set out three weeks earlier to find a unit representative of the 120,000 U.S. troops then in Iraq. We had chosen a platoon of the First Armored Division that operated in a district of northwest Baghdad considered crucial to any hope of securing Iraq. Al-Adhamiya was nestled in a bend of the Tigris River, a historic crossroads for the Sunni Muslims who dominated political life in the days of Saddam Hussein. Sunnis actively fueled the anti-U.S. resistance after he fled: insurgents launched rockets from its alleyways, hid weapons in houses, and seeded the roads with booby-trapped bombs concealed in everything from trash to dead cats.

The platoon's commander had been killed by a roadside device in late October. I was reminded of his death every time I strapped on body armor - a sixteen-pound Kevlar vest with super-hard ceramic inserts - as I did this chilly night before climbing into the cab of one of three Humvees lined up for the patrol. The sergeant had a different plan. "No, you're going in the high-back," he said, directing me to an open-air vehicle usually used to transport equipment or troops. "Okay, let's go out there and be targets," he barked as our convoy pulled out for the 8 p.m. patrol.

The soldiers played a daring game of chicken, cruising the streets to draw fire and lure resisters. But tonight there seemed to be no takers. We emerged an hour later into Al-Adhamiya's main marketplace, a large treeless square that was host to what looked like a block party in full swing. Old men, rocking back and forth on tiny stools, shuffled dominoes. Boys volleyed soccer balls. Women veiled in black fed their children from stalls of roasted chickens and shashlik. No one seemed to notice the foreign invaders passing by. I was scribbling notes from the wooden bench of my Humvee, which was built like a large pickup truck. Across from me, Time photographer Jim Nachtwey was snapping pictures. Two young soldiers, Private Orion Jenks and Private First Class Jim Beverly, pointed M-16s out of the back of the vehicle and kibitzed about Baghdad's crazy drivers.

"I'd hate to have a nice car here," said Jenks, a lanky, twenty-two-year-old Californian who had joined the platoon a few days earlier.

"Yeah, someone would ding you, and you're in a country that has no gun control laws," Beverly joked back. At nineteen, he was even younger than Jenks, a baby-faced kid from Ohio who sketched fantasy figures in his spare time.

Sergeant Ron Buxton, a short and taut Missourian in his early thirties, was riding shotgun in the cab. He whipped around and yelled, "I don't care if you joke or smoke, but make sure you watch our back."

We turned onto Market Street a few minutes before nine and got stuck in traffic in front of the Abu Hanifa Mosque. Second in the line, our Humvee was idling near a clock tower of the sacred Sunni shrine that U.S. tanks had poked a hole in nine months earlier. Elaborate wooden scaffolding encircled the tower now. I wondered if the heart of this ancient capital would mend as easily.

At first I thought it was a rock, the specialty of street urchins - a harmless shot against an armored Humvee. But the clanking sound that interrupted my thoughts couldn't be ignored. Nothing in Baghdad was what it appeared to be. You survived by sensing danger in little unordinary things: overcoats on a hot day, shadows flitting across a rooftop. For me it was the sound of a projectile landing louder than any stone should have.

It bounced off the steel blast wall behind me. I gazed down, then to the right, and spotted an object on the wooden bench two feet away. The dark oval was as shiny and smooth as a tortoiseshell, roughly six inches long and four inches wide. None of my fellow passengers seemed to notice. Private Jenks, who sat closest to it, was facing the other way. I confronted the intruder alone, a journalist caught in a military moment. Something told me there was no time to consult the soldiers.

I rose halfway, leaned to the right, and cupped the object. I might as well have plucked volcanic lava from a crater. I could feel the flesh of my palm liquefying. Pain bolted up my arm like an electric current. In one fluid motion, I raised my right arm and started to throw the mass over the side of the vehicle, a short backhand toss. Then everything went dark.



The Humvee bed was cold and hard, an inhospitable place to awaken. I struggled to sit up and fell back. Over my left shoulder, I could see sparks and a bluish flame rising in smoke. I took stock in the flickering light. My right leg burned from knee to hip, as if pricked by hundreds of hot needles. Blood was oozing from it and forming a cold, wet layer over my pant leg; my right arm felt heavy and numb. Was I having a nightmare? The hollow, faraway sound of voices was dreamlike. So was the sepia hue of the winter sky. I shook my right arm, trying to wake it up. Still no response. I elevated it to see why.

My wrist looked like the neck of a decapitated chicken. The wound was jagged, the blood glistening in the light. My mouth was dry, my brow soaked in sweat; my heart beat quickly and weakly, little dings in my chest.

All sound and sight dimmed, as my thoughts turned inward. This is not how I pictured my life ending: futilely and unglamorously, on the frigid floor of a truck, thousands of miles away from anyone I loved.

Noises muffled just a few moments earlier suddenly became distinct: "Are there casualties?" I recognized Buxton's voice.

"Yes, we need to go now," Beverly answered tersely.

"How serious? Are you wounded?"

"We don't have time to answer these questions right now, Sergeant. We need to get back to the base. We need to go now."

"We're hit, we need help," screamed Nachtwey. "Get us out of here. Move it." I tried to join in but could barely muster a whisper. Jenks was no better. He was glassy-eyed and slumped in the corner, his automatic weapon dangling at his feet. He looked dead.

Buxton ordered the driver to move. He didn't see Specialist Billie Grimes, who had jumped out of the vehicle behind us and was sprinting toward us in a hail of enemy fire. "Stop. Stop," she yelled. We did so long enough for the slight, twenty-six-year-old medic from rural Indiana to leap in. She landed on a floor that was so slick from blood she slid over me, barely able to stay on her feet. The driver gunned it again, all but pulling her legs out from under her. She straddled my hips to maintain her balance and quickly took inventory. Jenks was stunned, but breathing. Beverly, bleeding from his knees and mouth, was strong enough to hold up his weapon and guard the rear. Nachtwey was wounded in his knees and abdomen. Instinctively, he reached for his camera to document the scene. He leaned forward and focused the camera on me. The flash startled Grimes.

"Put down the camera, Jim," she yelled and flipped him a roll of gauze battle dressing to press on his wounds. Nachtwey ignored her and shakily snapped another frame. Then he passed out, camera in hand.

I became the priority the moment Grimes saw my arm: protruding, ivory-white wristbones in a bed of severed tendons and blood vessels. Moving quickly, she tossed aside her medic bag and pulled an elastic cord from her left belt loop. The band was usually used to pop up veins before drawing blood. Now Grimes contained my blood with it, an impromptu tourniquet she wound tightly around my stump. For good measure, she ripped open a roll of gauze with her teeth and wrapped it around the cord. It stanched the flow, freeing Grimes to take command of what was now essentially an emergency room on wheels.

Her voice carried over the open speaker of the cab's field radio as she shouted instructions to Buxton through an open panel separating the cab from cargo section. "Take the fastest route you can get to. I have four people injured. One amputation . . ."

Minutes later, the vehicle crashed through concertina wire blocking the back gate of the base, a shelled-out Saddam fleshpot renamed Gunner Palace after the artillery brigade occupied it. We hurtled toward the aid station so fast I thought we'd knock it down. The driver screeched to a halt a yard from the door. "Bring the litters, bring the litters," ordered Grimes. Four medics and a physician's assistant deposited Nachtwey and me on stretchers and brought us into an L-shaped clinic big enough for two gurneys. The place was roiling, medics scurrying in all directions. Nachtwey was begging for more painkillers. I had lost so much blood it took three soldiers to locate a vein. Within seconds, the morphine's warming, relaxing effect set in. I needed it for what came next: a wooden stick was tied between two pieces of cloth wrapped around my right arm, then turned like a tire wrench. Medics twisted the tourniquet tighter and tighter on my numbed limb, as if I had no bones left to worry about.

Grimes was so thoroughly soaked in my blood that the other medics assumed she'd been wounded. Throwing off her body armor, she jumped into the fray, moving as nimbly as a point guard - prospecting for a vein here, securing the tourniquet there. I was leaking blood, and no one could determine the source. Grimes snipped off my clothes and found it. "Why did you have to wear so much? It's not that cold out," she complained good-naturedly. The back of my upper-right thigh had been peppered by shrapnel, dozens of tiny metal shards. Medics swaddled it in a broad abdominal dressing.

I was naked and cold in the unheated aid station. Everything was playing in slow motion and elongated sound. The medics strapped me in the stretcher and drove me to the base's helipad. The only protection I had against the freezing night was a "shock blanket," a piece of aluminum foil that lined the gurney and folded over my feet. Grimes tried to tuck in the flimsy cover, but it kept blowing off and finally flew away in the gale of the Black Hawk's landing. I was loaded into the chopper, its door wide open and propellers slicing the air. Shivering uncontrollably, my teeth slammed like pistons; every muscle seemed to have gone into spasm. It occurred to me that I might be going into shock.

Loading the other three casualties seemed to take forever. As I lay there, I realized I was missing something: the makeshift photo album I always carried in my vest pocket.

</text>
