<text id="G63" category="" words="2007" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Seeing White: Children of Color and the Disney Fairy Tale Princess' The Journal of Negro Education, Vol. 74, No. 3 (Summer, 2005), pp. 221-232" Author="Dorothy L. Hurley" PublicationDate="Summer 2005" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.jstor.org/sici?origin=sfx:sfx&sici=0022-2984(2005)74:3%3C221:SWCOCA%3E2.0.CO;2-7">

Generally speaking, there is little evidence in the written source texts, with some exceptions, such as Snow White, Sleeping Beauty, and The Little Mermaid, of White privileging and/or of a binary color symbolism that associates white with goodness and black with evil. Even in texts that evidence some of this color symbolism, the relative symbolism may be, to some extent at least, a function of the translation. For example, in Snow White (Brothers Grimm, 1945), translated by Lucas, Crane, and Edwards, the poisonous apple is described as "beautiful to look upon, being white with red cheeks, so that anyone who should see it must long for it" (p. 173). In another version (Grimm's Fairy Tales, 1949) based on a translation by Taylor, the apple is described as simply "so very nice" (p. 143). Snow White, of course, is consistently described as having "skin as white as snow, lips as red as blood, and hair as black as ebony" (Grimm Brothers, 1945, 1949, 1963). Other evidence of color symbolism in this tale includes descriptions of the furnishings of the seven dwarfs: their little table was covered with a "white cloth" (Household Stories, p. 215) and their beds covered with "clean white quilts"(HouseholdStories, p. 215). The whiteness of Snow White's skin, as well as the "whiteness" attributed to the seven dwarfs' furnishings, suggests an equation of "white" with goodness. On the other hand, there is no corresponding evidence that equates black with evil. One of the core qualities possessed by Snow White is her beauty. Her "white" skin, therefore, her "red" lips, as well as her "black" hair are all symbolic markers of beauty.
In Perrault's The Sleeping Beauty in the Woods, translated by Johnson(2000c), only once is
whiteness evidenced in the text: after Sleeping Beauty is in her state of rest, her skin is referred to
as [still] "white and beautiful"(p. 13). Cinderella, in this same collection, shows no explicit evidence of a binary color symbolism. This is also true of Beauty and the Beast, included in the same collection but based on Mme. Leprince de Beaumont's text. It is, however, Woodard's adaptation of Hans Christian Anderson's (1981) The Little Mermaid that evidences the greatest degree of binary color symbolism. This adaptation clearly privileges whiteness and, in particular, White human beings. The nameless Little Mermaid is described as having "beautiful white arms"(p. 35), "eyes as blue as the deepest sea," (p. 6); and, after she is transformed into a human, she is described as possessing "the prettiest little white legs a girl could wish for"(p. 9). Throughout the text, white is used to symbolize beauty and goodness: the Little Mermaid loved the statue of the handsome boy which is "carved out of clear white stone"(p. 20); and when she danced, she "lifted her beautiful white arms"(p. 35). This tale, however, also privileges White humans, because the Little Mermaid is willing to give up everything to obtain "an immortal soul" (p. 37) that only humans possess and the only humans in this text are White:" I would gladly give all the hundreds of years I have to live if I could only be a human being for one day and afterwards have a share in the heavenly kingdom (p. 24)." On the other hand, black in this text is equated with evil or danger: a little "black dog" (p. 12) barks ferociously at one of the Mermaid's sisters; and the evil Sea Witch has "black blood" (p. 32) in her breast.
Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp (Lang, 1951) diverges from the other tales in relation to the documented provenance. This group of tales is reliably considered not to have originated in the Western world. Rather, they are thought to have been brought to the Western world in the eighteenth century and were translated from Arabic into French by Antoine Galland. The version of this tale examined in this study is an English translation edition by Lang (1951), specifically adapted for children. The princess of this tale is described with only one reference to her physical appearance: "she [was] so beautiful that Aladdin fell in love with her at first sight" (p. 206). The tale takes place primarily in China with a short segment in Africa. None of the major characters is described in relation to skin color. There is, however, one significant reference to color in the text: the sultan demands that Aladdin send him, "forty basins of gold brimful of jewels, carried by forty Black slaves, led by as many White ones" (p. 210). It is significant that although this reference depicts both Blacks and Whites as slaves, it clearly places White slaves in a position of relatively higher status.
Many of the pictorial texts that accompany these written fairytale texts use black and white line drawings, and where color illustrations are used, the characters are typically illustrated as White. This fact, however, should not be read as sinister, since these tales, with the exception of Aladdin, are all in fact European fairy tales and it is logical that European characters should be represented graphically as White.
Color symbolism in the Disney versions
The Disney film versions of these same texts reveal indisputable evidence of White privileging and a binary color symbolism that associates white with goodness and black with evil. The reign
of the Disney fairy tale princess began with the production of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs in 1937, and since then Disney productions have become the dominant source of children's
intertextual knowledge of fairy tales, particularly in relation to visual and imaginary images. However, Disney's productions of the fairy tales not only deviate a great deal from the source texts in relation to plot and characterization, they also manifest rampant use of the symbolism of
white for goodness and black for evil or danger. The princesses (and princes) are overwhelmingly White, several with either blonde hair or blue eyes when the hair is not blonde. The exceptions are Snow White, "whose hair had to be black as ebony," and Jasmine from Aladdin (Disney Films, 1992), who is tan- or olive-skinned with voluminous black hair. Moreover, just as the literary fairy tale texts of the 18th century excluded "common people" (Zipes, 1993, p. 13), so too, the Disneyfied versions, spanning a period of more than seven decades since the appearance of Snow White of these same texts, exaggerate the whiteness of the both primary and secondary characters,
and thus subtly promote an ideology of White supremacy. The black and white color symbolism in these Disney film versions is pervasive and powerful. For example, Snow White(Disney, 1937) features a wicked queen dressed in black who lives in a black castle that has black rats, a dangerous black forest containing blackbats, and black owls. Moreover, the wicked Queen has a black crow-like bird perched on a human skull. In the end, the film implies that the wicked queen is devoured (off screen) by black vultures. Even the poisonous apple turns black to symbolize what lies within before turning red again. On the other hand, Snow White is surrounded by white birds; the Prince appears in a white horse; Snow White is laid to rest (when presumed dead) on white flowers holding a bouquet of white flowers before the Prince returns to rescue her and they ride off on his white horse toward the his white castle. It is interesting to note that Snow White's complexion in the film is darker than that of the wicked stepmother. It is clear, therefore, that whiteness is not simply a color but a symbolic marker of goodness.
In Disney's Cinderella(1950), the color symbolism operates in both explicit and implicit or
Subtle ways. The "good" Cinderella is blonde and blue-eyed. Her "bad" stepsisters and mother are
visibly darker in complexion than Cinderella who is visibly White. The prince lives in a white
castle that has white birds at the window. His father has white hair, which signals not only age, but
a child-like innocence and goodness as well. Cinderella's fairy godmother also has white hair. The
godmother turns brown, low-status, mice into white human beings and animals: white horses,
white coachman, and white doorman. Moreover, she transforms a pumpkin into a white coach.
The prince, although black-haired, which is a marker of virility, is clad in a white jacket. His
father dreams of grandchildren, represented specifically as a blonde-haired boy and girl even though his son is black-haired. The coding of black and dark hues is subtle in this film. The
wicked stepmother's cherished pet is a black cat named "Lucifer." Interestingly, although Cinderella acts as a benevolent mistress to all the other creatures in
the film, she can find no good characteristics in Lucifer, and even complains: "There must be something good about him." The brown mice, in their behavior and demeanor, are reminiscent of the "good plantation slaves" featured in some of Hollywood's most racist films. They are taken care of by the good Cinderella (presumably they cannot take care of themselves), and grateful to be of service, and are willingly being transformed into something other than themselves for her benefit.
Disney's Sleeping Beauty (1959), or Princess Aurora, opens with a deviation from the stereotypical symbolism of black as evil. In an early scene, knights are dressed in black on white horses (with one exception of a black knight on a black horse). The faces of the knights are never revealed. In this case, black suggests the anonymity and mystery that surround the knights, while the white horses indicate the goodness of their charge. Sleeping Beauty's father also has black hair, which signals qualities of virility, seriousness, and steadfastness that most often are not found in characters that have white hair. King Stephan, however, is married to a blonde, which represents the highest standard of beauty and grace. Sleeping Beauty is also blonde and blue-eyed. White birds appear on-screen and fly upwards as one of the fairy godmothers, Fauna, bestows the gift of song on her at the celebration of her birth. The prince is tawny-haired and lives in a castle around which white birds are flying. The wicked stepmother, Maleficent, bears the title of "Mistress of all evil." She is dressed in black and has a black crow-like bird as a companion. She is also accompanied by dark hunch-backed creatures and dark warthogs that do her evil bidding.
In this film, black and white are also coded with religious notions of good and evil. The prince is armed by the good fairies with "weapons of righteousness" - virtue and truth - to triumph over evil, "all the powers of hell" claimed by Maleficent. The good fairies empower Prince Phillip's sword so that "evil may die and good endure." The prince carries a shield with a cross, reminiscent of the symbol of crusaders. In the end, evil, in the person of Maleficent, is liquefied into a black puddle.
In Disney's Beauty and the Beast (1991) the overwhelmingly White world of fairytales is magnified and exaggerated by the inclusion of a cast of characters not present in the source text. Early in the film we learn that the Beast, once a prince, has been punished for his selfishness, because he offended a blonde enchantress who was at the time disguised as an old woman. For this perceived offense, she turned him into a big brown beast. Beauty, a tawny-haired, devoted daughter, is coveted by the only black-haired, yet white male in the film. It is this male, Gaston, who instigates and leads (riding a black horse) a mob to storm the castle presumably to kill the big brown beast who dared to have won the affections of the woman he (Gaston) wanted. The mob scene evokes memories of lynch mobs of the South in the United States.
In other instances in the film, black is used to imply danger and evil: when Belle's father is lost in the woods, a black creature flashes across the screen just before a tree explodes with black bats; black dragon-like statues are shown inside and outside the Beast's castle.

</text>
