<text id="H05" category="" words="2028" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Chapter 7 Legislative Research Commission" Author="Kentucky Code " PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://law.justia.com/kentucky/codes/2006/007-00/007-00.html">

7.110 Power to secure information -- Coercing production of evidence -- Cooperation of other agencies -- Cooperation with other states -- Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws -- Subcommittee and citizens' committee reports and recommendations. (1) The Commission, its co-chairmen or director, any other member of the General Assembly authorized by the director, or any employee authorized by the director, shall have access to all public records as provided in KRS 61.870 to 61.884, of every agency, division or department of state government, and of any agency or institution, public or private, which has been the recipient of public funds. The Commission, its co-chairmen or director, any other member of the General Assembly authorized by the director, or any employee authorized by the director, may utilize automated data processing procedures and equipment in the accession of public records, if such records exist in machine readable form. To effect the purposes of this section, the Commission shall promulgate such rules and regulations relating to the accession of public records as are necessary.  The Commission, its co-chairmen or director, any other member of the General Assembly authorized by the director, or any employee authorized by the director, may require information on oath of any person touching any matter which he is instructed to investigate, study or audit, and shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and records for such purpose, and otherwise compel the giving of evidence of any matter under study. If any person fails or refuses to testify or furnish documentary evidence concerning any matter with respect to which the Commission desires information pertaining to the studies in which it is engaged, the Franklin Circuit Court, on application of the Commission, may compel obedience by proceedings for contempt as in the case of disobedience of a subpoena issued from the Circuit Court or a refusal to testify therein. Every witness so subpoenaed under this section shall receive for his attendance the fee and mileage provided for witnesses in civil cases in Circuit Court, which shall be audited and paid upon the presentation of proper vouchers sworn to by the witness and approved by the Commission. (2) All state agencies and institutions shall cooperate with the Commission to effectuate the purposes of KRS 7.090 to 7.110 and shall submit copies of their annual or biennial reports to the Commission. (3) The Commission shall encourage and arrange conferences with officials of other states and of other units of government; carry forward the participation of this state as a member of the Council of State Governments, both regionally and nationally, and formulate proposals for cooperation between this state and other states. The Legislative Research Commission shall function as Kentucky's commission on interstate cooperation in carrying out the program of the Council of State Governments as it relates to Kentucky. (4) The Commission shall designate persons to represent Kentucky at the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws. The Commission shall report the findings and recommendations of the national conference to the General 
Assembly. Any funds appropriated to the commissioners on uniform state laws shall be paid out on vouchers approved by the director of the Commission. (5) The Commission may establish such subcommittees and advisory citizens' committees as may be convenient or desired for the proper and efficient performance of its functions. Members of the General Assembly other than those who are members of the Commission designated to serve on subcommittees shall receive the same travel allowances and compensation for attending meetings as they do for attending meetings during a session of the General Assembly, except that each General Assembly member who is a chairman of a joint interim committee of the Legislative Research Commission shall be paid, in addition to such allowances and compensation, ten dollars ($10) per day for each committee meeting that he chairs. (6) The Commission shall report its findings, either with or without recommendations, to the Governor of the Commonwealth, and to each member of the General Assembly at least thirty (30) days prior to the convening of each regular session of the General Assembly. Effective: July 13, 1984 History: Amended 1984 Ky. Acts ch. 131, sec. 2, effective July 13, 1984. -- Amended 1982 Ky. Acts ch. 129, sec. 2, effective July 15, 1982. -- Amended 1976 Ky. Acts ch. 83, sec. 12, effective March 29, 1976. -- Amended 1954 Ky. Acts ch. 9, sec. 3, effective June 17, 1954. -- Created 1948 Ky. Acts ch. 15, sec. 3, effective June 17, 1948.

7.1105 Persons with disabilities or members of their families to be included in membership of boards and committees affecting them -- Prohibition against discrimination. (1) To ensure opportunities for participation by persons with disabilities and their families in the development of policies, support, and services that affect them: (a)  Persons with one (1) or more disabilities, or members of their families, who may be affected by or be the subject of an advisory board, committee, commission, task force, or ad hoc committee, shall be included in the membership of each advisory board, committee, commission, task force, or ad hoc committee of the Legislative Research Commission or the General Assembly. (b)  Persons with one (1) or more disabilities, or members of their families, shall be included in the membership of any advisory committee, board, or commission of the Legislative Research Commission or General Assembly whose mission or purpose is to make recommendations or to establish criteria for services and support for persons with disabilities or to develop standards that govern the services and support funded or administered by any state government agency. (c)  Persons with one (1) or more disabilities shall not be discriminated against and shall be given an equal opportunity for membership on any board, task force, or commission established by the Legislative Research Commission or the General Assembly consistent with and to the extent required by the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act. (2) As used in this section, "disability" has the same meaning as in KRS 12.450. (3) The requirements of this section shall affect all boards, committees, commissions, task forces, or ad hoc committees created on or after June 21, 2001. (4) For boards, committees, commissions, task forces, or ad hoc committees in existence prior to June 21, 2001, any vacancy arising on or after June 21, 2001, shall be filled pursuant to this section. (5) The requirements of this section shall only apply to an advisory board, committee, commission, task force, or ad hoc committee that is created specifically to develop or oversee policies or programs related to persons living with a disability or their families, except that the provisions of paragraph (c) of subsection (1) of this section shall apply. Effective: June 21, 2001 History: Amended 2001 Ky. Acts ch. 164, sec. 11, effective June 21, 2001. -- Created 1996 Ky. Acts ch. 336, sec. 5, effective July 15, 1996. Page 1 of 1 

7.1106 Membership on boards, task forces, and commissions and participation in programs consistent with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act -- Disability awareness program. To ensure that Kentuckians with disabilities and their families enjoy full partnership in all programs, services, and activities throughout the Commonwealth: (1)  Consistent with this subsection, consideration shall be given to persons with one (1) or more disabilities for membership on any board, task force, or commission established by the Legislative Research Commission or the General Assembly. Persons with one (1) or more disabilities shall not be discriminated against and shall be given an equal opportunity for membership on any board, task force, or commission established by the Legislative Research Commission or the General Assembly consistent with and to the extent required by the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act; (2)  Individuals with disabilities shall be given an equal opportunity to participate in programs, services, and activities established by the Legislative Research Commission consistent with and to the extent required by the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act; (3)  If not already a part of staff development training, a program shall be established within the Legislative Research Commission with a disability awareness component; and (4)  If program evaluation criteria are utilized by the Legislative Research Commission, the criteria may include in the measures of performance, the number of individuals served by the program, service, or activity. Effective: June 21, 2001 History: Created 2001 Ky. Acts ch. 164, sec. 10, effective June 21, 2001. Page 1 of 1 

7.111 Right of access to information, when. (1) The Kentucky State Police, Department of Corrections, the Department of Juvenile Justice, the Cabinet for Health and Family Services, and the Administrative Office of the Courts shall provide access to their databases and the centralized criminal history record information system and the data contained therein to other criminal justice agencies, including criminal justice statistical analysis centers, and to the Legislative Research Commission. The right of access granted herein shall not include the right to add to, delete, or alter data without permission of the agency holding the data. (2) Criminal justice agencies and the Legislative Research Commission shall not make public information on an individual person's criminal history record where such record is protected by state or federal law or regulation. (3) The Legislative Research Commission shall have access to information which does not identify an individual person when determined by the director of the Legislative Research Commission to be necessary for a legislative purpose. (4) The Legislative Research Commission shall have access to individual persons' criminal history records subject to the following provisions: (a)  Access shall not include information on federal offenses or convictions; (b)  Access shall not include information on out-of-state convictions; and (c)  Requests for the release of the information shall be approved by the Legislative Research Commission by vote at a meeting of the Commission. Effective: June 20, 2005 History: Amended 2005 Ky. Acts ch. 99, sec. 73, effective June 20, 2005. -- Amended 1998 Ky. Acts ch. 606, sec. 11, effective July 15, 1998. -- Amended 1992 Ky. Acts ch. 211, sec. 2, effective July 14, 1992. -- Created 1986 Ky. Acts ch. 389, sec. 4, effective July 15, 1986.
7.112 Information to be provided free of charge. Any public officer or official, agency, or organization of state or local government required or requested to furnish information or data to the Legislative Research Commission, a subcommittee, task force, or other body associated therewith shall do so without any fees or charges of any kind for the information or data or any cost associated with its gathering, processing, or production. Effective: July 15, 1988 History: Created 188 Ky. Acts ch. 231, sec. 2, effective July 15, 1988.
7.115 Testimony of members of interim subcommittees of Legislative Research Commission. The chairmen and members of the interim subcommittees of the Legislative Research Commission may, subject to the approval of the Commission, appear and testify before committees of the Congress of the United States on all matters involving federal-state relations and on matters which concern the authority or interests of the states. The chairmen and members of the interim subcommittees shall receive the same travel expenses and compensation for appearing before congressional committees as they receive for attending meetings of their respective interim subcommittees. Effective: June 21, 1974 History: Amended 1974 Ky. Acts ch. 308, sec. 3, effective June 21, 1974. -- Created 1972 Ky. Acts ch. 224, sec. 1, effective June 16, 1972.
7.117 Legislative drafting communications not subject to disclosure -- Application. (1) A member of the General Assembly is immune from disclosing in a civil or criminal court proceeding, or in an administrative or legislative proceeding, any communication: (a)  Made by the member of the General Assembly to a member of the staff of the Legislative Research Commission, or to a member of the staff of the General Assembly, with regard to a request for legislative drafting of bills or resolutions or amendments thereto or to any information surrounding such a request; or (b)  Received from a member of the staff of the Legislative Research Commission, or from a member of the staff of the General Assembly, with regard to a request for legislative drafting of bills or resolutions or amendments thereto or to any information surrounding such a request.

</text>
