<text id="H06" category="" words="1992" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="2006 Annual Report" Author="Transportation Research Board" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/general/2006_TRB_Annual_Report.pdf">

The total available in FY
2006 is about $880,000. The HMCRP Oversight
Panel, appointed by TRB, held its first meeting
late this year to establish operating procedures
and to prioritize research needs.
COMMERCIAL TRUCK
AND BUS SAFETY
SYNTHESIS PROGRAM
CTBSSP is a cooperative research program sponsored
by FMCSA and administered by TRB. The
program was authorized in late 2001 to support
FMCSA's safety research programs.
The annual level of funding provided by
FMCSA - typically $100,000 to $400,000 - 
determines the number of synthesis studies the
program will initiate. The reports summarize
current practice in a specific technical area in
commercial truck and bus safety, usually through
a literature search and a survey of organizations
such as state DOTs, enforcement agencies, commercial
truck and bus companies, or other
appropriate groups. The program is modeled
after the successful synthesis programs of
NCHRP and TCRP. The primary users of the
syntheses are practitioners who are facing the
issues or problems with diverse approaches in a
variety of settings.
A program oversight panel monitors CTBSSP
and program procedures; selects synthesis topics
annually, after periodic industrywide solicitations;
refines synthesis scopes; selects researchers
to prepare each synthesis; reviews products; and
makes publication recommendations.
The program oversight panel has authorized
15 synthesis topics. Five syntheses were completed
this year and are expected to be published in
early 2007:
• Commercial Motor Vehicle Driver Training
Curricula and Delivery Methods and Their
Effectiveness;
• Commercial Motor Vehicle Carrier Safety Management
Certification;
• The Role of Safety Culture in Preventing Commercial
Motor Vehicle Crashes;
• The Impact of Behavior-Based Safety Techniques
on Commercial Motor Vehicle Drivers;
and
• Health and Wellness Programs for Commercial
Vehicle Drivers.
Strategic Highway Research Program II
The U.S. Congress authorized the second
Strategic Highway Research Program
(SHRP II) in August 2005 to address complex
goals that require integrated and atypical
approaches to reducing crashes, renewing the
transportation infrastructure, increasing highway
capacity, and providing reliable travel
times. The first SHRP was conducted between
1987 and 1993; SHRP II was originally proposed
as a 9-year, $450 million program. As
authorized, the program is funded at approximately
$150 million over 7 years and expects to
award approximately $110 million or more in
research contracts.
SHRP II is being conducted under a memorandum
of understanding among the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO), the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA), and the National
Research Council, TRB's parent organization. In
late March 2006, first-year funding for SHRP II
became available through an agreement with
FHWA, initiating an ambitious schedule of
activities to staff the program, establish committees,
and refine research plans. The scope of the
original research plans has been adjusted to
reflect the reduction in funding and will continue
to evolve in response to research findings,
emerging opportunities, and potential funding
fluctuations.
FOCUS AREAS
Safety
Estimated funding: $44 million;
11 planned projects
SHRP II safety research will take advantage of
unprecedented opportunities to improve highway
safety through advanced technologies. Most
highway safety research has focused on crashes
and on how changes in vehicles and roads could
improve safety. SHRP II safety research will focus
on driver behavior and will collect data on precrash
and noncrash circumstances.
The research will quantify the interactions of
drivers, roads, vehicles, and environmental conditions
and will develop objective measures of
crash risk. An ambitious effort will use on-board
recorders to capture data on 2,000 to 3,000 volunteer
drivers, their vehicles, the environment,
and the roadways. Site-based technologies and
instrumented vans also will be deployed. Analysis
of the data will have implications for effective
countermeasures to reduce the number and
severity of crashes.
Renewal
Estimated funding: $29 million;
28 planned projects
The U.S. highway system is aging and must be
rebuilt while in service. Research in the renewal
focus area therefore addresses the need to complete
highway projects quickly, with minimal disruption
to the community, and to produce facilities
that are long-lasting.
Identifying new technologies for locating
underground utilities; developing procedures to
speed the evaluation of designs and the inspection
of construction; and applying new methods
and materials for preserving, rehabilitating, and
reconstructing roadways and bridges are among
the goals for this focus area. Alternative strategies
for contracting, financing and managing projects,
and mitigating institutional barriers also are
part of the emphasis on rapid renewal.
Reliability
Estimated funding: $18 million;
12 planned projects
Improving the reliability of travel time predictions
can reduce the costs and frustrations of
traffic delays and can help address the problems
of roadway congestion. Research in the reliability
focus area will identify and analyze congestion
mitigation measures and practices at agencies
that have improved travel time reliability; develop
analytical procedures for estimating the benefits
and effectiveness of countermeasures; assess
the institutional architectures necessary for successful
operations programs; and develop local
and national programs to monitor reliability.
Capacity
Estimated funding: $18 million;
8 planned projects
The objective of the capacity focus area is to
develop a consistent framework for balanced,
collaborative decisions on enhancing transportation
capacity and to provide the tools for applying
the framework. The research will develop a
project evaluation process that will help stakeholders
balance the need to reduce delays caused
by conflicting demands with the need to produce
transportation solutions that support community,
economic, and environmental goals.
The research also will develop a structure
for a project's many contributors to share data
and knowledge. This will require identifying critical
points for decision making in various
processes, the data and knowledge essential for
these decisions, and successful methods of sharing
information.
MANAGEMENT
AND OVERSIGHT
TRB manages SHRP II in close cooperation with
FHWA and AASHTO. The SHRP II Oversight
Committee, appointed by the National Research
Council, has responsibility for all aspects of the
program's research activities. A technical coordinating
committee in each of the four focus areas is responsible for recommending the research plan
and for monitoring the conduct of the research.
Small groups of technical experts are convened
as necessary to draft research project
statements to inform requests for proposals
(RFPs). Members of these committees and
groups are knowledgeable and experienced professionals
in transportation and related fields,
are recruited from around the nation, and serve
without compensation.
SCHEDULE OF ACTIVITIES
The first RFPs for each focus area were released
in September. The initial projects either will produce
analytic methods and study designs for
follow-on research or will identify specific needs
in technology, data, and knowledge for the projects
that follow.
Starting in 2007, RFPs will be issued twice
each year, in June and December, with notices
posted in the TRB e-newsletter and website.
Contract awards will go out in August and February.
SHRP II will publicize its annual research
program in January of each year.

PROGRAM STAFFING
Start-up activities and the work of the program's
first year have been accomplished by a core team
of experienced staff members. New expertise will
be added as the SHRP II staff reaches its full
complement. Currently, the staff includes:
• Neil Hawks, a manager in the first SHRP and
recently director of TRB's Special Programs
Division, serves as director of SHRP II.
• Ann Brach, Senior Program Officer and
director of the study that defined the need
and proposed the goals for SHRP II, is deputy
director.
• Stephen Andrle, recently director of the Center
for Transportation Research and Education
at Iowa State University, heads the SHRP
II capacity focus area.
• Kenneth Campbell, formerly with the Oak
Ridge National Laboratory and the University
of Michigan Transportation Research Institute,
staffs the safety focus area.
• Walter Diewald, Senior Program Officer and
recently study director in the TRB Division of
Studies and Information Services, is staff officer
for the reliability focus area.
• Robert Raab, Senior Program Officer, is heading
up the renewal focus area while the
staffing process continues.
• Monica Starnes, Senior Program Officer, is
working primarily in the renewal focus area.
She previously worked for the Applied
Physics Lab at Johns Hopkins University and
for the National Institute of Standards and
Technology.
• Linda Mason serves as the SHRP II Communications
Officer.
• Jo Ann Coleman and Makeeya Hazelton are
Senior Program Assistants. Coleman has
worked as an analyst for the U.S. Department
of Transportation and as transaction specialist
at Remax Allegiance,Woodridge, Virginia.
Hazelton was supervisor of customer service
for TRB's Publications Sales and Affiliates Services
department.
• Connie Woldu is the program's Administrative
Coordinator.
Administration and Finance
The TRB Administration and Finance Division
provides financial, technological, and
administrative support for TRB staff; financial
oversight of the contracts and grants that support
the work of TRB; expenditure controls;
administration of publications sales and distribution;
maintenance of the benefits and services
for sponsor and affiliate organizations; and liaison
to the administrative and financial offices of
the National Academies.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
The division manages the contracts and grants
that support TRB's work, prepares budgets for
continuing operations and individual projects,
and controls expenditures. TRB's total income
and expenditures have increased consistently
each year to more than $60 million (see graph,
page 51). A statement of income and expenditures
appears on pages 52 - 53.
AFFILIATE AND SPONSOR
SERVICES
TRB's core technical activities have five levels of
support: student affiliates, individual affiliates,
organizational affiliates, sustaining affiliates, and
sponsors. All affiliates and sponsors contribute to
the support of TRB activities through annual fees
determined by the level of services selected.
Individual and student affiliates' benefits
include reduced registration fees for the TRB
Annual Meeting, complimentary subscription to
TR News, discounts on most TRB books and
reports, use of the TRB library, and assistance
with the use of TRB computer-based information
services. Individual and student affiliates
also may subscribe to publications at a substantially
reduced rate through a selective distribution
program.
Organizational affiliates include government
agencies, academic organizations, private organizations,
and consultants committed to the
advancement of knowledge about the nature and
performance of transportation systems and system
components. In addition to the range of
benefits that individual affiliates receive, organizational
affiliates receive most publications at no
cost, as well as complimentary registrations for
the TRB Annual Meeting. Organizational affiliate
contributions range from $2,850 to $7,100,
depending on the level of benefits selected.
Sustaining affiliates are agencies and organizations - 
including individual corporations and
businesses - that support TRB at a level considerably
higher than the direct cost of all the services
and publications received. The minimum
annual contribution is $15,000.
Sponsors are the major source of financial
support for TRB's core technical activities. Federal,
state, and local government agencies and professional
societies and organizations that represent
industry groups are eligible to be TRB
sponsors. Fees and services are negotiated to
serve the sponsor's needs and to provide funda mental support for the Board's programs and
activities of interest to the entire transportation
community. The minimum annual sponsor fee is
$60,000. Sponsors are also represented on the
TRB Executive Committee. (See pages 58 - 59 for
a list of TRB sponsors and sustaining affiliates.)
PUBLICATIONS SALES
AND DISTRIBUTION
TRB's timely distribution of publications disseminates
transportation research and technology
results worldwide. TRB also releases selected
publications - some exclusively - in electronic
format.
A list of TRB publications issued from January
1 through December 31, 2006, appears on
pages 55 - 57.
WEB AND STRATEGIC
APPLICATIONS
The TRB Information Technology unit develops
and supports many of the applications used by
TRB's divisions and serves as the liaison for computer
network infrastructure to the National
Academies' Information Technology Services
office. The unit's major activities in 2006 involved
the planning and updating of TRB's website for
transfer to a new server environment.At the same
time, the National Academies relocated its operations
center - including the TRB servers - to a
new remote facility.
The unit implemented a new version of Web-
Board, TRB's online forum for discussions, information
sharing, and data storage.1 The package now consolidates access to web boards, conferences,
and messages on a single web page for
easy navigation and can be tailored for user preferences
and needs.
Activities planned for 2007 include updates
to the electronic bookstore, enhancements to
TRB affiliate and participant data management
systems, and implementation of a new content
management system.

</text>
