<text id="H11" category="" words="1991" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Middle Africa Development Indicators 2006 " Author="The World Bank Washington DC" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTSTATINAFR/Resources/ADI_2006_text.pdf">

7. Infrastructure

Internal fresh water resources per capita is the
sum of total renewable resources, which include
internal fl ows of rivers and groundwater
from rainfall in the country, and river
fl ows from other countries.
Population with sustainable access to an improved
water source is the percentage of population
with reasonable access to an adequate
amount of water from an improved source,
such as a household connection, public
standpipe, borehole, protected well or spring,
or rainwater collection. Unimproved sources
include vendors, tanker trucks, and unprotected
wells and springs. Reasonable access is
defi ned as the availability of at least 20 liters
a person a day from a source within 1 kilometer
of the user's dwelling.
Population with sustainable access to improved
sanitation is the percentage of the
population with at least adequate access to
excreta disposal facilities that can eff ectively
prevent human, animal, and insect contact
with excreta. Improved facilities range from
simple but protected pit latrines to fl ush toilets
with a sewerage connection. / e excreta
disposal system is considered adequate if it
is private or shared (but not public) and if it
hygienically separates human excreta from
human contact. To be eff ective, facilities
must be correctly constructed and properly
maintained.
Average nonrevenue water is the diff erence
between water supplied and water sold (that
is, the volume of water "lost") expressed as a
percentage of net water supplied.
Water supply failure for fi rms receiving water
is the average number of days per year that
fi rms experienced insuffi cient water supply
for production.
Average household tariff s for water services,
largest city are the average tariff s for wastewa ter services for household consumers in the
largest city.
Committed nominal investment in potable
water projects with private participation is annual
committed investment in potable water
projects with private investment.
Average annual offi cial development assistance
(ODA) disbursements for water and sanitation
are average annual ODA for water and
sanitation, including bilateral, multilateral,
and other donors.
Source: Data on fresh water resources are
from the World Bank's World Development
Indicators database. Data on access to water
and sanitation are from the World Health
Organization and United Nations Children's
Fund's Meeting the MDG Drinking Water
and Sanitation Target (www.unicef.org/wes/
mdgreport). Data on average nonrevenue
water and average household tariff s for water
services in the largest city are from the
International Benchmarking Network for
Water and Sanitation Utilities (IBNET). Data
on water supply failure are from World Bank
Investment Climate Surveys. Data on committed
nominal investment in potable water
projects with private participation are from
the World Bank's Private Participation in
Infrastructure database. Data on ODA disbursements
are from the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development.

Total length of road network is the length
of motorways, highways, main or national
roads, secondary or regional roads, and other
roads.
Total length of national road network is the
length of the interurban classifi ed network
without the urban and rural network.
Rail lines are the length of railway route
available for train service, irrespective of the
number of parallel tracks.
Road density, ratio to arable land is the total
length of national road network per 1,000
square kilometers of arable land area. / e use
of arable land area in the denominator focuses
on inhabited sectors of total land area by
excluding wilderness areas.
Road density, ratio to total land is the total
length of national road network per 1,000
square kilometers of total land area.
Energy consumption for transportation is the transportation sector's contribution to total
fi nal energy consumption.
Rural access is the percentage of the rural
population who live within 2 kilometers of
an all-season passable road as a share of the
total rural population.
Commercial vehicles are the number of commercial
vehicles, which use at least 24 liters
of diesel fuel per 100 kilometers.
Passenger cars are the number of passenger
vehicles, which use at least 9 liters of gasoline
fuel per 100 kilometers.
Length of national network in good condition
is the length of the national road network,
including the interurban classifi ed network
without the urban and rural network, that is
in good condition, as defi ned by each country's
road agency.
Ratio of paved to total roads is the length of
paved roadsówhich are those surfaced with
crushed stone (macadam) and hydrocarbon
binder or bituminized agents, with concrete,
or with cobblestonesóas a percentage of all
the country's roads.
Average time to ship 20 ft container from port
to fi nal destination is the time in days from
when the ship is available for unloading (be
it moored at the berth or off shore) until the
content of the container is made available to
the fi nal customer at the destination in the
considered economic center, weighted based
on container traffi c for each corridor.
Firms identifying transport as major or very
severe obstacle to business operation and growth
is the percentage of fi rms that responded
"major" or "very severe" obstacle to the following
question: "Please tell us if any of the
following issues are a problem for the operation
and growth of your business. If an issue
(infrastructure, regulation, and permits)
poses a problem, please judge its severity as
an obstacle on a fi ve-point scale that ranges
from 0 = no obstacle to 5 = very severe
obstacle."
Average cost to ship 20 ft container from
port to fi nal destination is the costs of all operations
associated with bringing a container
from onboard a ship to the considered economic
center, weighted based on container
traffi c for each corridor.
Price of diesel fuel and super gasoline is the
price as posted at fi lling stations in a country's
capital city. When several fuel prices for
major cities were available, the unweighted average is used. Since super gasoline (95 octane/
A95/premium) is not available everywhere,
it is sometime replaced by regular gasoline
(92 octane/A92), premium plus gasoline
(98 octane/A98), or an average of the two.
Committed nominal investment in transport
projects with private participation is annual
committed investment in transport (including
roads, airport, seaport, toll road, and railroad)
projects with private investment.
Average annual offi cial development assistance
(ODA) disbursements for transportation
and storage are average annual ODA for transportation
and storage, including bilateral,
multilateral, and other donors.
Existence of road fund includes fi rst generation
(funded primarily by earmarked taxes)
and second generation (funded primarily by
user charges) road funds.
Source: Data on total length of road network
are from the International Road Federation's
World Road Statistics. Data on total length of
national network, length of national network
in good condition, average time and cost to
ship 20 ft container, and existence of a road
fund are from the World Bank's Sub-Saharan
Africa Transport Policy Program (SSATP).
Data on rail lines and ratio of paved to total
roads are from the World Bank's World Development
Indicators database. Data on road
density and rural access to roads are from
the World Bank's SSATP and World Development
Indicators database. Data on energy
consumption for transportation are from the
International Energy Agency. Data on vehicle
fl eet and fuel and gasoline prices are from the
German Society for Technical Cooperation
(GTZ). Data on fi rms identifying transport
as a major or very severe constraint to business
operation and growth are from World
Bank Investment Climate Surveys. Data on
committed nominal investment in transport
projects with private participation are from
the World Bank's Private Participation in
Infrastructure database. Data on ODA disbursements
are from the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development.

Telephone subscribers are subscribers to a
main telephone line service, which connects a
customer's equipment to the public switched telephone network, or to a cellular telephone
service, which uses cellular technology.
Unmet demand is unmet applications for
connection to the public switched telephone
network that have had to be held over owing
to a lack of technical facilities (equipment,
lines, and the like) divided by the number of
main telephone lines in operation.
Households with own telephone is the percentage
of households possessing a telephone.
Delay for fi rm in obtaining a telephone connection
is the average actual delay in days that
fi rms experience when obtaining a telephone
connection, measured from the day the establishment
applied to the day it received the
service or approval.
Duration of telephone outages is the average
duration in hours of instances of telephone
unavailability related to production.
Reported phone faults is the total number
of reported faults for the year divided by
the total number of mainlines in operation
multiplied by 100. / e defi nition of fault can
vary. Some countries include faulty customer
equipment; others distinguish between reported
and actual found faults. / ere is also
sometimes a distinction between residential
and business lines. Another consideration is
the time period: some countries report this
indicator on a monthly basis; in these cases
data are converted to yearly estimates.
Firms identifying telecommunications as major
or very severe obstacle to business operation
and growth is the percentage of fi rms that responded
"major" or "very severe" obstacle to
the following question: "Please tell us if any
of the following issues are a problem for the
operation and growth of your business. If an
issue (infrastructure, regulation, and permits)
poses a problem, please judge its severity as an
obstacle on a fi ve-point scale that ranges from
0 = no obstacle to 5 = very severe obstacle."
Cost of a cellular local call is the cost of a
three-minute cellular local call during off -
peak hours.
Cost of a local phone call is the cost of a threeminute
local call during peak hours. Local call
refers to a call within the same exchange area
using the subscriber's own terminal (that is,
not from a public telephone).
Cost of phone call to the United States is
the cost of a three-minute call to the United
States during peak hours. Committed nominal investment in fi xed-line
and long distance projects with private participation
is annual committed investment in
fi xed-line and long distance projects with private
investment.
Committed nominal investment in mobile
projects with private participation is annual
committed investment in mobile projects
with private investment.
Average annual offi cial development assistance
(ODA) disbursements for communications are average
annual ODA for communications, including
bilateral, multilateral, and other donors.
Source: Data on telephone subscribers, reported
phone faults, and cost of local and cellular
calls are from the International Telecommunications
Union. Data on unmet demand
are from the World Bank's Infrastructure
Vice Presidency. Data on households with
own telephone are from Demographic and
Health Surveys. Data on delays for fi rms in
obtaining a telephone connection, duration
of telephone outages, and fi rms identifying
telecommunications as a major or very severe
obstacle to business operation and growth
are from World Bank Investment Climate Assessments.
Data on cost of a call to the United
States are from the World Bank's Global
Development Finance and World Development
Indicator databases. Data on committed
nominal investment are from the World
Bank's Private Participation in Infrastructure
database. Data on ODA disbursements are
from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development.

Installed capacity is the sum of conventional
thermal electricity installed capacity; hydroelectricity
installed capacity; nuclear electricity
installed capacity; and geothermal, solar,
wind, wood, and waste electricity installed
capacity.
Electric power consumption is the production
of power plants and combined heat and
power plants, less distribution losses and
own use by heat and power plants.
Energy use per purchasing power parity (PPP)
gross domestic product (GDP) is apparent consumption,
which is equal to indigenous production
plus imports and stock changes minus
exports and fuels supplied to ships and
aircraft engaged in international transport, divided by nominal GDP in PPP U.S. dollars.
Access to electricity is the percentage of the
population living in households with access
to electricity. Solid fuels use is the percentage of the
population using solid fuels as opposed to
modern fuels.

</text>
