<text id="H29" category="" words="2008" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Global Sustainability and Philanthropy Report" Author="Proctor and Gamble" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.pg.com/en_US/downloads/sustainability/reports/sustainability_report_2006.pdf">

The objective of our governance structure is to maintain corporate governance principles, policies and practices that support management and Board of Directors accountability. These are in the best interest of the Company and our shareholders, and they are consistent with the Company's Purpose, Values and Principles. We believe that good governance practices contribute to better results for shareholders. Everything we do is done with our commitment to "doing the right thing" in mind.
Corporate Governance and Management's Responsibility P&amp;G has a strong history of doing what's right. Our employees embrace our Purpose, Values and Principles. If you analyze what has made our Company successful over the years, you may focus on our brands, our marketing strategies, our organization design, our ability to innovate. But if you really want to get at what drives our Company's success, the place to look is our people. Our people are deeply committed to our Purpose, Values and Principles. It is this commitment to doing what's right that unites us. This commitment to doing what's right is embodied in our financial reporting. High-quality financial reporting is our responsibility  -  one we execute with integrity and within both the letter and spirit of the law. High-quality financial reporting is characterized by accuracy, objectivity and transparency. Management is responsible for maintaining an effective system of internal controls over financial reporting to deliver those characteristics in all material respects. The Board of Directors, through its Audit Committee, provides oversight. They have engaged Deloitte &amp; Touche LLP to audit our consolidated financial statements, on which they have issued an unqualified opinion. Our commitment to providing timely, accurate and understandable information to investors encompasses: Communicating Expectations to Employees Every employee  -  from senior management on down  -  is trained on the Company's Worldwide Business Conduct Manual, which sets forth the Company's commitment to conduct its business affairs with high ethical standards. Every employee is held personally accountable for compliance and is provided several means of reporting any concerns about violations.

Maintaining a Strong Internal Control Environment Our system of internal controls includes written policies and procedures, segregation of duties, and the careful selection and development of employees. The system is designed to provide reasonable assurance that transactions are executed as authorized and appropriately recorded, that assets are safeguarded, and that accounting records are sufficiently reliable to permit the preparation of financial statements conforming in all material respects with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. We monitor these internal controls through control self-assessments by business unit management. In addition to performing financial and compliance audits around the world, including unannounced audits, our Global Internal Audit organization provides training and continuously improves internal control processes. Appropriate actions are taken by management to correct any identified control deficiencies. Executing Financial Stewardship We maintain specific programs and activities to ensure that employees understand their fiduciary responsibilities to shareholders. This ongoing effort encompasses financial discipline in our strategic and daily business decisions and brings particular focus to maintaining accurate financial reporting and effective controls through process improvement, skill development and oversight. Exerting Rigorous Oversight of the Business We continuously review our business results and strategic choices. Our Global Leadership Council is actively involved  -  from understanding strategies to reviewing key initiatives, financial performance and control assessments. The intent is to ensure we remain objective, identify potential issues, continuously challenge each other and ensure recognition and rewards are appropriately aligned with results. Engaging our Disclosure Committee We maintain disclosure controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed is recorded, processed, summarized and reported accurately and in timely fashion. Our Disclosure Committee is a group of senior-level executives responsible for evaluating disclosure implications of significant business activities and events. The Committee reports its findings to the CEO and CFO, providing an effective process to evaluate our external disclosure obligations.
Encouraging Strong and Effective Corporate Governance from Our Board of Directors
We have an active, capable and diligent Board that meets the required standards for independence, and we welcome the Board's oversight. Our Audit Committee comprises independent directors with significant financial knowledge and experience. We review significant accounting policies, financial reporting and internal control matters with them and encourage their independent discussions with external auditors. 
Our corporate governance guidelines, as well as the charter of the Audit Committee and certain other committees of our Board, are available on our website at www.pg.com/company/our_commitment/corp_gov
Governance Structure 
We believe that good governance practices contribute to better results for shareholders. Our objective is to maintain corporate governance principles, policies and practices that support management and Board of Directors accountability. These are in the best interest of the Company and our shareholders, and they are consistent with the Company's Purpose, Values and Principles. 
Governance starts with the Board of Directors, which has general oversight responsibility for the Company's affairs, pursuant to Ohio's General Corporation Law and the Company's Code of Regulations and Bylaws. In exercising its fiduciary duties, the Board of Directors represents and acts on behalf of the shareholders. Although the Board of Directors does not have responsibility for day-to-day management of the Company, it stays informed about the business and provides guidance to management through periodic meetings, site visits and other interactions. 
The Board is deeply involved in the Company's strategic planning process, leadership development and succession planning. The Board has several committees to facilitate its oversight of the Company. These include Audit, Compensation &amp; Leadership Development, and Governance &amp; Public Responsibility. The responsibilities of the Governance &amp; Public Responsibility Committee include oversight of organization diversity, sustainable development, community and government relations, product quality assurance and corporate reputation. The Board of Directors and its committees operate under our Corporate Governance Guidelines and Charters. Additionally, the Board has adopted guidelines for determining the independence of its members. As of June 2006, approximately 72 percent of our directors qualified as being independent. 
The Board has approved a code of conduct, outlined in our Worldwide Business Conduct Manual. This code applies to all directors, officers and employees and is designed to help ensure compliance with all applicable laws and Company 
policies, including those related to sustainable development. Shareholders may communicate with the Board of Directors and submit shareholder proposals as described in the Company's proxy statement.
Executive Compensation 
Executive compensation is based on principles that have served the Company well and enabled it to increase shareholder value:
• Pay competitively.
• Pay for performance. 
• Design compensation programs that support the business. 
These principles have helped the Company develop and retain extraordinary executive talent. P&amp;G develops executives from within, an achievement few other major corporations have matched. 
A substantial portion of compensation is composed of variable, at-risk incentives, the majority based on the Company's long-term success. We benchmark the Company's pay structure annually and also review its business and financial performance. 
Additionally, we expect executives to uphold the fundamental principles in the Company's Statement of Purpose, Values and Principles, plus the Worldwide Business Conduct Manual, the Sustainability Report, and the Environmental Quality Policy. These principles include integrity, maximizing the development of each individual, developing a diverse organization, and continually improving the environmental quality of the Company's products and operations. In upholding these principles, executives not only contribute to their own success but also help ensure the prosperity of P&amp;G's business, employees, shareholders and the communities in which the Company operates.
Stakeholder Engagement
P&amp;G works hard to be a good corporate neighbor and to improve lives in the communities where we live and work.
Communities
Each P&amp;G production facility has site-specific activities to build constructive relationships with local authorities, local industry associations, residential and business neighbors, local action groups, thought leaders and news media. Depending on individual communities' cultures and interests, this can range from regular official meetings during which new information is shared or questions are answered, to more informal meetings. This could be, for example, a reception for the immediate neighbors, where information on the past year and plans for the new year are discussed. P&amp;G ensures continuity in community interaction by meeting regularly with local authorities to update them on plant news. In the neighborhoods of many P&amp;G operations, the Company cooperates with and sponsors local events, so the whole area benefits from the presence of a P&amp;G site.
P&amp;G recognizes the importance of improving the quality of life in our local communities, and we support local initiatives and encourage employee involvement. The most valuable community support we provide usually involves not only writing a check but also taking advantage of the intellectual capabilities and energy of P&amp;G people. We look for areas where we can make a significant long-term, systemic difference. This leads us to focus heavily on education and health, with special emphasis on youth. It also leads us to build alliances with strategic partners to achieve a better result than we could alone. We look to our people in the area to work with their local communities and government officials to learn where we can make the biggest difference.
Caring
Committed, Involved, Knowledgeable, Passion for making a real difference.
Communities
Each P&amp;G production facility has site-specific activities to build constructive relationships with local authorities, local industry associations, residential and business neighbors, local action groups, thought leaders and news media. Depending on individual communities' cultures and interests, this can range from regular official meetings during which new information is shared or questions are answered, to more informal meetings. This could be, for example, a reception for the immediate neighbors, where information on the past year and plans for the new year are discussed. P&amp;G ensures continuity in community interaction by meeting regularly with local authorities to update them on plant news. In the neighborhoods of many P&amp;G operations, the Company cooperates with and sponsors local events, so the whole area benefits from the presence of a P&amp;G site.
P&amp;G recognizes the importance of improving the quality of life in our local communities, and we support local initiatives and encourage employee involvement. The most valuable community support we provide usually involves not only writing a check but also taking advantage of the intellectual capabilities and energy of P&amp;G people. We look for areas where we can make a significant long-term, systemic difference. This leads us to focus heavily on education and health, with special emphasis on youth. It also leads us to build alliances with strategic partners to achieve a better result than we could alone. We look to our people in the area to work with their local communities and government officials to learn where we can make the biggest difference.
NGOs: Local  -  Regional  -  Global
P&amp;G frequently enters into dialogue with nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to understand their concerns and cares. In order to work constructively with stakeholders, it is essential to have their confidence and to be seen as a reliable and open discussion partner. By building an open relationship we can approach our NGO partners when issues arise. There is a wide range of NGOs varying by area of interest (environmental, consumer, animal welfare, etc.), by attitude (from extreme to moderate) and by their geographic links (from local to global). Depending on their characteristics, a number of NGOs can be seen as the vocal spokespeople for the general public.
Consumer organizations exist in many countries. These organizations contact companies to compare products and voice comments they receive from their members. P&amp;G continuously provides consumer organizations with information on new initiatives and cooperates with them in answering consumer questions.
Fighting Bird Flu in China
Safeguard has joined with the Red Cross Society of China to educate the public about prevention and transmission of bird flu and to reduce bird flu's threat to communities.
Safeguard has developed a TV public service announcement explaining the importance of washing hands with soap. Safeguard is also designing and producing a key visual for use by the Red Cross in its bird flu education materials.
Bird flu originated in Asia. The first human case in China occurred in November 2005, despite the Chinese government's best efforts to prevent it by vaccinating poultry and culling flocks.

</text>
