<text id="J22" category="" words="2009" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Existentialism : a very short introduction " Author="LawFlynn, Thomas R. " PublicationDate="Oxford ; New York : Oxford University Press 2006" SampledFrom="e-book" WebAddress="http://lib.myilibrary.com/Open.aspx?id=75296&loc=&srch=undefined&src=0">

Chapter 1.
Philosophy as a way of life.
If I do not reveal my views on justice in words, I do so by my conduct - Socrates to Xenophon. Despite its claim to be novel and unprecedented, existentialism represents a long tradition in the history of philosophy in the West, extending back at least to Socrates (469-399 bc ). This is the practice of philosophy as 'care of the self' ( epimeleia heautou ). Its focus is on the proper way of acting rather than on an abstract set of theoretical truths. Thus the Athenian general Laches, in a Platonic dialogue by that name, admits that what impresses him about Socrates is not his teaching but the harmony between his teaching and his life. And Socrates himself warns the Athenian court at the trial for his life that they will not easily find another like him who will instruct them to care for their selves above all else. This concept of philosophy flourished among the Stoic and Epicurean philosophers of the Hellenistic period. Their attention was focused primarily on ethical questions and discerning the proper way to live one's life. As one Classical scholar put it, 'Philosophy among the Greeks was more formative than informative in nature'. The philosopher was a kind of doctor of the soul, prescribing the proper attitudes and practices to foster health and happiness.
Of course, philosophy as the pursuit of basic truths about human nature and the universe was also widespread among the Ancient Greeks and was an ingredient in the care of the self. It was this more theoretical approach that led to the rise of science and came to dominate the teaching of philosophy in the medieval and modern periods. Indeed, 'theory' today is commonly taken as synonymous with 'philosophy' in general, as in the expressions 'political theory' and 'literary theory', to such an extent that 'theoretical philosophy' is almost redundant. At issue in this distinction between two forms of philosophy (among other things) are two different uses of 'truth': the scientific and the moral. The former is more cognitive and theoretical, the latter more self-formative and practical, as in 'to thine own self be true'. Whereas the former made no demands on the kind of person one should become in order to know the truth (for the 17th-century philosopher Rene Descartes, a sinner could grasp a mathematical formula as fully as a saint), the latter kind of truth required a certain self-discipline, a set of practices on the self such as attention to diet, control of one's speech, and regular meditation, in order to be able to access it. It was a matter of becoming a certain kind of person, the way Socrates exhibited a particular way of life, rather than of achieving a certain clarity of argument or insight in the way Aristotle did. In the history of philosophy, care of the self was gradually marginalized and consigned to the domains of spiritual direction, political formation, and psychological counselling. There were important exceptions to this exiling of 'moral' truth from the academy. St Augustine's Confessions ( ad 397), Blaise Pascal's Pensees (1669), and the writings of the German Romantics in the early 19th century are examples of works that encouraged this understanding of philosophy as care of the self. It is in this larger tradition that existentialism as a philosophical movement can be located. The existentialists can be viewed as reviving this more personal notion of 'truth', a truth that is lived as distinct from and often in opposition to the more detached and scientific use of the term. It is not surprising that both Soren Kierkegaard (1813-55) and Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900), the 19th-century 'fathers of existentialism', had ambivalent attitudes towards the philosophy of Socrates. On the one hand, he was seen as the defender of a kind of rationality that moved beyond merely conventional and subjective values towards universal moral norms, for which Kierkegaard praised him and Nietzsche censured him. But they both respected his individuating 'leap' across the gap in rationality between the proofs of personal immortality and his choice to accept the sentence of death imposed by the Athenian court. (Socrates was tried and found guilty on charges of impiety and for corrupting the youth by his teaching.) In other words, each philosopher realized that life does not follow the continuous flow of logical argument and that one often has to risk moving beyond the limits of the rational in order to live life to the fullest. As Kierkegaard remarked, many people have offered proofs for the immortality of the soul, but Socrates, after hypothesizing that the soul might be immortal, risked his life with that possibility in mind. He drank the poison as commanded by the Athenian court, all the while discoursing with his followers on the possibility that another life may await him. Kierkegaard called this an example of 'truth as subjectivity'. By this he meant a personal conviction on which one is willing to risk one's life. In his Journals , Kierkegaard muses: 'the thing is to find a truth which is true for me , to find the idea for which I can live and die' (1 August 1835). 
Clarity is not enough. 
Galileo wrote that the book of nature was written in mathematical characters. Subsequent advances in modern science seemed to confirm this claim. It appeared that whatever could be weighed and measured (quantified) could give us reliable knowledge, whereas the non-measurable was left to the realm of mere opinion. This view became canonized by positivist philosophy in the 19th and
early 20th centuries. This positivist habit of mind insisted that the 'objective' was synonymous with the measurable and the 'value-free'. Its aim was to extract the subject from the experiment in order to obtain a purely impersonal 'view from nowhere'. This led to a number of significant discoveries, but it quickly became apparent that such an approach was inconsistent. The limiting of the knowable to the quantifiable was itself a value that was not quantifiable. That is, the choice of this procedure was itself a 'leap' of sorts, an act of faith in a certain set of values that were not themselves measurable. Moreover, the exclusion of the non-measurable from what counted as knowledge left some of our most important questions not only unanswered but unanswerable. Are our ethical rules and values merely the expression of our subjective preferences? To paraphrase the mathematician and philosopher Bertrand Russell, scarcely an existentialist: can anyone really believe that the revulsion they feel when they witness the gratuitous infliction of pain is simply an expression of the fact that they don't happen to like it? Such was the doctrine of the 'emotivists' in ethical theory, sometimes called the 'boo/hurrah' theory of moral judgements. They were forced in that direction by acceptance of the positivist limitation of knowledge to the measurable. But are we even capable of the kind of antiseptic knowledge that the positivists require of science? Perhaps the knowing subject can be reintroduced into these discussions without compromising their objectivity. Much will depend on us revising our definition of 'objectivity' as well as on discovering other uses of the word 'true' besides the positivists' 'agreement with sense experience'. The existentialists among others responded to this challenge. Jean-Paul Sartre (1905-80) exemplifies this response when he remarks that the only theory of knowledge that can be valid today is one which is founded on that truth of microphysics: the experimenter is part of the experimental system. What he has in mind is the so-called Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle from atomic physics which, in its popular interpretation at least, states that the instruments which enable us to observe the momentum and the position of an orbital electron interfere with the process such that we can determine the one or the other but never both at once. Analogously, one can object that the very act of intervening in the life of a 'primitive' tribe prevents the ethnologist from studying that people in their pristine condition. Such considerations served to undermine the positivists' concept of knowledge as measurability. But they also clouded the rationalists' view of reality as exhaustively available to a logic of either/or with no middle ground. To cite another example, light manifests qualities that indicate it is a wave and others that show it to be a particle. Yet these two characteristics seem to exclude each other, leaving the question 'Is light a wave or a particle?' unanswerable with the standard logic of either/or. Light seems to be both and yet neither exclusively. Another kind of logic seems called for to make sense of this phenomenon. Numerous other examples from physics and mathematics appeared early in the last century that offered counterexamples to the positivists' and the rationalists' claims about knowledge and the world. 
Lived experience. 
It is into this world of limited and relative observation and assessment that the existentialist enters with his/her drive to 'personalize' the most impersonal phenomena in our lives. What, for example, could be more impersonal and objective than space and time? Even the chastened view of space-time that the Relativity Theory offers us relies on an absolute or constant referent, namely the speed of light. We measure time by minutes and seconds and chart space by yards or metres. This too seems quantitative and hence objective in the positivists' sense. And yet the notion of what existentialists call 'ekstatic' temporality adds a qualitative and personal dimension to the phenomenon of time-consciousness. For the existentialist, the value and meaning of each temporal dimension of lived time is a function of our attitudes and choices. Some people, for example, are always pressed to meet obligations whereas others are at a loss to occupy their time. Time rushes by when you're having fun and hangs heavy on your hands when you are in pain. Even the quantitative advice to budget our time, from an existentialist point of view, is really a recommendation to examine and assess the life decisions that establish our temporal priorities in the first place. If 'time is of the essence', and the existentialist will insist that it is, then part of who we are is our manner of living the 'already' and the 'not yet' of our existence, made concrete by how we handle our immersion in the everyday. The existentialist often dramatizes such 'lived time'. Thus, Albert Camus (1913-60) in his allegory of the Nazi occupation of Paris, The Plague , describes the people in a plague-ridden, quarantined city: 'Hostile to the past, impatient of the present, and cheated of the future, we were much like those whom men's justice, or hatred, forces to live behind prison bars.' The notion of imprisonment as 'doing time' is clearly existential. And Sartre, in an insightful analysis of emotive consciousness, speaks of someone literally 'jumping for joy' as a way of using their bodily changes to conjure up, as if by magic, the possibility of possessing a desirable situation 'all at once' without having to await its necessary, temporal unfolding. Though Sartre stated this thesis in the 1930s, one immediately thinks of the photo of Hitler's little 'jig' under the Arc de Triomphe during the German occupation of Paris. Time has its own viscosity, as Michel Foucault remarked. Ekstatic temporality embodies its flow. But existential space is personalized as well. Sartre cites the social psychologist Kurt Lewin's notion of 'hodological' space (lived space) as the qualitative equivalent to the lived time of our quotidian existence. The story is told of two people, one who prefers to get as closely face-to-face in conversation as possible and the other a distant, stand-off kind of person, propelling and repelling each other around the room at a cocktail party in an attempt to carry on a conversation. Lived space is personal; it is the usual route I take to work, the seating arrangement that quickly establishes itself in a classroom, or the ordering of the objects on my desk. It is what psychologists call my 'comfort zone'. This too is a function of my life project.

</text>
