<text id="J31" category="" words="2014" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Evolutionary Jungian Psychology" Author="Bruce J. MacLennan" PublicationDate="June 1, 2006  p. 9-28" SampledFrom="Psychological Perspectives " WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?hid=122&sid=1dec9873-7fd1-453d-b6d4-e44e1ef47e5b%40sessionmgr115&vid=3">

There is an important convergence taking place between Jungian psychology,
evolutionary psychology, and neuroscience. Many readers will
be acquainted with recent developments in neurotheology, which seeks to
understand the neurological bases of spiritual experiences and practices. Perhaps
less familiar will be the field of evolutionary psychology, which seeks
to understand human psychology in terms of its adaptive role in our species'
evolution and by comparison with the evolution of other species. Orthodox
Jungians might worry about the effects of this encroachment of materialist
ideas and methods. Will this not lead to a reduction of psychical experience
to neurons and genes, which would suck the life out of Jungian psychology? I
hope to show that this is not the case, and that each of these three disciplines
may reinforce and expand the others, if we take the appropriate approach of
recognizing psychical reality alongside material reality. (Much of what I say
is based on the work of Jungian analyst Anthony Stevens.)
ARCHETYPE AND INSTINCT.
The lynchpin connecting the three disciplines of Jungian psychology, neuroscience,
and evolutionary psychology is simple: The archetypes are psychical
correspondents of human instincts. That is, when you are behaving
instinctually, you experience yourself to be in an archetypal situation. Activation
of an instinct structures an animal's perception and behavior, and when
you are that animal, you experience a myth unfolding in which you are a key
actor. Some people might find the idea of "human instincts" to be objectionable,
for we have long flattered ourselves with the idea that we are completely
autonomous in our behavior, and that this autonomy separates us from "the
beasts." However, evolutionary psychologists have shown that we are no different
from other animal species in possessing a wide range of instincts that
have promoted the evolutionary success of our species. Jungians, too, are familiar with the ego's inflated opinion of its own autonomy and understand its
more modest function in relation to the Self and the collective unconscious.
Indeed, Jung understood the connection between the archetypes and
instincts. For example, he wrote, "To the extent that the archetypes intervene
in the shaping of conscious contents by regulating, modifying, and motivating
them, they act like the instincts" (CW 8, par. 404), and "The hypothesis of
the collective unconscious is . . . no more daring than to assume that there are
instincts" (CW 9, pt. 1, par. 91).
The instincts tune perception and behavior in order to fulfill some purpose
important to our species, be it mating, infant care, cooperation, social
organization, defense, or competition for mates. When an appropriate releasing
stimulus activates the instinct, you may feel as if you were living a myth
or that you are possessed by a spirit with its own agenda. To take an obvious
example that almost everyone will recognize, when stricken by love, you may
feel as though Aphrodite or Eros is governing your behavior; your perception
of the beloved will be transformed, and he or she will appear numinous and
divine; indeed, all of life may be experienced in a magical or uncanny light.
EVOLUTION AND THE INSTINCTS.
Konrad Lorenz (1903 - 1989) was the founder of ethology. Stevens (2003) observes
that Lorenz and Jung can be considered complementary, for Lorenz
focused on external behavior, whereas Jung focused on internal experience.
Of course, there are significant differences: Jung was more interested in people,
Lorenz in nonhuman animals. Also, Lorenz and other ethologists are interested
in placing behavior in its evolutionary context, whereas Jung was not so
interested in an evolutionary perspective. Finally, contemporary neuroethologists
are interested in the neurological substrates of behavior and how brains
have evolved, whereas Jung abandoned neurology, and most Jungians have
avoided it (perhaps in reaction to the prevalent reductionist materialism of
our time).
Ethology is the discipline that studies animal behavior in the context of
its evolutionary development; that is, it seeks to understand how a species'
instincts have evolved in interaction with its historical environment, and how
they have promoted the survival of the species in that environment. The basis
of ethology is the recognition that an instinct must be understood in terms of
a species' environment of evolutionary adaptedness, that is, the environment
in which it has evolved and to which that instinct has served to adapt
the species. This is the context in which we may explain the purpose of an
instinct (that is, its adaptive function). (Indeed, many evolutionary psychologists
refer to evolved mechanisms or adaptations rather than instincts.)
Therefore, to understand the purpose (adaptive function) of the archetypes (as the psychical correlates of the instincts), we must consider Homo sapiens'
environment of evolutionary adaptedness. In addition to their interior
aspect, which is well-known from Jungian psychology, the archetypes have an
exterior aspect when they manifest in behavior, and the exterior aspect is especially
relevant as functional (purposeful, adaptive) behavior in the human
environment of evolutionary adaptedness.
Thus, instincts, understood in their evolutionary context, give us another
perspective (an exterior perspective) from which to understand the
archetypes. We can explore how these instincts have been adaptive in our
environment of evolutionary adaptedness, and we can investigate similar instincts
in related species (e.g., nonhuman primates) and how they relate
to their environments. Because a species' instincts have evolved in an environment
of evolutionary adaptedness, this is the environment in which the
function of those archetypes is easiest to understand. If we want to understand
the function of the archetypes and thereby gain a better understanding
of their structure, then we should look to the environment of evolutionary
adaptedness of Homo sapiens.
Modern humans (Homo sapiens sapiens) are believed to have evolved
about 200,000 years ago in Africa. Further, as Stevens (1993) notes, we have
spent about 99.5% of that time as hunter-gatherers, until animal husbandry
and agriculture began to appear about 10,000 years ago. In evolutionary terms
this is not much time, so genetically we are very similar to our hunter-gatherer
ancestors. That fact means that our environment of evolutionary adaptedness
and our instincts and archetypes are essentially the same as those of paleolithic
hunter-gatherers.
Based on studies of contemporary hunter-gatherer societies, Stevens
(1993) has outlined the characteristics of human society throughout most
of our history - in other words, the sort of life to which we would expect
our instincts and corresponding archetypes to be adapted. Comparisons with
closely related primate species also add to a behavioral understanding of
the instincts, which complements the interior structure described in Jungian
psychology and evident in myths and dreams. Stevens observes that huntergatherer
groups typically contain 40 - 50 interrelated individuals, of whom 6 - 
10 are adult males, 10 - 20 adult females, and the remainder juveniles. Sexual
relations are not necessarily monogamous. Such groups spend much of their
time in isolation but do encounter other similar groups from time to time,
which may lead to fighting or exogamous mating.
One of the dilemmas facing modern humans is that our contemporary
environment is very different from our environment of evolutionary adaptedness.
Therefore, the archetypes that served us well through nearly 200,000
years of hunting and gathering may not fit so well with contemporary culture
and lifestyles. As is explained later, part of the goal of individuation is to achieve a reconciliation and accommodation between our contemporary lives
and our genetic heritage, represented in the Self.
NEUROPSYCHOLOGY OF THE ARCHETYPES.
Just as the various physiological processes in our bodies are functions of our
organs as they develop in a normal environment, so human instincts and the
corresponding archetypes are rooted in the body, primarily in the brain, as it
develops in a normal environment. Although there is individual variation, the
brain's gross anatomy as well as its detailed organization are the same for all
people; so also the archetypes are common to all people, which is why we can
speak of a collective unconscious and an objective psyche.
Nevertheless, it is unlikely that we will discover a simple relationship
between the archetypes and brain structures (as is sometimes suggested by
evolutionary psychologists' use of such terms as "mental organ" or "module").
The mother archetype, for example, depends on many brain systems: perceptual,
emotional, motivational, attentional, learning and memory, and so forth.
The neural structures subserving an archetype extend through many regions
of the brain, from the brainstem to higher cortical areas. Furthermore, as Jung
emphasized in his later writings, because archetypes are dynamic structures,
not static images, we can expect different brain systems to be involved in different
phases of an archetype's activation. Eventually, with improved imaging
studies and a deeper overall understanding of the brain, we may be able to
chart all of the brain regions subserving an archetype, but that time is well
in the future. Nevertheless, in the meantime, even a partial understanding of
the neurological substrate of the archetypes will improve our understanding
of them.
It may be worthwhile to emphasize that the archetypes, even as dynamic
structures, are not fixed throughout an individual's life; that is, the dynamic
structures restructure through time according to a developmental program.
The first archetype to develop is, perhaps, a generalized parent archetype,
which soon becomes more specific as the nascent mother archetype; later,
the father archetype is differentiated, and so forth. Adolescence accelerates
development of some archetypes and causes a general reorganization of them
all. This pattern is consistent with what we know about the development of
the brain, which develops rapidly into the mid-20s, but continues to transform
itself thereafter (menopause being an obvious example). The old dogmas
about the cessation of neuron growth are slowly collapsing, and every year
brings new evidence of the brain's plasticity throughout life. So although the
archetypes (as abstract structures) are eternal and unchanging, our relationships
with them mature along with our bodies.Amiddle-agedmanexperiences
Eros differently than does an adolescent boy.
Even the developmental change in the brain that has been longest
acknowledged - neuronal death - should be understood more broadly than
"the inevitable decline of old age." We now know that programmed neuronal
death (neuronal apoptosis) is an important mechanism in the brain's selforganization
(which takes place in interaction with the environment). The
unborn infant's brain grows many more neurons than it needs, and in a competitive
process known as "neural Darwinism," it organizes, tunes, and optimizes
connections by eliminating approximately half of its neurons in a process that
begins in the final trimester and continues for several years. There is another
spurt of neural growth shortly before puberty, followed by another wave of
competitive elimination that continues well into the 20s. Clearly, neuronal
death is not always a bad thing; it may serve a useful organizational function
(rather like weeding a garden or pruning a tree), and even the gradual
neuronal loss of our adult years may serve some adaptive function. In any
case, neuronal death is apparently an inevitable part of the human life cycle,
suggesting that the corresponding changes in our relationships with the
archetypes are also a part of our life cycle - changes that lie along our paths
to individuation.
Because of genetic variation among individuals as well as differing environmental
influences during development, archetypes are experienced differently
by each of us. Nevertheless, there is overall similarity among us, which
is why we can speak of a collective unconscious comprised of the archetypes.
However, in addition to the developmental processes that I have mentioned,
it's important to keep in mind that learning extends and modulates the dynamic
processes governed by the archetypes, and in this way they may become
much more individual, that is, they may engender personal complexes.
I return to this issue later.
THE HUMAN GENOME AND THE OBJECTIVE PSYCHE.
Each individual's genotype - that is, the abstract sequence of approximately
300 million base pairs - defines that person's genetic makeup. When encoded
in the DNA of a fertilized egg, this sequence governs (in interaction with the
environment) the development of the organism, including its brain. Therefore,
the seed from which the archetypes grow, as you experience them, resides in
your genotype. Your genotype corresponds precisely to a number of approximately
180 million digits; in principle, a person genetically identical to you
could be created using this number (it has been done already for viruses).

</text>
