<text id="J37" category="" words="2010" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Odd Couple: Ending The Jordanian-Syrian &quot;Cold War&quot;" Author="Curtis R. Ryan" PublicationDate="January 1, 2006  p. 33-56" SampledFrom="Middle East Journal VOLUME 60, NO. 1, WINTER 2006" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?hid=122&sid=08ac189c-e049-4a9b-8abd-a7e1731c9a55%40sessionmgr104&vid=3">

Of all the bilateral relationships between Arab states, the Jordanian-Syrian
relationship has been among the most tumultuous. Jordanian-Syrian relations
have, more often than not, been marked by varying degrees of mutual hostility
and even violence. These periods of animosity have been so frequent that they
amounted to a local "Cold War" even in the midst of the many other conflicts in
the region. But with regime changes in both Amman and Damascus, a marked
thaw has emerged in Jordanian-Syrian relations, seemingly ending another long
period of acrimony. But this type of event has happened once before: in the late
1970s when Jordan and Syria shifted from antagonism to alliance. This article
examines both the historic and current attempts to end the Jordanian-Syrian
Cold War, so that the earlier episode may shed some light on the present and
future of Jordanian-Syrian relations.
L hroughout their histories as independent states, Jordan and Syria have had a tenuous
relationship at best, marked by temporary military alliances during wars with
Israel, but more often by varying degrees of mutual hostility. These long periods of
hostility were so extensive, in fact, that they amounted to a local "Cold War" in the
midst of the many other conflicts already operating in the region. Today, however, a
marked thaw has emerged in Jordanian-Syrian relations. The thaw began only in
1999, but within two years it had shifted already from a cold war, to a cold peace, and
then even to more meaningful cooperation and coordination. By 2001, some officials
were even talking of the potential for a full Jordanian-Syrian alliance.'
The successful ending of the Jordanian-Syrian Cold War certainly marks a new
chapter in the history of these two states' bilateral relations. But despite the long
history of acrimony between Amman and Damascus, this type of event has actually
happened once before: in the late 1970s when Jordan and Syria shifted from antagonism
to full-scale alliance. This article examines both the historic and current attempts
at bringing the Jordanian-Syrian Cold War to an end, providing an empirical
analysis of both episodes with the hope that the earlier case may shed light on the present and future of the Jordanian-Syrian relationship. This change in Jordanian-
Syrian relations marks a critical but largely unnoticed shift in the international relations
of the modem Middle East. The change is especially important in the context of
renewed violence in the region  -  from the second Intifada to the insurgency in Iraq
 -  and given the atmosphere in Washington, DC, of hostility, threats, and economic
sanctions against Syria, even as the US-Jordanian alliance seems closer than ever. In
the analysis that follows, I will first provide an overview of the history of tensions
between Jordan and Syria, before moving on to examine in tum the origins of the
1975-79 Jordanian-Syrian alliance and finally, the current warming in Jordanian-
Syrian relations since 1999.
THE JORDANIAN-SYRIAN COLD WAR.
In the 1950s and 1960s inter-Arab relations were characterized by an "Arab
Cold War."^ The Arab Cold War, usually associated with the era of Egyptian President
Gamal 'Abd al-Nasir, featured an inter-Arab struggle for power and influence between
Nasir and his Ba'thist rivals. But it also pitted conservative, pro-Western monarchies
(such as Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Jordan) against more radical, revolutionary
republics (such as Egypt, Iraq, Libya, and Syria). But even within that broad
regional dynamic, Jordan and Syria remained in many respects a classic study in
opposites, as well as in rivalry.'
Jordan under King Husayn became the classic conservative monarchy with a
foreign policy that was virulently anti-communist, moderate in its policies toward
Israel, and an ally of Western powers. Syria, in contrast, remained fiercely anticolonial
and became virtually the archetype of the revolutionary republic, led by
various colonels and generals following a succession of coups d'etat, until the 1970
coup brought Hafiz al-Asad to power. Asad changed the country's image as a coup
factory, establishing his own Ba'thist authoritarian regime and ruling until his death in 2000. While Jordan allied itself closely with the US, Syria allied itself with the
Soviet Union.
At both the global and regional levels, both countries had constructed identities
that stood in contrast to one another.'' The Hashimite Kingdom was, of course, decidedly
royalist, moderate in its foreign policy, cautious, and conservative. Syria was
anti-monarchist, more militant in its foreign policy, revolutionary, and radical. These
socially-constructed images are held even today by many participants and observers
of Middle East politics. But these remain constructs from as early as the 1950s, and
are today only partly accurate, and partly national stereotype. While still different
from one another in many significant ways, Jordan and Syria are no longer the stark
pair of opposites they once were. With major regime changes in both countries, their
policies toward one another have changed dramatically. But for most of their modern
histories, the two countries more often than not had maintained a cold war of their
own. Recriminations between the two were particularly harsh after the 1967 War,
given the sheer magnitude ofthe loss. Israel had launched a surprise attack (in its view
a preemptive strike) and within six days it had destroyed the air forces and later
defeated the armies of Egypt, Syria, and Jordan. For Syria, the 1967 defeat included
the loss of the strategic Golan Heights to Israel. For Jordan, the disaster had cost the
Hashimites all of the West Bank, including East Jemsalem, while thousands of Palestinian
refugees fled across the border into the Jordanian Kingdom.
In 1970, tensions exploded within Jordan in the form ofthe Jordanian Civil War
between the Hashimite armies of King Husayn and the guerrilla forces of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO). This bloody affair, known to Palestinian nationalists
as "Black September" and to some Jordanian nationalists as "White September,"
was not limited to Palestinian-Jordanian fighting alone. Indeed, in September 1970,
Syrian military forces crossed the Jordanian border, launching an unsuccessful invasion
of northern Jordan in support of PLO forces. The Syrian forces were eventually
defeated and turned back, but thereafter any Syrian military build-up on the border
had to be regarded in Jordan as more than a hypothetical threat.
Yet, by October 1973, Egypt and Syria had colluded in launching an attack on
Israel, later supported by the Saudi-led oil embargo, in a conflict known alternatively
as the October, Ramadan, or Yom Kippur War. Jordanian forces refused to open a
third front against Israel, but did send minimal forces to defend Syria on the Golan.
According to one of Jordan's top generals at the time, war was not an option for
Jordan, still recovering from the debacle of the 1967 War and the disastrous 1970-71
Civil War:
We lacked air defense, and sufficient numbers of troops. And in addition to
that, they [Egypt and Syria] did not choose to inform Jordan in the first place
[about the planned attack]. And they then tried to drag Jordan in, with inevitable catastrophic effects. I asked [Syrian President] Asad, why do you now
ask us? Asad argued that there were political advantages to be reaped. But I
responded that there will be no Jordan left to reap the advantages. If Syria
liberates the Golan, Egypt liberates the Sinai, then you've got a point ... We
convinced them, that if Jordan joined the battle, it would become the tnain
target of the Israelis. We were dragged into the 1967 War and we lost the West
Bank. We couldn't afford to lose the East Bank ... Asad seemed to understand
our position, but he still disagreed. But what they were facing in the Golan
and Sinai still left the vast majority of Israeli forces facing Jordan ... Anyway,
we did compromise. We did send units to the Golan. But this did not involve
direct confrontation with Israel through our lines.
The gesture may have seemed small, but it was iti the aftermath of that campaigti,
between 1975 and 1979, that Jordan and Syria would finally shift from hostility to
alliance.
By the end of the decade, however, the more familiar pattern of animosity had
returned. Thus by 1980, Jordan and Syria had de-aligned once again with extensive
saber-rattling on their mutual border. The Jordanian-Syrian Cold War had indeed
returned in full force. Throughout the 1980s, Jordan supported Iraq, while Syria
supported Iran in the eight-year long Iran-Iraq War. But beyond throwing their support
behind opposite powers in the 1990-91 Gulf War, the tensions between Jordan
and Syria also had profound domestic consequences as each intervened in the domestic
politics and stability of the other.
It remains unclear how direct a role either government played in the destabilization
that followed, but suffice it to say that each blamed the other, in particular for
subverting domestic security. The Syrian government specifically charged the Jordanians
with providing aid, support, and sanctuary to Syrian Islamists. Even Jordan's
own prime ministers do not agree on this point. Former Prime Minister Ahmad
'Ubaydat (1984-85), for example, vehemently denied that any such subversion ever
took place with support from the Jordanian government. One of his rivals, also a
former prime minister, suggested that Jordan did indeed support the Muslim Brotherhood
in Syria, but that this policy (a mistake in his view) was carried out without the
knowledge of King Husayn. Another former prime minister argued that Jordanian-
Syrian problems remained broader still, and were rooted in disregard for the other's
sovereignty and security:
They [the Syrians] have even at times claimed us as southern Syrians. Then
again, we Hashimites have at times seen them as our northern inheritance. But Syria likes to be the power. It likes its hegemony. But Jordan could never
accept this. Syria works through Lebanon or through Jordan to irritate Israel.
But we resent this. It also affects our own security.'"
Regardless of whether opponents of either regime received external support or not, in
many respects the 1980s version of the Jordanian-Syrian Cold War appeared to have
become a mukhabarat v. muiciiabarat struggle, in a sort of localized version of the
global US-Soviet Cold War and its associated espionage campaigns.
In 1990, after Iraq invaded Kuwait, Jordan and Syria took almost opposite stands
once again  -  but in each case, surprising many observers. Syria elected to join the
US-led coalition against Iraq, while Jordan attempted to mediate between the antagonists
(unsuccessfully) while calling for an inter-Arab solution rather than foreign
intervention. Jordanian policy-makers argued that Jordan's position was the defmition
of balance: neither sending troops to defend Iraq, nor joining the US-led military
coalition.  Three years after the Gulf War, in 1994, Jordan signed its peace treaty
with Israel, but more than a decade later, Israeli-Syrian relations remained coldly
hostile. Throughout these decades of policy differences and animosity, the Jordanian
and Syrian regimes differed not only on relations with Israel, but also on relations
with the PLO. One Syrian policy-maker, and sometime advisor to President Hafiz al-
Asad, emphasized this as a central factor in inter-Arab politics, but particularly so in
Jordanian-Syrian relations and rivalry. Regarding this time period, he argued that:
The nnost important factor in inter-Arab relations is each country's relationship
with the PLO. Jordan and Syria are the only two Arab states adjacent to
Israel who are eligible  -  after [Egyptian President] Sadat's visit to Jerusalem
 -  to "control" the PLO, let's say. So the question is who will exercise more
control over the PLO, Amman or Damascus?
Beyond even the causal factors, however, the Jordanian-Syrian Cold War seemed to
have developed its own tragic inertia. Indeed, beyond even policy differences, the
level of mutual suspicion and distrust between the two regimes also became deeply
personally entrenched in the persons of President Hafiz al-Asad and King Husayn.
With the passing of these two powerful antagonists, and the emergence of a new
generation of leaders, Jordan and Syria were able to make a second attempt at ending
their longstanding cold war. Thus, for decades, the prevailing trends in Jordanian-Syrian relations amounted simply to varying degrees of hostility  -  from diplomatic rifts, to political threats, to actual acts of military and civil violence.

</text>
