<text id="J43" category="" words="2048" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The gay archipelago : sexuality and nation in Indonesia " Author="Tom Boellstorff " PublicationDate="2005" SampledFrom="ebook -- PRINCETON AND OXFORD: PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS. pp. 35-39" WebAddress="http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/pageviewer-idx?c=acls;cc=acls;idno=heb04438.0001.001;seq=55;size=100;view=text;page=root">

Historical Temptations
WHO NEEDS HISTORY?
Subject positions, the topic of this book, do not always have names, but
like any aspect of culture they always have a history. They come into being
at a certain period of time, which shapes them, and they also change
through time as long as they persist. Subject positions also always contain
spatial scales within them (N. Brenner 1998; Harvey 2000). To be a "Yale
student" has a different spatial scale than to be a "New Yorker" or "Japanese." The various subject positions through which one lives at any point in time may not have isomorphic spatial scales: one's sense of self as a youth could be global, as a man local, and as a laborer national, all at the same time. Or to be a youth could be both local and global at the same time, intersecting. Thus, three crucial issues in the ethnographic investigation of subject positions are (1) their historicity (that is, the way they are shaped by their embedded notions of their own history and what counts as history); (2) their spatial scales; and (3) how they intersect with other subject positions and the histories and spatial scales of those other subject positions. This chapter focuses on the first of these issues.
Only since the 1970s or so have people in Indonesia called themselves
gay or lesbi, yet many Westerners seek a clear temporal trajectory connecting gay and lesbi with "indigenous" homosexualities. This deep-seated desire for unbroken history has many precedents in the Western tradition, most notably the Old Testament chains of "begats" that establish legitimacy through a patriline. While on rare occasions I have encountered
gay and lesbi Indonesians who share this concern with a clear temporal
trajectory, what demands explanation is that most do not. It is not a meaningful connection; for gay and lesbi Indonesians, belonging, recognition, and authenticity are legitimated not through history but by the performance of good deeds (prestasi) in the present. Since this chapter concerns the historicity of the gay and lesbi subject positions, it is built around an empty center, a McGuffin-Hitchcock's term for a plot element that is of intense interest (to Westerners, in this case) but has no content. The point is not to unearth the hidden past of gay and lesbi subjectivities, but to explore contingent contexts of homosexual desire in the archipelagoand why such "history" matters to the Western reader, where notions of the "archive" as scene of legitimation remain powerful, and archives are often mined for their content without attention to the affective assumptions embedded in their form (Derrida 1996; Stoler 2002a).
"Indonesia," after all, is a self-consciously novel concept. The postcolonial nation came into being with the proklamasi (proclamation) of Sukarno on August 17, 1945; nationalism dates back only another forty
years or so. The term "Indonesia" was coined by George W. Earl in 1850
and first used by his colleague James R. Logan that same year, but it was
not used as a political term by "natives" of the archipelago until April
1917 (Ave 1989:220; R. Jones 1973:100-103; Nagazumi 1978:28). It is
quite certain that no one in the archipelago called themselves gay or lesbi
in the year 900, 1400, 1900, or probably even 1960. Yet by the early
1980s gay and lesbi existed in the archipelago as nationally distributed
subject positions. These subject positions challenge narrativizing; their
"history" seems to be all change and no continuity. This threatens the
dualism of change (modernity) and continuity (tradition) that has been a
motif of Indonesianist historiography (Benda 1972).
This problem-"can there be a history of sexuality?"-is not unique
to Indonesia; it has been the topic of debate in scholarship on Western
sexualities. But it takes on new urgency when globalization and postcoloniality are brought into the discussion. The most careful scholarship on Western homosexualities takes continuity into consideration while foregrounding "the irreducible cultural and historical specificities of the present" (Halperin 2002:17). In a postcolonial context, it can appear that without an unbroken historical timeline one must view gay and lesbian non-Westerners as derivative, converging on a single global conception of
homosexuality.
One response to the problem of radical change accepts the premise that
an unbroken historical timeline is needed to establish authenticity. Since
the nation-state form is deeply bound up with conceptions of modernity,
the idea of tradition is a central paradox of national thinking: nationstates are young, but they imagine themselves as of great antiquity (Anderson 1983:5). Tradition is the shadow modernity casts back in time to see itself whole. Often it is postcolonial nation-states that display a particular concern with an unbroken historical timeline because this appears to bracket the colonial encounter. Although one does not assume that a Western man born in 1980 is first shaped by conceptions of homosexuality dominant in the 1920s before calling himself "gay" in 2001, this response suggests that gay and lesbian non-Westerners are first and foremost products of indigenous locality-as if the history of a person repeats, in miniature, the ostensible history of a society. This developmentalist perspective assumes that non-Western "homosexualities" like gay and lesbi originate in homosexualities and transgenderisms of the past. It makes it difficult to understand how a lesbi woman in northern Bali could say "I don't know of any cases in the past where there were actually women having sex with each other" and not find this a cause for concern.
A more theoretically informed response to the problem of radical
change questions the need for "the narrative continuity of history and
identity" (Clifford 1988:341). Can there be a subject position without a
direct historical predecessor? Is such a subject position necessarily less
authentic? How can one think historically about the gay and lesbi subject
positions without assuming that what came before is the foundation of
what comes after? Concerns for "discovering gay and lesbian history"
sometimes participate in the widespread assumption that such history always already exists; that its real or apparent absence is inevitably problematic; that its existence by definition has validating effects; and that these effects are necessary to the sexualities in question. This tempting chain of reasoning creates the desire for narrative continuity and delegitimates sexualities for whom such continuity really does not exist (and is not only waiting to be uncovered).
I am not saying that historical research on nonnormative sexualities
and genders is misguided, but that tradition is not the same thing as history and that proper historiography requires being open to a variety of
causal relationships between the past and present, including no relationship at all. There may be no "perfect path" between past and present, just as there may be no genealogical lineage between "gay" and "lesbian" sexualities in the West and non-West (Boellstorff 1999). A less reproductive and heteronormative metaphor is needed in place of the genealogical grid. One such metaphor I develop in this book is that of the archipelago.
Forging histories of nonnormative sexualities and genders outside the
West presents methodological as well as theoretical challenges. While the
barriers to historical research on homosexuality in the United States may
only "appear, at first glance, to be unusually daunting" (Chauncey
1994:365), outside the West much more than appearances are involved.
The available documentation is often so minimal that one is forced to
make do with limited sources and craft the best narrative possible (Jackson 1999a:369). Written documents by persons from the archipelago now
called "Indonesia" are primarily limited to courtly texts. These sometimes
address homosexuality and transgenderism, but not in a sustained manner; it is unclear to what extent they reflect everyday life outside royal
circles. One can often read between the lines of colonial documents to
find data concerning homosexuality and transgenderism (e.g., Proschan
2002). In Indonesia, the remarkable lack of colonial documentation on
male (and female) homosexuality underscores how Dutch civil law paid
little attention to sodomy until the end of the three-century presence of
the Dutch in the archipelago. Stoler (1995:96) notes that her own "silence on this issue and the prominent place I give to heterosexuality reflects my
long-term and failed efforts to identify any sources that do more than
assume or obliquely allude to this 'evil,' thereby making the other 'lesser' evils of concubinage and prostitution acceptable."1
This chapter examines past nonnormative sexualities and genders in
what is now called Indonesia without assuming that this past contains the
present in embryonic form. Gay and lesbi subjectivities can represent an
innovation, even a radical break, with understandings of sexuality in Indonesia and still be authentic if they are conceptualized in terms of conjunctural, "dubbed" histories of homosexual desire.
RITUAL AND DRAMA
Scholars of sexuality in what is now called Indonesia have tended to focus
on what might be called "indigenous" homosexualities and transgenderisms. The best known is probably the bissu subject position, associated
with Bugis culture in southern Sulawesi. Bissus are linked to pre-Islamic
traditions and first entered the Western written record with the visit of
Antonio de Paiva to Sulawesi in 1545. They appear in sources from the
1600s, as well as the travelogue of the "white raja" James Brooke in 1840
(Andaya 2000:41; Bleys 1995:117; Pelras 1996:56).
At present it is typically assumed that bissus are male transvestites
(Hamzah 1978:6; Pelras 1996:165-167), but female bissus appear in Bugis mythology (Pelras 1996:83), and historically the majority of bissus were apparently women (in the I La Galigo myth cycle, for instance, thirty-two of the forty original bissus were women, including We Tenriabeng, twin sister of the cycle's hero Sawerigading).2 To the present day there are women bissus (known by the terms bissu makkunrai or corecore) whose presence is required for certain rituals (Lathief 2004:48-49).
Although refraining from sex has long been a way for bissus to protect
and increase their power, and despite the fact that bissus sometimes married women, since at least the sixteenth century most bissus have been male transvestites who engage in sex with men (Pelras 1996:83).3 Following what is usually at least three years of training (Lathief 2004:43), bissus
historically engaged in a lifelong profession of guarding royal regalia and
conducting rituals for nobles, particularly for life events like childbirth
and weddings, as well as rituals for the fertility of the rice fields. In performing these activities, bissus would dress in an androgynous fashion, combining men's and women's clothing. One of the best-known bissu rituals involves trance proven through maggiri, where bissus attempt to
stab themselves with ceremonial knives (krises); if the bissus' bodies are
truly possessed by gods (dewatas), the knives will not be able to enter (Graham 2003). At present, however, this ritual is not performed by all bissu groups (for instance, it is not performed in the Bone region; Lathief 2004:75).
For several hundred years, bissu rituals coexisted with the Islamic faith
now followed by virtually all Bugis. This changed radically with the rise
of the Islamic fundamentalist movement of Kahar Muzakar in South Sulawesi in the mid-1960s. One element of this movement, "Operasi Tobat" (Operation Repent), took aim at practices considered un-Islamic, particularly bissu practices. It was also claimed that bissus were in league with the Communist Party of Indonesia, which was in the process of being eliminated by Soeharto's New Order government. Sacred regalia were burned or thrown in the sea, rituals forbidden, and bissus offered the choice of death or leaving the bissu profession, dressing and working like
"normal" men (Lathief 2004:79-80). As a warning, the head bissu of the Bone region, Sanro Makgangke, was decapitated and his head publicly displayed; many other bissus were killed as well.
Since the late 1990s there have been attempts to revitalize bissu practices. In part this reflects the refetishization of adat (traditional custom) across the archipelago in the wake of Soeharto's fall in 1998, supported by new government policies of regional autonomy. This has included the production of at least two documentary films by Westerners on bissus.
However, it appears that these attempts to revitalize bissu practices are failing.  Bissu rituals have been radically simplified (for instance, the Mappalili agrarian ritual in the Segeri region that once took forty days is now conducted in a single night), many rituals are now performed only for tourists, and the rice fields that were once given to the bissu community for income have been taken away and sold (Lathief 2004:69, 87-89, 83 -85).

</text>
