<text id="J49" category="" words="2013" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Adult Learner : The Definitive Classic in Adult Education and Human Resource Development" Author="Malcolm S. Knowles" PublicationDate="2005" SampledFrom="ebook -- Elsevier, USA pp. 1-9" WebAddress="http://lib.myilibrary.com/Open.aspx?id=100997&loc=&srch=undefined&src=0">

In the early 1970s when andragogy and the concept that adults and children learn differently was first introduced in the United States by Malcolm Knowles, the idea was groundbreaking and sparked much subsequent research and controversy. Since the earli- est days, adult educators have debated what andragogy really is. Spurred in large part by the need for a defining theory within the field of adult education, andragogy has been extensively analyzed and critiqued. It has been alternately described as a set of guidelines (Merriam, 1993), a philosophy (Pratt, 1993), a set of assumptions (Brookfield, 1986), and a theory (Knowles, 1989). The disparity of these positions is indicative of the perplexing nature of the field of adult learning; but regardless of what it is called, &amp;#8220;it is an honest attempt to focus on the learner. In this sense, it does provide an alter- native to the methodology-centered instructional design perspective  (Feur and Gerber, 1988). Merriam, in explaining the complexity and present condition of adult learning theory, offers the following: 
It is doubtful that a phenomenon as complex as adult learning will ever be explained by a single theory, model or set of principles. Instead, we have a case of the proverbial elephant being described differently depending on who is talking and on which part of the animal is examined. In the first half of this century, psychologists took the lead in explaining learning behavior; from the 1960s onward, adult educators began formulating their own ideas about adult learning and, in particular, about how it might differ from learning in childhood. Both of these approaches are still operative. Where we are headed, it seems, is toward a multi- faceted understanding of adult learning, reflecting the inherent richness and complexity of the phenomenon.
Despite years of critique, debate, and challenge, the core principles of adult learning advanced by andragogy have endured (Davenport and Davenport, 1985; Hartree, 1984; Pratt, 1988), and few adult learning scholars would disagree with the observation that Knowles ideas sparked a revolution in adult education and training (Feur and Gerber, 1988). Brookfield (1986), positing a similar view, asserts that andragogy is the single most popular idea in the education and training of adults.  Adult educators, particularly beginning ones, find these core principles invaluable in shaping the learning process to be more conducive to adults. It is beyond the scope of this introductory book to address the many dimensions of the theoretical debate raised in academic circles. Our position is that andragogy presents core principles of adult learning that in turn enable those designing and conducting adult learning to build more effective learning processes for adults. It is a transac- tional model in that it speaks to the characteristics of the learning transaction, not to the goals and aims of that transaction. As such, it is applicable to any adult learning transaction, from community education to human resource development in organizations.

Care must be taken to avoid confusing core principles of the adult learning transaction with the goals and purposes for which the learn- ing event is being conducted. They are conceptually distinct, though as a practical matter may overlap considerably. Critiques of andra- gogy point to missing elements that keep it from being a defining the- ory of the discipline of adult education (Davenport and Davenport, 1985; Grace, 1996; Hartree, 1984), not of adult learning . Grace, for example, criticizes andragogy for focusing solely on the individual and not operating from a critical social agenda or debating the rela- tionship of adult education to society. This criticism reflects the goals and purposes of adult education. Human resource developers in organizations will have a different set of goals and purposes, which andragogy does not embrace either. Community health educators may have yet another set of goals and purposes that are not embraced. Therein lies the strength of andragogy: It is a set of core adult learning principles that apply to all adult learning situations. The goals and purposes for which the learning is offered are a separate issue. Adult education (AE) professionals should develop and debate models of adult learning separately from models of the goals and purposes of their respective fields that use adult learning. Human resource development (HRD), for example, embraces organizational performance as one of its core goals, whereas adult education may focus more on individual growth. Having said that, these core principles are also incomplete in terms of learning decisions. Figure 1-1 graphically shows that andragogy is a core set of adult learning principles. The six principles of andra- gogy are (1) the learners need to know, (2) self-concept of the learner, (3) prior experience of the learner, (4) readiness to learn, (5) orientation to learning, and (6) motivation to learn. These principles are listed in the center of the model. As you shall see in this and sub- sequent chapters, there are a variety of other factors that affect adult learning in any particular situation and may cause adults to behave more or less closely to the core principles. These include individual learner and, situational differences , and goals and purposes of learning , shown in the two outer rings of the model. Andragogy works best in practice when it is adapted to fit the uniqueness of the learners and the learning situation. We see this not as a weakness of the principles, but as a strength. Their strength is that these core principles apply to all adult learning situations, as long they are considered in concert with other factors that are present in the situation. This sixth edition of The Adult Learner provides a journey from theory to practice in adult learning. Figure 1-1 provides a snapshot summary of the journey in displaying the six core adult learning principles surrounded by the context of individual and situational differences, and the goals and purposes of learning. The following chapters will reveal the substance and subtleties of this holistic model of andragogy in practice.
The first part of the book The Roots of Andragogy  presents the core principles of adult learning: andragogy. It traces the development of the theory and focuses on the core unique characteristics of adults as learners. Part 2, Advances in Adult Learning addresses the two outer rings. Chapter 7 discusses in detail the Andragogy in Practice model introduced in this chapter and discusses how to apply it in different settings. Chapter 8 discusses adult learning as practiced within human resource development. Chapter 9 focuses on new thinking about andragogy and elaborates on applying the core prin- ciples to different learners. Chapter 10 discusses new advancements in the understanding of adult learning that enable facilitators to further adapt application of the core principles. Chapter 11 summarizes these two sections by looking at the future of andragogy in the areas of research and practice. Part 3, Practice in Adult Learning, presents selected readings that elaborate on specific aspects of andragogy in practice. These include strategies to implement the core assumptions, to tailor learning to individual differences, and to implement adult learning in organizations. Of special interest are two self-assessment instruments, the Core Competency Diagnostic and Planning Guide (Chapter 16) and the Personal Adult Learning Style Inventory (Chapter 17), that enable the reader to begin a personal development journey in adult learning.
 Reflection Questions
What are your general thoughts on how humans learn? 
Based on personal experience, what key factors are related to adult learning? 
 If you understood more about how adults learn, how would you use this information? 
This is a good question. Perhaps you shouldnt. If you have no questions about the quality of learning in your organization, if you are sure its the best it can be, we suggest that you cancel your order for this book and get a refund. However, if you re a policy-level leader, a change agent, a learning specialist, or a consultant, you should seriously consider exploring learning theory. Doing so will increase your understanding of various theories and your chances for achieving your desired results. Policy-level leader may have such questions as: Are our HRD interventions based on assumptions about human nature and organizational life that are congruent with the assumptions on which our management policies are based? Is our HRD program contributing to long-run gains in our human capital, or only short-run cost reduction? Why do our HRD personnel make the decisions they do concerning priorities, activities, methods and techniques, materials, and the use of outside resources (consultants, package programs, hard- ware, software, and university courses)? Are these the best decisions? How can I assess whether or not, or to what degree, the program is producing the results I want? Managers may have all of these questions plus others, such as: Which learning theory is most appropriate for which kind of learning, or should our entire program be faithful to a single learning theory? How do I find out what learning theories are being followed by  the various consultants, package programs, and other outside resources available to us? What difference might their theoretical orientation make in our program? What are the implications of the various learning theories for our program development, selection and training of instructional personnel, administrative policies and practices, facilities, and program evaluation? Learning specialists (instructors, curriculum builders, and meth- ods, materials, and media developers) may have some of those questions in addition to the following: How can I increase my effectiveness as a learning specialist? Which techniques will be most effective for particular situations? Which learning theories are most congruent with my own view of human nature and the purpose of education? What are the implications of the various learning theories for my own role and performance? Consultants (change agents, experts, and advocates) may have some of these questions plus others, such as: Which learning theory should I advocate under what circumstances? How shall I explain the nature and consequences of the various learning theories to my clients? What are the implications of the various learning theories for total organizational development? Which learning theory is most consistent with my conception of the role of consultant? A good theory should provide explanations of phenomena as well as guidelines for action. But theories about human behavior also carry with them assumptions about human nature, the purpose of education, and desirable values. Understandably, then, a better understanding of the various learning theories will result in better decisions regarding learning experiences and more desirable outcomes.
What ia A Theory?
It seems that most writers in this field dont expressly define the term theory , but expect their readers to derive its meaning from their use of the term. Torraco (1997) informs us that a theory simply explains what a phenomenon is and how it works (p. 115). Websters Seventh New Intercollegiate Dictionary gives five definitions: (1) the analysis of a set of facts in their relation to one another; (2) the general or abstract principles of a body of fact, a science, or an art; (3) a plausible or scientifically acceptable general principle or body of principles offered to explain phenomena; (4) a hypothesis assumed for the sake of argument or investigation; (5) abstract thought. Learning theorists use all five of these definitions in one way or another, but with wide variations in their usage: Here, for example, are some definitions by usage in context. The research worker needs a set of assumptions as a starting point to guide what he/she does, to be tested by experiment, or to serve as a check on observations and insights. Without any theory, researcher activities may be as aimless and as wasteful as the early wanderings of the explorers in North America . . . knowledge of theory always aids practice. (Kidd, 1959, pp. 134) A scientist, with the desire to satisfy his/her curiosity about the facts of nature, has a predilection for ordering his/her facts into systems of laws and theories. He/she is interested not only in verified facts and relationships, but in neat and parsimonious ways of summarizing these facts. (Hilgard and Bower, 1966, pp. 1-2) Every managerial act rests on assumptions, generalizations, and hypotheses; that is to say, on theory.

</text>
