<text id="J61" category="" words="2005" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Hitchcock and Cavell" Author="RICHARD ALLEN" PublicationDate="January 1, 2006 " SampledFrom="Journal of Aesthetics & Art Criticism Winter2006, Vol. 64 Issue 1, p43-53 " WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?hid=112&sid=7e114201-8f33-4d55-bb9c-f91599640aed%40sessionmgr111&vid=3">

Stanley Cavell's philosophy and Alfred Hitchcock's
films share a distinctive feature: they are
both concerned with the relationship between
doubt and romance. Cavell is a thinker who has
forcefully articulated the idea that the narrative
of heterosexual romance is a place where philosophical
doubt or skepticism enters into the
everyday or the ordinary. For Cavell, skepticism
is the central problem that is confronted in the
lives of protagonists who seek to enter into and
sustain a relationship of intimacy, and classical
Hollywood cinema is a privileged place for
staging the relationship between heterosexual
romance and skepticism. In the history of cinema,
it is Hitchcock who has most consistently
charted the vicissitudes of romance in relationship
to the representation of doubt about what
characters within the romance and the spectator,
alongside those characters, see and hear. Furthermore,
Cavell himself has written an essay
on Hitchcock's film North by Northwest (1959)
as an exemplification of what he calls "Comedies
of Remarriage" that play a significant role in the
articulation of his philosophy.
Yet I shall argue in this essay that it is precisely
because Hitchcock's films share Cavell's
concern with the relationship between doubt
and romance that they call into question his presupposition
of the bond between skepticism and
romance, and the manner in which he uses texts
to illustrate and illuminate it. Cavell's philosophy
is based on two interrelated claims. First,
our relationship to other people and the world is
not one of knowing. This is what Cavell calls
"the truth of skepticism." Second, romantic
love and, in particular, marriage, is the place
where we best learn to live with "the truth of
skepticism," where we overcome or succumb to
its corrosive effects. Although romance in
Hitchcock's films is a place inhabited by doubt
that tests the capacity of a protagonist to understand
the true intentions of his or her romantic
partner, and the world of Hitchcock's films
from North by Northwest to Psycho (1960)
seems governed by a sense of arbitrariness and
incipient chaos, Hitchcock's films do not demonstrate
"the truth of skepticism," for the protagonists
of his works, together with the
audience, typically arrive at certainty about
what it is that they see and hear. Although the
protagonists of Hitchcock's works, and even the
audience for a time, may be uncertain about the
motivation of other characters, these doubts are
not essentially irresolvable, they do not provide
evidence of an inescapable skepticism that
informs everyday interactions. By at once making
doubt explicit and typically resolving it,
Hitchcock's films call into question Cavell's
assumption that the portrayal of romance in
popular American cinema and in Hitchcock's
films, in particular, dramatizes "the truth of
skepticism."
In suggesting that Hitchcock's films provide
a counterexample to the claims made by Cavell,
I hope to establish the broader point that
Cavell's interpretations of the works of popular culture fail to provide "evidence" for the truth
of his philosophy and, insofar as the truth of his
philosophy depends on the interpretation of
texts, that truth is open to question. Of course, I
do not expect Cavell or his followers to be persuaded
by the putative counterexample to his
philosophy provided by Hitchcock's films. For
it seems to me that Cavell's assumption that
"the truth of skepticism" is portrayed in
the vicissitudes of romance is probably an intellectual
presupposition of the kind that
Ludwig Wittgenstein after Goethe called an
Urphänomen, "a preconceived idea that takes
possession of us." By captivating the mind of
the person who adopts it, the Urphänomen is
claimed to underlie all phenomena, regardless
of anything that might count as evidence against
it. Cavell implicitly presupposes that the
explicit representation of doubt and its resolution
in texts, such as those of Hitchcock, are
secondary to the radical doubt or "the truth of
skepticism" that he perceives to underlie the
human condition and that is dramatized in the
romance. In this sense, citing Hitchcock's treatment
of doubt in romance as a counterexample
to Cavell's philosophy will do nothing to dislodge
the conviction of Cavell and his followers
in the truth of that philosophy. However, the
grounds for the truth of Cavell's philosophy
cannot be convincingly based on the interpretation
of texts, despite the appearance of "evidence"
that his discussions of texts seem to
provide, if nothing could qualify as a counterexample
to those interpretations.
CAVELL, SKEPTICISM, AND ROMANCE.
Cavell writes that skepticism "is a place, perhaps
the central secular place, in which the
human wish to deny the condition of human
existence is expressed." By skepticism, he
means the familiar philosophical argument that
"we can never know with certainty of the existence
of something; call it the external world,
and call it other minds." What is "the condition
of human existence" that human beings wish to
deny and why do they wish to deny it? Broadly
speaking, by "the condition of human existence"
Cavell seems to mean human mortality or
"finitude." The wish or impulse to deny human
mortality seems to arise out of the very fact that
to be human is to be aware of one's mortality.
For it seems, for Cavell, that human beings are
inevitably drawn to conceive of their embodied
nature as a constraint or limitation that they
seek to overcome or deny. Skepticism, for
Cavell, is thus an expression of this wish to
transcend our mortal coil. Why? The skeptic
claims that human beings possess a seemingly
direct, unmediated, and therefore indubitable
awareness of our own sensations, thoughts, and
feelings. By comparison, the external world is
known only through our perception of it. Since
in any given case we may be deceived about
what it is that we perceive - for example, we
may wrongly infer that the stick that appears
bent in the water really is bent - how can we be
sure that the external world exists? Furthermore,
since the sensations, thoughts, and feelings
of another can be inferred only through our
perception of what he or she does and says, the
existence of these sensations, thoughts, and
feelings is also subject to doubt. If we can mistakenly
infer that someone is in pain when they
are not, how can we even be sure that his or her
behavior is expressive of something called a
mind? Thus it seems that, for the skeptic, the
condition of human embodiment that makes
possible our orientation in the world and interaction
with others is experienced as a limitation
or constraint that would have to be transcended
in order to achieve certainty. Thus, for Cavell,
skepticism expresses human beings' inability to
transcend their condition of embodiment. Since
awareness of embodiment as a constraint is a
condition of being human, skepticism, for
Cavell, is itself an inevitable consequence of
the human condition. In this sense, Cavell is a
skeptic.
However, what the skeptic overlooks in his
or her pursuit of certainty is the manner that
human expressive behavior in general and the
skeptic's expressive behavior in particular are
embedded in human community. For Cavell,
what makes someone's behavior pain behavior,
as opposed to, say, the expression of pleasure or
an empty gesture, is the fact that other people
recognize and respond to that behavior as providing
criteria for the existence of pain, for
example, by expressing sympathy. Cavell calls
this recognition or response "acknowledgment."
Acknowledgment is a form of attunement with
others and characterizes the way we exist with 

others in the world in a manner that is not based
on knowing. The skeptic thus seeks to replace
the only relationship to the world and to others
that is available to him or her - attunement with
the behavior of others that recognizes or
acknowledges that behavior as human behavior
or as expressive of mind - with something else,
namely, certainty. By seeking certainty in the
existence of the other and thereby coming to
doubt that existence, the skeptic withholds his
or her response to the other; he or she refuses to
acknowledge, for example, pain behavior as
expressive. Skeptical doubt thus expresses a
failure of acknowledgment.
To withhold, or hedge, our concepts of psychological
states from a given creature on the ground that our
criteria cannot reach to the inner life of the creature,
is specifically to withhold the source of my idea that
living beings are things that feel; it is to withhold
myself, to reject my response to anything as a living
being: to blank so much as my idea of anything as
having a body.
There is not only confusion but also a tragic
pathos in the skeptic's position. The skeptic
seeks certainty in the existence of the other in
order to affirm his or her own membership in
the human community. However, by repudiating
the idea that the behavior of others is
expressive behavior, the skeptic repudiates the
conditions of his or her own existence in the
world with others that depends on the acknowledgment
by others of his or her own behavior
as expressive behavior. For it is only through
responding to the behavior of others as expressive
behavior, for example, by sympathizing
with someone who is in pain, that I call on my
own behavior to be affirmed as my behavior, as
expressive of my self. By withholding his or her
response to the other, the skeptic renders himself
or herself unknown to and isolated from the
other. The skeptic thus ends up tragically misrecognizing
the condition of human finitude,
one that is shared with others, as a condition of
isolation or of expressive silence. In so doing,
the skeptic creates the very conditions of existence
that he or she purported to derive from
reflection on those conditions of existence. Yet,
at the same time, it is this very fact that allows
the conclusion of the skeptic to be contested.
For the skeptic can be brought back from his
or her condition of skeptical isolation through
the acknowledgment that his or her response to
the human condition, however extreme, is nonetheless
a human response, that the skeptic's
behavior, too, may be acknowledged as human
behavior.
For Cavell, the drama of skeptical denial and
acknowledgment is played out most intensely in
the relationship between an individual and a
privileged other, in particular (though by no
means exclusively) the other privileged in a
romantic relationship, exemplars of which
Cavell discovers in the works of Shakespeare
and popular culture alike. The reason that
Cavell focuses on this privileged other in his
philosophy is that if I am inclined to disavow
attributing minds to human beings and hence to
disavow their humanity (their autonomy from
me) and hence my humanity (my autonomy
from them), the best case for testing my theory
would be "a given other who exemplifies all
others for me, humanity as such." This best
case then becomes at once for the skeptic the
occasion for the rejection of the humanity of
the other - their autonomy and uniqueness - 
through their metaphorical or literal annihilation
(which reciprocally entails the annihilation
of the self), as in Shakespeare's tragedies such
as Othello, and, at the same time, an occasion
for the most forceful and articulate assertion of
human possibility and renewal through the creation
of a relationship between equals, as in the
cinematic genre Cavell identifies as Comedies
of Remarriage.
Cavell characterizes the Comedy of Remarriage
in terms of a founding myth in which "[a]
running quarrel is forcing apart a pair who recognize
themselves as having known one another
forever, that is from the beginning, not just in
the past but in a period before there was a past,
before history."8 They discover sexuality at the
same time as they enter the social world, which
is a complementary discovery marked by marriage
"as if the sexual and social are to legitimize
one another." But there is trouble in the
paradise of marriage: "call it its impotence to
domesticate sexuality without discouraging it,
or its stupidity in the face of the riddle of intimacy."
Disappointment engenders a desire for
revenge in which the woman leaves the man
for a simpler soul who is a father substitute.
Archetypically, Cary Grant is traded for Ralph Bellamy.

</text>
