<text id="J62" category="" words="2008" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="MARFALAND" Author="Adam E Mendelsohn" PublicationDate="February 1, 2006 " SampledFrom="Art Monthly Feb2006, Issue 293, p13-16," WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?hid=112&sid=0197b53c-aefa-47a8-af78-43d6d63ee1c2%40sessionmgr111&vid=3">

I STILL REMEMBER THE DAY a colleague at art school told
me about Donald Judd's compound in West Texas.
Already being a fan of Judd's work, though not
knowing much about him, I had imagined it as my
friend told me: that somewhere in the desert, under
lock and key, two giant hangar-sized structures were
filled with Judd's perfectly austere, milled aluminium
objects, and that Judd himself would visit them
alone to commune with them, fantastic. I decided right then and there that I would have to
see these things for myself one day. Last year I finally had the opportunity to join the ranks of
Judd pilgrims when I went to Marfa for the opening of an exhibition by the artists Elmgreen
&amp; Dragset. Among the many wonderful discoveries I made during my time there, one of the
more bizarre ones, was the real estate feeding frenzy underway in both the one-horse town of
Marfa (population 2,500) and the surrounding counties  -  well, at least rumours of one anyway. During my brief visit, it was hard to avoid talk
along the lines of 'That one bedroom shack that was
$20,000 a few years ago is on the market for $200,000
now' or 'People in Manhattan and LA are snapping up
properties sight unseen!' Not vast sums of money compared
to east or west coast real estate prices, but certainly
worth paying attention to, given the context.
Being an amateur student of real estate, at some
point I suppose you'd have to pay attention to the evidence
that, when artists occupy depreciated or unwanted
property, money often follows. Today, some of the most
expensive real-estate in Manhattan can be found in
SoHo and Tribeca. During the late 60s however, these
neighbourhoods were neglected slums where artists
could afford to pay the dirt-cheap rents. Judd, for example,
was an early pioneer of SoHo where in 1968 he
bought a classic five-storey building at 101 Spring St for
$68,000. In London, areas such as Hackney and
Shoreditch have developed along similar lines (see
AM246). Not so long ago even blue chip real-estate markets
like the Hamptons were inexpensive alternatives for
artists who couldn't afford to summer in more fashionable
locations. And then there are the Guggenheim Bilbaos
of the world: Frank Gehry's museum was so
successful, that developers and urban planners the
world over (who refer to the phenomenon as the 'Bilbao
effect') use it as a model for revitalising economically
depressed, metropolitan communities. Like it or not,
history will tell you that art and artists attract people,
who in turn attract business.
Marfa Texas, home to Judd's sprawling museum, is a
speck of a town in the middle of nowhere. So it's a little
difficult to entertain the notion that creative people from
all over the place are moving there just so they can exist
within close proximity to the art. Founded in 1883, Marfa was little more than a watering stop on the railroad
route from El Paso to San Antonio. Legend has it
that a railroad engineer's wife named it after a character
from The Brothers Karamazov by Dostoyevsky. Originally
known as Tank Town, some 60 miles from the Mexican
border, it is set on a plateau a mile above sea level and
ringed by mountain ranges. As early as 1911 the US government
sent soldiers to Marfa in response to the Mexican
uprising. Eventually this outpost, little more than
barracks and artillery sheds, became Ft. DA Russell.
Because the land was so cheap, the site suited his purposes,
and because he loved the landscape, Judd bought
the entire site in the 70s and transformed it into the
Chinati Foundation (named after a nearby mountain
range). Judd also went on to buy up half the town, three
ranches totalling more than 40,000 acres, and the
Kingston Hot Springs near the Rio Grande  -  which
evidently had been used for 200 years by the locals until
Judd closed it to the public. It is not entirely clear when
Judd officially moved to Marfa, though many people
agree that it coincided with the divorce from his wife in
1976. During the years preceding his move, Judd had
refined his enormously influential concepts about integrating
art with the space around it: 'that the building be
useful for living and working and more importantly,
more definitely, be a space in which to install work of
mine and others'. At some point around the time of his
divorce it became clear to Judd that what he had created
at his building in SoHo was a blueprint for a larger scale
project that required more space. He had also become
disenchanted with the New York art world and the constraints
of the commercial gallery system describing it as
a 'harsh and glib situation'. And perhaps more than anything,
Judd was irritated by the distractions of life as a
famous artist. 
Many people who have moved to Marfa recently and
who are responsible for the buzzy type of attention it has
been getting, did so partly for the same reasons Judd did
and partly not. The town itself is charming enough, has
a pinkish, second empire style courthouse in the middle,
a bunch of new contemporary art galleries, a world class
bookstore, a place called the Brown Recluse where they
roast fair trade coffee beans on the premises, a hotel
where the cast of the movie Giant stayed in the 50s (the
film was shot in Valentine up the road), a restaurant, an
old wool and mohair factory stocked with John Chamberlain
sculptures, and a pizza place appropriately
named the Pizza Foundation. All of the renovations are
subdued and in keeping with the town's overall aesthetic.
The original character of Marfa, architecturally speaking,
appears well preserved if not improved. And
strolling around town there is always the palpable whiff
of authentic Americana. The most persuasive draws,
though, are the surrounding geography. The arid,
mountainous desert, the wide open spaces, the enormous
skies, the alien sunsets that make you understand
the Dan Flavin sculptures, the spectacular canopy of
stars at night, and the sense of freedom and possibility
inextricably wrapped up in romantic ideas about the
frontier West. The dramatic contrast to urban environments
is attractive. Its inaccessibility (the nearest pharmacy
is a two-hour drive) shields it, at least for the time
being, from the rest of homogenised America  -  the Wal-
Marts and the Starbucks.
The recent migration of people to Marfa is typified
by Nick Perry and his wife, both painters, who moved
from New York three years ago. 'We first came here to see the collection and really loved the town.' Perry, who
works at the Chinati Foundation as coordinator for education,
says that they both wanted a larger place to live
and work, but that the realities of being artists in NY
meant not being able to foster those type of dreams.
When asked if the town has suffered under the current
media scrutiny responsible for labelling Marfa 'The
Hamptons of Texas' or 'The Texas Palm Springs', Perry
says: 'Towns evolve. Regardless of how much the town
expands, barring sky-scrapers marring the view  -  the
collection will always be protected by its literal position
in the landscape. A lot of artists have moved here for
the landscape alone and could care less about the Chinati
Foundation.' Perry also informs me that a recording
studio is currently being built, that the town
philosophers meet at the Dairy Queen, and that the
owners of the restaurant Maya's have built a loft-style
Montessori school for the new generation of kids growing
up in Marfa.

Boyd Elder, artist, long-time collaborator with rock
band The Eagles, and sometime resident of Marfa actually
moved there before Judd did. 'When I heard Don
was moving here it was exciting. Our kids were about
the same age, and I was looking forward to having
someone around I could talk about art with. Of course,
we never talked about art, just sleazy gallery owners and
dealers in Manhattan.' Elder has long-time ties to that
part of West Texas, his great-grandfather having done
business with local ranchers. When asked if the recent
developments pose a threat, Elder says: 'It's not a danger
it's an attraction. Ballroom Marfa and the Marfa Book
Co have really contributed to the culture and increased
its intrigue. Before these kinds of people moved here,
the community was depressed. Now it's a whole conglomerate
of fascinating characters, because you know,
the extremes of living here, it's a far-fetched notion. I
believe that art creates a magnet.'
Ballroom Marfa, a non-profit gallery whose inaugural
exhibition was in October 2003, has contributed a lot to
the town's evolving identity. Its current show 'You Are
Here' features an impressive roster of mainly young,
New York artists. Founded by Virginia Leberman and
Fairfax Dorn, Ballroom is also a centre for film screenings
and music. Having moved to Marfa from Manhattan,
Dorn says: 'We thought there was space for more to
happen here ... people are getting tired of the financial
pressures and social distractions of urban life. I feel
lucky to live here.' September of this year sees Ballroom
Marfa building a semi-permanent drive-in just west of
town where MoMA New York is curating the film programme.
United Artists Ltd is also a project space that
opened its doors in October 2005. It was created by New
York-based artist Michael Phelan after he was invited to
show work at Ballroom. Similar in spirit to Andrea Zittel's
High Desert Test Sites, UAL 'is structured by a single
method: three artists and a writer are invited four
times a year to Marfa where they meet, install work, and
spend the week under one roof  -  hanging out, conversing,
exchanging ideas, and of course, drinking lots of
tequila. The first project included Carol Bove, Adam
McEwen and Seth Price. Over the course of the week
conversation included Bob Dylan, the Marfa lights, John Chamberlain's The Secret Life of Hernando Cortez, DMT
and the elves, Joan Didion, best Neil Young song, worst
artists with the best careers, and which artists' work we
would like to see under one roof.'
There seems to be a small contingent in town that
resents people who are discovering Marfa after them  - 
trespassers on their secret slice of the American dream.
Other people display a worshipful reverence for Judd, forgetting
that Judd, as magnificent as his Chinati Foundation
is, isn't the only visionary either historically or in
recent times to have utilised the desert's raw potential. A
couple of states over in Arizona for example, there's
Frank Lloyd Wright's Taliesin West, James Turrell's
Roden Crater, Paolo Soleri's Arcosanti; and Jeff Bezos,
the Amazon.com billionaire, has recently bought
239,000 acres of land north of Marfa where he intends
to build a spaceport. Artists have been flocking to places
like Taos in New Mexico for the light, the beauty, and the
lack of consumerist culture for years. Since places like
that are now dominated by wealthy retirees, it makes
sense for artists with little capital to jump at the opportunity
to get in on something before it becomes too expensive
for them. Another worry is that Marfa will become
'an artists' colony in a kitschy sort of way  -  one souvenir
shop next to another' in the words of Marianne Stockebrand,
former head of the Chinati Foundation and Judd's
lover has said. Craig Rember, the collections manager for
the Judd Institute, remarked: 'I appreciate the new developments
in Marfa and don't really see them ending soon.
Every time a new project seems to be the last big thing,
something else comes along.' It's true that some of the
locals have been squeezed out. The town's biggest
employer is border patrol (when Judd first moved there
he was the biggest employer), and most of these locals
are moving out because they can't afford to park their
land yachts in town anymore, although most people who
live in Marfa will tell you that a lot of the jacked up property
isn't actually selling.

</text>
