<text id="J74" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="A Tale of Two Bonanzas: How Knowledgeable Communities Think about Technology" Author="Edward W. Constant II" PublicationDate="2006  " SampledFrom="Technology and Culture  Vol. 47, No. 2 (Apr., 2006) (pp. 253-285)" WebAddress="http://www.jstor.org/stable/40061063">

For owners and pilots of V-tail Beechcraft Bonanzas, the fall of 1986 truly was the best of times and the worst of times. On the one hand, they were the proud possessors of arguably the most beautiful, and certainly the most widely recognized, private airplane in the world. On the other hand, the classic V-tails of their Model 35 Bonanzas had an indisputable tendency to come off at inopportune moments, with predictably untidy results. Owners of straight-tail Bonanzas were somewhat better off: neither the Model 33, the sort of frumpy, pillared, sedan version of the sexy Model 35 "hardtop," nor the stretched Model 36, the station-wagon version, had exhibited any problems with in-flight tail failure.1 How the Bonanza community-owners and pilots, their association (the American Bonanza Society [ABS]), the Beech Aircraft Corporation, and responsible regulatory agencies (the National Transportation Safety Board [NTSB] and the Federal Aviation Administration [FAA])-responded to the problem of V-tail Bonanza inflight breakups provides a nice if not terribly exceptional case study of a technological crisis and its resolution. But what makes this case different is the insight it can offer into how ordinary consumers-here, owners and pilots and prospective purchasers of these airplanes-not only participated in and responded to crisis but also thought about technology.

A lot of recent scholarship in the history of technology has moved away from traditional concerns with science, research and development, invention, innovation, engineering, and production to the social, broadly construed to include the roles of workers, users, and consumers in shaping, coconstructing, or negotiating technological artifacts and practices. Results on the whole have been salutary, but despite some marvelously imaginative uses of nonobvious data to make inferences about the thoughts and life-worlds of ordinary people, evidence for what the simple folk do or think remains sparse and to some extent suspect. It's virtually impossible to assess sample bias for populations who ordinarily leave no systematic records.

The V-tail Bonanza controversy provides a natural experiment that goes a long way toward addressing this difficulty.4 Specific variants of Model 35 (V-tail) and Model 33 (straight-tail) Bonanzas are absolutely identical in all respects save for their tail structures, while the Model 36 (also straight-tail) is very nearly identical. Ceteris paribus really holds. This fact of the matter, combined with the particular character of the used airplane market, permits the use of market and price data to make inferences about how the entire relevant community-all of the simple folk-reacted to the emerging crisis and came to credit its resolution. Bonanza owners and pilots represent a class of knowledgeable technological communities, and market data can reveal how such communities collectively attend to expertise, respond to institutionalized authority, and, most important, assess empirical evidence-how they think about technology.


The Bonanza's Tail

The Beechcraft Bonanza has been the paragon of private, single-engined airplanes for well over half a century, and has been in continuous production since 1947, longer than any other airplane, of any type, anywhere in the world, ever. Initial design of the Model 35 Bonanza began late in 1944; its first flight occurred in December 1945 and certification and first deliveries in March 1947. The Bonanza set new standards for private airplane aerodynamic cleanliness, structural integrity and strength, build quality, speed, efficiency, handling, and style, all still largely unsurpassed. When first introduced, the Model 35 Bonanza was significantly faster than any production airplane in the world with equal installed horsepower, and, among all private or commercial airplanes, notably slower only than Beechcraft's own twin-engined D18S Twin Beech, Lockheed's big and expensive L-18 Lodestar, and a handful of much larger and more powerful next-generation airliners, such as the Lockheed Constellation, just then coming into service.

The Bonanza's trademark "V" tail, which made it so distinctive, was adopted both to save weight and to reduce drag (two tail surfaces rather than three). The aircraft's flight qualities-the extraordinary lightness and harmony of its controls-were reported to have deliberately mimicked those of what fighter pilots regarded as the best-handling of the World War II fighter planes, the British Supermarine Spitfire. In building and selling the Bonanza, Beech exploited the organizational capabilities it had developed in producing and marketing the classic Twin Beech 18 (also an all-metal, stressedskin design, and itself in continuous production from 1937 to 1969), as well as capital equipment and expertise acquired during the war. The Bonanza used new, custom-developed engines, and Beech developed new, high-precision Class A production tooling in anticipation of a long production life for the airplane. They guessed right. By 1982, nearly fifteen thousand Bonanzas of all types had been built, including almost 10,400 V-tail Model 35s.

As would be expected over so long a production run, Bonanzas and their derivatives were built in a bewildering array of variants; indeed, all current Beech propeller-driven airplanes trace their lineage by one path or another back to the Bonanza. The Bonanza Model 35 itself went through eighteen major iterations, from the original of 1947 to the V35B of 1970- 82. In addition. Beech introduced the lower-priced, lower-powered, "decontented" Model 33 Debonair in 1959 to compete with the Piper Comanche (1957) and the Cessna 210 (1959), both of which offered comparable (hut slightly inferior) performance to, but were priced substantially below, the Model 35 Bonanza. The Model 33 was structurally nearly identical to the then current V-tail Model K35, except that it used a conventional cruciform tail to even further differentiate it from the more prestigious Bonanza. Similarly, Cessna's introduction of the six-seat Model 206 Stationair in 1963 induced Beech to counter (belatedly, in 1968) with a "utility" version of the Bonanza, the stretched, six-seat Model 36, which also used the Model 33's straight tail.

Initially, neither the Model 33 nor the Model 36 were market successes. People who paid Beechcraft prices didn't want "decontented" airplanes, they wanted Bonanzas. Thus the Debonair quietly became the Model E33 Bonanza in 1968. With introduction of the "long cabin" F33A in 1971, the straight-tail (F33A) and V-tail (V35B) Bonanzas became absolutely identical, except for their tails; engines, propellers, wings, fuselage structure, interiors, landing gear, standard avionics, optional equipment, and gross weights were exactly the same." The two airplanes were even priced identically new. The Model 36 had become the A36 in 1970, and likewise had been upgraded to full Bonanza "plushness." The A36, stretched 10 inches forward of the wing but identical to the F33A aft, was priced above either of the short fuselage airplanes: it offered not only six usable seats and rear cabin access through double doors, but also a higher gross weight and a larger center of gravity envelope, although at a slight performance penalty. In power and equipment, the A36 was identical to the other two airplanes, and quickly became the best-selling Bonanza. For these airplanes, ceteris paribus is the fact of the matter.14 And despite competition from Cessna, Mooney, Piper, and, latterly, France's SOCATA (Aérospatiale), the Beechcraft Bonanza remains the ne plus ultra of private, piston-engined airplanes.

CONTROVERSY AND CRISIS

In the late 1970s and early 1980s, however, it transpired that the V-tail Bonanzas had a higher rate of in-flight breakup than either of the straight-tail variants. The difference was small but statistically significant. The first overt public inkling of trouble came in an April 1979 Aviation Consumer article on private airplane Fatal In-Flight Airframe Failure Accident (FIFAFA) rates. The author, Brent Silver, claimed that National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) findings of cause for private airplane crashes, which so often came down to pilot error, could be masking structural deficiencies in the airplanes. Silver continued to deconstruct the Bonanza's tail in a February 1980 article that explicitly attacked the structural integrity of all V-tail Bonanzas and reemphasized the statistical difference in FIFAFA rates between the V-tail and straight-tail airplanes. That same spring CBS spread the bad news in a muckraking 60 Minutes segment. Response from Bonanza owners and pilots, and from Beechcraft, was swift and angry, with the president of the American Bonanza Society (ABS) reporting that "The phone at ABS Headquarters has been jumping off the wall."

Beech issued a strongly worded rebuttal on 12 June 1980, which nicely framed most of the issues that would animate the controversy for the next seven years.19 First, the statistical data was suspect. Aviation Consumer had computed FIFAFA rates using FAA estimates of hours flown per year (derived from survey data), which even the magazine acknowledged were likely wrong by at least 10 percent. For this reason, Beech chose to calculate accident rates based on total aircraft population, per aircraft rather than per estimated flight-hour. This choice also biased the numbers, but in the V-tail's favor, since it tacitly assumed that older aircraft were flown as much as newer aircraft.20 Beech looked specifically at "excessive speed" accidents, typically where the pilot had lost control of the airplane, which everyone agreed was the normal precursor to in-flight structure failure. According to Beech, between 1972 and 1979 the rate per year of excessive speed accidents as a function of airplane population was:

V-tail 0.00135

Conventional tail 0.00090

In the same period, annual rates of in-flight airframe separation at excessive speed were:

V-tail 0.00100 (55 over 8 years)

Conventional tail 0.00012 (2 over 8 years)

Annual rates of ground impact at excessive speed were:

V-tail 0.00035 (19 over 8 years)

Conventional tail 0.00078 (13 over 8 years)

With regard to excessive speed accidents overall, Beech argued, "In relation to population, the difference of 0.00045 between the V-tail and conventional tail . . . is, in the opinion of Beech engineers, accounted for by factors which are difficult to assess, such as the fact that the average age of the V-tail fleet is far greater than the average age of the conventional tail fleet, with related differences in IFR instrumentation, airframe, power plant and maintenance."

That the V-tail airplanes suffered in-flight airframe separation an order of magnitude more often than conventional-tailed ones did, but that conventional-tailed airplanes hit the ground intact more than twice as often, was more problematic. Beech offered a bizarre rationale: "In the opinion of Beech engineers, the V-tail aircraft retains full maneuverability deeper into the spectrum of flight at excessive speeds than does the conventional tail. This is not to say that the conventional tail becomes completely rigid or unmaneuverable. Rather, the conventional tail tends not to provide or retain sufficient maneuverability to avoid ground impact at excessive speeds. The V-tail does, but at the cost of imposing loads on the airframe that are beyond its design strength."

On other aspects of the issue, Beech and the critics of the V-tail were in broad agreement. As Beech pointed out, 92 percent of the excessive speed accidents occurred under IFR (instrument flight rules) conditions. Over half (52 percent) occurred after VFR-rated pilots (visual flight rules-rated, that is, not qualified to fly on instruments) flew into IFR conditions. Fully 40 percent resulted from flying into thunderstorms, which no light airplane, and not many heavy ones, could survive.

In addition to weather and pilot error, four other factors were thought to be possible causes of loss-of-control accidents. First, on the V-tail Bonanza ruddervator, balance is especially critical; as little as two ounces out of specification can result in potentially destructive ruddervator flutter. Second, deteriorated or improperly rigged control cables can have the same effect. Balance and maintenance are critical. Third, the 35-series airplanes have tight center-of-gravity limits and are particularly easy to load past their aft limit, which results in a reduction in pitch stability and makes loss of control easier. Finally, the same exquisite control lightness that makes the Bonanza such a delight to fly also makes it easy to lose control of under less than ideal circumstances, while the aerodynamic slipperiness of the airplane permits it to accelerate quickly to unsurvivable speeds. These last two factors, of course, apply equally to the F33A.

Despite these areas of agreement, the statistically robust discrepancy between V-tail and straight-tail FIFAFA rates remained: the V-tail airplanes came apart in midair fully an order of magnitude more often than otherwise identical straight-tail airplanes.

</text>
