<text id="J75" category="" words="2004" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Cite Right A Quick Guide to Citation Styles -  MLA, APA, Chicago, the Sciences, Professions, and More" Author="Charles Lipson" PublicationDate="2006 The University of Chicago Press, Chicago" SampledFrom="ebook" WebAddress="http://www.netlibrary.com/Reader/">

why cite?
There are three reasons to cite the materials you use:
To give credit to others' work and ideas, whether you agree with
them or not. When you use their words, you must give them credit
by using both quotation marks and citations.
To show readers the materials on which you base your analysis,
your narrative, or your conclusions.
To guide readers to the materials you have used so they can examine
it for themselves. Their interest might be to confirm your work,
to challenge it, or simply to explore it further.
Taken together, these citations fully disclose your sources. That's important
for academic integrity in several ways.
First, good citations parcel out credit. Some belongs to you for the
original work you did; you need to take full responsibility for it. Some
belongs to others for their words, ideas, data, drawings, or other work. You
need to acknowledge it, openly and explicitly.
Second, if you relied on others' work in order to tell your story, explain
your topic, or document your conclusions, you need to say exactly what
you used. Take a simple paper about World War I. No one writing today
learned about it firsthand.Whatwe know,we learned by reading books and
articles, by examining original documents and news reports, by listening
to oral histories, by reviewing data compiled by military historians, and
perhaps by viewing photographs or movies.When we write about the war,
then, we should say how we acquired our information. The only exception
is "commonly known information," something that everyone in the field
clearly understands and that does not require any substantiation.1 There's
no need for a footnote to prove Woodrow Wilson was actually president
of the United States. But if you referred to his speech declaring war, you
would need a proper citation. If you used his words, you'd need quotation
marks, too.
Third, your readers may want to pursue a particular issue you cover.
Citations should lead them to the right sources, whether those are books,
interviews, archival documents,Web sites, poems, or paintings. That guidance
serves several purposes. Skeptical readersmay doubt the basis for your
work or your conclusions. Others may simply want to double-check them
or do more research on the topic. Your citations should point the way.
What citations should not do is prance about, showing off your knowledge
without adding to the reader's. That's just bragging.
Beyond this question of style (and good manners), there is the basic
issue of honesty. Citations should never mislead your readers. There are
lots of ways to mislead or misdirect your readers; accurate citations avoid
them. For example, they should not imply you read books or articles when
you really didn't. They should not imply you spent days in the archives
deciphering original documents when you actually read them in an edited
book or, worse, when you "borrowed" the citation from a scholar who
did study the originals. Of course, it's fine to cite that author or an edited
collection. That's accurate. It's fine to burrow into the archives and read
the original yourself. It's dishonest, though, to write citations that only
pretend you did.
Good citations should reveal your sources, not conceal them. They
should honestly showthe research you conducted. That means they should
give credit where credit is due, disclose the materials on which you base
yourwork, and guide readers to that material so they can explore it further.
Citations like these accurately reflect your work and that of others. They
show the ground on which you stand.

the basics of citation
Acknowledging your sources is crucial to doing honest academic work.
That means citing them properly, using one of several styles. The one you
choose depends on your field, your professor's advice if you are a student,
and your own preferences.
There are three major citation styles:
Chicago (or Turabian), used in many fields
MLA, used in the humanities
APA, used in social sciences, education, engineering, and business
Several sciences have also developed their own distinctive styles:
CSE for the biological sciences
AMA for the biomedical sciences, medicine, and nursing
ACS for chemistry
AIP for physics, plus other styles for astrophysics and astronomy
AMS for mathematics and computer sciences
Legal citations are different from any of these. So are anthropology citations.
I will cover each one, providing clear directions and plenty of examples
so you won't have any trouble writing correct citations. That way, you can
concentrate on your paper, not on the type of citation you're using. I'll
cover each style separately so you can turn directly to the one you need.
Using this information, you'll be able to cite books, articles, Web sites,
films, musical performances, government documents - whatever you use
in your papers.
Why would you ever want to use different citation styles? Why can't
you just pick one and stick with it? Because different fields won't let you.
They have designed citation styles to meet their special needs, whether it's
genetics or German, and you'll just have to use them. In some sciences,
for instance, proper citations list only the author, journal, and pages. They
omit the article's title. If you did that in the humanities or social sciences,
you'd be incorrect because proper citations for those fields require the title.
Go figure.
Compare these bibliographic citations for an article of mine:
Chicago Lipson, Charles. "Why Are Some International Agreements
Informal?'' International Organization 45 (Autumn 1991):
495 - 538.
APA Lipson, C. (1991). Why are some international agreements informal?
International Organization, 45, 495 - 538.
ACS Lipson, C. Int. Org. 1991, 45, 495.
None of these is complicated, but they are different. When you leave
the chemistry lab to take a course on Shakespeare, you'll leave behind your
citation style as well as your beakers. Not to worry. For chemistry papers,
just turn to chapter 9. For Shakespeare, turn to chapter 4, which covers
MLA citations for the humanities. Both chapters include lots of examples,
presented in simple tables, so it won't be "double, double toil and trouble."
Despite their differences, all these citation styles have the same basic goals:
to identify and credit the sources you use; and
to give readers specific information so they can go to these sources
themselves, if they wish.
Fortunately, the different styles include a lot of the same information.
That means you can write down the same things as you take notes, without
worrying about what kind of citations you will ultimately use. You should
writedownthat information as soon as youstart taking notesonanewbook
or article. If you photocopy an article, write all the reference information
on the first page. If you do it first, you won't forget. You'll need it later for
citations.
How these citations will ultimately look depends on which style you
use. Chicago notes are either complete citations or shortened versions
plus a complete description in the bibliography or in a previous note.
Their name comes from their original source, The ChicagoManual of Style,
published by the University of Chicago Press. This format is sometimes
called "Turabian" after a popular book based on that style, Kate Turabian's
A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations.

If you use complete-citation notes, you might not need a bibliography
at all since the first note for each item includes all the necessary data. If you
use the shortened form, though, you definitely need a bibliography since
the notes skip vital information.
Whether you use complete-citation notes or the shortened version, you
can place them either at the bottom of each page or at the end of the document.
Footnotes and endnotes are identical, except for their placement.
Footnotes appear on the same page as the citation in the text. Endnotes are
bunched together at the end of the paper, article, chapter, or book. Word
processors give you an easy choice between the two.
MLA, APA, and the science citation styles were developed to provide
alternative ways of referencing materials. They use in-text citations such
as (Stewart 154) or (Stewart, 2004) with full information provided only in
a reference list at the end.2 Because these in-text citations are brief, they
require a full bibliography. I'll describe each style in detail and provide lots
of examples, just as I will for Chicago citations.
In case you are wondering about the initials: APA stands for the American
Psychological Association, which uses this style in its professional journals.
MLA stands for the Modern Language Association. Both styles have been
adopted well beyond their original fields. APA is widely used in the social
sciences,MLAin the humanities. Chicago citations arewidely used in both.
I will discuss the science styles (and what their initials mean) a little later.
Your department, school, or publisher may prefer one style or even
require it, or they might leave it up to you. Check on that as soon as you
begin handing in papers with citations. Why not do it consistently from
the beginning?
Tip on selecting a citation style: Check with your teachers in each class to find
out what style citations they prefer. Then use that style consistently.
Speaking of consistency . . . it's an important aspect of footnoting. Stick
with the same abbreviations, capitalizations, and don't mix styles within
a paper. It's easy to write "Volume" in one footnote, "Vol." in another,
and "vol." in a third. We all do it, and then we have to correct it. We all

abbreviate "chapter" as both "chap." and "ch." Just try your best the first
time around and then go back and fix the mistakes when you revise. That's
why they invented the search-and-replace function.
My goal here is to provide a one-stop reference so that you can handle
nearly all citation issues you'll face, regardless of which style you use and
what kinds of items you cite. For each style, I'll showyou howto cite books,
articles, unpublished papers,Web sites, and lots more. For specialized documents,
such asmusical scores or scientific preprints, I show citations only
in the fields that actually use them. Physicists often cite preprints, but they
don't cite Beethoven. The physics chapter reflects those needs. Students
in the humanities not only cite Beethoven; they cite dance performances,
plays, and poems. I have included MLA citations for all of them. In case
you need to cite something well off the beaten path, I'll explain where to
find additional information for each style.
hanging indents
One final point about shared bibliographic style. Most bibliographies - 
Chicago, MLA, APA, and some of the sciences - use a special style known
as "hanging indents." This applies only to the bibliography and not to
footnotes or endnotes. It is the opposite of regular paragraph indention,
where the first line is indented and the rest are regular length. In a hanging
indent, the first line of each citation is regular length and the rest are
indented. For example:
Rothenberg, Gunther E. "Maurice of Nassau, Gustavus Adolphus,
Raimondo Montecuccoli, and the 'Military Revolution' of
the Seventeenth Century." In Makers of Modern Strategy from
Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, edited by Peter Paret, 32 - 63.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986.
Spooner, Frank C. Risks at Sea: Amsterdam Insurance and Maritime
Europe, 1766 - 1780. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
There's a good reason for this unusual format. Hanging indents are
designed to make it easy to skim down the list of references and see the
authors' names. To remind you to use this format, I'll use it myself when
I illustrate references in the citation styles that use it. (The only ones that
don't use hanging indents are science styles with numbered citations and
legal citations. It's actually not complicated, and I'll explain it later.)

To make the authors' names stand out further, most bibliographies list
their last names first. If an author's name is repeated, however, the styles
differ.APArepeats the full name for each citation.MLAuses three hyphens,
followed by a period. Chicago uses three em dashes (that is, long dashes),
followed by a period.

Lipson, Charles. Barbecue, Cole Slaw, and Extra Hot Sauce. Midnight,
MS: Hushpuppy, 2006.
More Gumbo, Please. Thibodeaux, LA: Andouille Press, 2005.

</text>
