<text id="L10" category="" words="2013" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Murder in Little Italy" Author="Victoria Thompson" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="/">

"I mean if you put a man in jail or execute him, he might
have a family that's left to starve . . . or worse. Half the children living on the streets have a father in jail and a mother
who died after selling herself too many times. Now do you
still feel like grinning?"
"No, sir," Gino replied, properly chastened.
"Good. We're going to visit the Ruoccos. Your job is to
translate if they say anything in Italian and to help me make
sure they answer all my questions."
"Yes, sir," he said.
Gino followed him respectfully for the short distance to
Mama's Restaurant. Frank noticed the young men loitering
on the street corners. Sarah was right, they'd make sure the
Irish didn't get very far if they tried to start another riot.
None of them would meet Frank's gaze, and he walked into
Mama's unchallenged, with Gino on his heels.
The aroma of garlic and tomatoes washed over them,
making Frank's stomach clench with longing. The dining
room was starting to fill up, and Frank saw Joe and Lorenzo
moving through the room with trays held aloft, delivering
plates heaped with mouth-watering food to the diners.
"Looks like we came at a bad time," Gino observed.
"They're all busy."
"That's good," Frank pointed out. "The rest of the family won't have time to interfere when we question our suspects."
When Joe's tray was empty, he looked over to see who had
come in. The welcoming smile froze on his handsome face.
He called something to Lorenzo, who frowned when he saw
the cops. Lorenzo hurried back into the kitchen as Joe made
his way across the room to meet them.
"What do you want?" he demanded.
"We've got a few questions for some members of your
family," Frank said.
"It's suppertime. We are very busy. Come back tomorrow."
"We don't want to come back tomorrow. We want to ask
our questions right now," Frank informed him with a glare
that drained the antagonism right out of him. "Where's
Antonio?"
"In . . . in the kitchen," Joe admitted reluctantly. "He's
helping Mama."
"Tell him we need to see him." Frank glanced around the
noisy room. "And we'll need someplace private to talk to
him, unless you want everybody here to know what we're
asking him about."
Joe looked like he wanted to punch somebody, but he
said, "I'll tell him to take you upstairs. I'll get him."
The people in the restaurant were starting to notice
Frank and Gino, and the noise level in the room lessened
considerably as people stopped conversing and started whispering and staring. Frank gave them his best effort at intimidation, and soon most of them were at least pretending
to mind their own business.
"Here he comes," Gino said softly, and Frank looked
over. Antonio had come out of the kitchen, pulling off a
sauce-stained apron. He glanced around the room nervously
and found to his horror that everyone was staring at him.
Then he spotted Frank and Gino near the front door, and
paled noticeably. He motioned for them to join him at the
stairway door. By the time they got there, he'd opened the
door and started up the stairs. They followed, closing the door
decisively behind them.
Antonio stopped at the first landing on the second floor,
and led them down a short hallway into a family parlor.
"What do you want with me?" Antonio asked before they
were even in the room. "I don't know anything."
"I'm sure you know a lot of things, Antonio," Frank said,
taking stock of the room. The furniture was comfortably
shabby. A shawl hung over the back of a chair and a pair of
slippers had been left in front of the sofa. A pillow rested at
one end of the sofa, and a blanket had been folded up and
laid on top of it, as if someone had been sleeping there. "Tell
me how you met Nainsi, Antonio," Frank said.
Antonio frowned. "Why does that matter now?"
"Everything matters now," Frank snapped. "Answer my
question."
"I . . . At a dance. I used to go to the dance houses with
my brother, and I met her there."
"When was this?"
He frowned, as if trying to remember exactly. "August.
I remember because it was right after Valentina's birthday."
"That's a lie, Antonio," Frank moving toward him. "I
don't like people who lie to me."
"It's the truth, I swear," Antonio cried, his voice shrill
and his eyes wide with fright. He flinched and tried to cover
his face when Frank raised his hand, but he only used it to
push the boy down onto a chair.
"Then why did Nainsi tell her friends she met you in the
spring?"
"I don't know," he claimed, looking up at Frank in desperation. "She couldn't have told them that. I didn't even
know who she was back then."
"It's true," a voice said from the doorway behind them.
They all turned to see Maria Ruocco standing there. Frank
had thought Patrizia was the matriarch of this family, the
formidable one they'd have to outsmart, but seeing Maria
right now, he reconsidered. For such a small, plain woman,
she radiated an amazing amount of authority.
"Excuse me, Mrs. Ruocco," Frank said politely, in deference to the power he sensed in her. "But how would you
know such a thing?"
"Because Antonio never went to the dance houses before
that. Mama wouldn't allow it until . . . until Joe said it was
time he started acting like a man."
"When was Valentina's birthday?" Frank asked her.
"August fifteenth."
This didn't make sense. Nainsi's friends knew about
Antonio months before that. "Maybe he was sneaking out so
his mama didn't know," Frank suggested, giving Antonio
another glare.
"No, I swear! Maria, tell them. I never went out at night
before that."
"He would not have dared disobey Mama," Maria confirmed. "What does it matter now, anyway?"
"Because," Frank said, still respectful to her, "if Antonio
wasn't the baby's father, he had a good reason for killing
Nainsi."
"I wasn't even here when she died," Antonio reminded
him. "Joe took me to see Uncle Ugo and then . . . We were
with him all night!"
"Why did you go see Ugo?" Frank asked. "Did you want
him to get rid of your wife for you?"
"No! I mean . . . I don't know why we went. It was Joe's
idea. He said Ugo would know what to do."
"Antonio," Maria snapped.
"Thank you for your help, Mrs. Ruocco," Frank said,
moving toward her in a slightly menacing manner that
forced her to step back until she was out in the hallway.
"We'll send for you if we need you again." He closed the
door in her surprised face. Then he motioned for Gino to
come over to guard the door and turned his attention back
to Antonio.
"What did Joe want Uncle Ugo to do?" he asked when he
was standing over the boy again.
"He didn't want him to do anything," he claimed. "Joe just
told him that Nainsi had the baby and I wasn't the father."
"What did Ugo say?"
Antonio winced at the memory. "He said I was stupid to
trust a whore, and I got what I deserved. He said a lot of
things like that. I don't remember all of it. He gave me
some whiskey to drink, and we sat there for a long time,
drinking. He and Joe were talking, but I was just drinking.
I don't remember much after that. Next thing I know, I
wake up right there." He pointed at the sofa.
"That's convenient," Frank observed. "You don't remember what you did for the rest of the night?"
"No, I don't!"
"Then for all you know, you came home, went up to your
bedroom, and put a pillow over Nainsi's face and smothered
her."
"I didn't! Why would I?" he cried.
"A lot of reasons. Because you didn't like being made
a fool of by a cheap little mickey bitch. Because you didn't
like being stuck raising somebody else's bastard. Because
you didn't want a wife who'd lift her skirts for any man who
gave her a smile or bought her a drink."
The boy lunged to his feet with a roar of outrage, but
Frank grabbed his shoulders and slammed him back down
into the chair.
"Isn't that what happened?" Frank challenged. "Did she
do it for just a smile, or did she make you buy her a drink
first?"
Antonio's eyes glowed with loathing, and his handsome
face twisted with rage. "It wasn't like that!"
"Wasn't it?" Frank demanded. "Did she even tell you her
name first?"
"I knew her name!"
"Did you know she was carrying somebody else's baby?"
That stopped him cold. Frank watched the rage drain out
of him, and he was a boy again. "She said . . . she said it was
her first time."
"Of course she did."
"She said she liked me," he remembered sadly.
"Maybe she did," Frank allowed. "She was looking for a
husband, so she would have wanted somebody she could live
with."
Antonio grimaced. "She didn't like me after we got married though. She didn't even want me in her bed. She said
she was sick from the baby, and didn't want me to touch
her. She was mean to everybody else, too. Mama hated her.
Lorenzo said I never should've married her."
"No one would blame you for killing a woman like that,
Antonio," Frank said reasonably. "They'd probably throw
you a parade."
The boy's eyes filled with tears. "I wish I had killed her.
Nobody would laugh at me then. They wouldn't say I was
stupid and weak for getting tricked like that."
His shoulders started to shake and the tears ran down
his cheeks. Frank had to look away. At least he could
be pretty sure Antonio hadn't killed Nainsi. He was too
young and still too innocent to hide such a grievous sin.
He might've been too drunk to remember, but if he'd been
that drunk, he wouldn't have been able to overpower the
girl.
"Go back downstairs and tell your brother Joe to come
up to see me," Frank said in disgust.
Antonio looked at him in surprise, scrubbing the tears
from his face with his palms. "Joe? Why do you want to see
Joe?"
"Because I do. Now go get him before I decide to take
the easy way out and lock you up."
Antonio sprang to his feet and rushed out, practically
shoving Gino aside as he jerked open the door and ducked
through it. Maria Ruocco still stood in the hallway outside.
She watched Antonio race away, then turned back and came
to the doorway again.
"He didn't kill the girl," she said urgently. "He doesn't
have it in him."
"Then he doesn't have anything to worry about," Frank
said. "Mrs. Ruocco, would you answer a few questions for
me?"
She stiffened in silent resistance, but she lifted her chin
and said, "I don't know what I can tell you."
"You and your husband sleep upstairs in the room across
from where Nainsi died, don't you?"
"Yes." She folded her hands tightly at her waist, offering
nothing more.
"Did you sleep there the night Nainsi died?"
"Of course. I always sleep there."
"When was the last time you saw Nainsi?"
She frowned, her heavy brows knitting as she considered
the question. "I'm not sure. I . . . helped her with the baby
for a while . . . after Mrs. Brandt left. Mama said Nainsi
could stay until she was recovered."
"I guess Nainsi must have been upset about having to
leave with her baby," Frank suggested.
She took a moment before answering this question, too.
"No, she wasn't. She . . . she thought Mama would let her
stay. She was married to Antonio, and she thought we would
have to let her stay."

</text>
