<text id="N18" category="" words="2011" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Mustang Breaker" Author="Stephen A. Bly" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="/">

Brownie's rear rocketed straight up as if propelled from a
cannon. Develyn clamped her knees against the fender of
the saddle and fought to keep her tennis shoes in the stirrups.
When his back hooves slammed into the ground, she snatched
up a rein and yanked it to the right.
"Stop it right now!" she hollered.
Brownie spun right.
Develyn lost her left stirrup. She felt her bottom slide out
of the saddle, so she threw her body to the left. But the gelding
stopped spinning, and her over-compensation flung her over
the horse. Her flailing hands clutched the saddle horn. The
entire saddle now slipped to the left side of the horse. Develyn
clutched a handful of chocolate brown mane to keep from
hitting the dirt.
Ears tucked back, Brownie lunged forward. Develyn didn't
turn loose of the mane or the tilted saddle horn. Sharp pains
shot through her ankles as they bounced on the river rocks.
"Stop it, I said!" she cried.
Brownie bucked again, and flipped Develyn like a rag doll
over his back. Her jaw clamped as tight as her fingers. The
saddle circled back into position. Her knuckles and fingers
throbbed in pain. She bounced along backward, her heels
slamming into the dirt and rocks on every jump.
"Please, stop it," she whimpered. "I don't want to die."
Brownie slowed his bucking, but bounced down the trail
at a reckless trot.
"Bees!" Develyn groaned. "Mountain bumble bees!" With
bodies the size of a quail egg, a dozen angry bees dove on the
tail-swishing, wide rump of the quarter horse gelding.
At the first sting, Brownie ducked his head and thrashed his
rear hooves toward the Wyoming sun. At the same moment, he
spun right. Develyn slammed into the saddle, backward. She
clutched a handful of mane hair, but managed also to grip
the cantle and stay seated as the horse bolted up the trail.
The little swarm of bees reassembled just above Brownie's
rump. Develyn tossed the handful of horsehair and grabbed
the stampede string on her straw cowboy hat. Hat in hand, she
leaned back over the cantle and swatted at the bees when they
dove this time.
She batted several to the ground. The others retreated.
What am I doing? Now they'll attack me!
They lunged at her hat. With patience beyond her ten years,
she took aim again. Three bees shot back into the air like
badminton birdies.
The others veered off toward a dwarf juniper tree.
Then they were gone.
All of them.
"Whoa, Brownie!" Develyn shouted. "Whoa!"
When the horse stopped, she continued to sit backward in
the saddle. She glanced over her shoulder. "It's OK, Brownie.
You couldn't help it. I'm sorry I . . she fought to catch her
breath.
"Devy-girl!"
The yell was distant, but familiar. She stared down the dirt
trail at die boy on the galloping horse. She jammed on her
straw hat and slid the keeper up to her chin.
"What are you doin' like that, Devy-girl?" Dewayne asked.
"Like what?"
"Backward in the saddle."
"I was swatting bees."
"Bees?"
"A swarm of very large mountain bees attacked Brownie,
and I chased them off."
"I don't see any bees."
"That's because I did a good job." Develyn swung around in
the saddle and hooked her toes into the stirrups.
"Hey, I got good news, Devy-girl."
She gazed at her twin brother. "This better not be a joke or
something, because Brownie and me have lots to do."
He scratched his very short brown hair. "You don't have
anything to do but ride."
"Hah!"
"Mr. Homer came to town today and brought a paint gelding for you to ride."
"What?"
"He said he knew how disappointed you were with your
pony, so he brought you another one."
"I don't want another one."
"What? You cried and cried because you didn't get a paint
horse."
"I was younger then."
"That was just last Tuesday."
"It doesn't matter. Brownie is my horse now." She leaned
forward and patted the horse's neck.
"What am I goin' to tell Mr. Homer?"
"Tell him that me and Brownie have been through too
much already. Tell him I've made my choice, and Develyn Gail
Upton Worrell doesn't change her mind."
The pulsating intro of Brooks and Dunn singing "Go West"
opened her eyes, but it wasn't until a long black braid swished
in front of her that she remembered her location.
And her age.
"Are you ready to ride, Ms. Worrell?" Casey asked.
Develyn sat up in the plastic webbed lounge chair and shaded
the bright sun with her hand to her forehead. Sweat dribbled
down the back of her lavender T-shirt. "I think I fell asleep."
"Were you dreaming of a classroom of Indiana fifth-graders,
or living in that big headquarters house at the Quarter Circle
Diamond with your Quint?"
"I was dreaming about horses."
"That's what you always say. Are all your dreams about
horses?"
"Only the good ones."
Develyn grabbed her distressed straw cowboy hat and a bottle of water from the wooden counter that served as the cupboard and the only shelf in her log cabin. When she stepped
back outside, Casey Cree-Ryder had two horses tied to the side
of her horse trailer.
"You brought Popcorn?"
Casey patted the brown Appaloosa gelding with white
spots on his rump. "He needs some work."
"I've never seen you ride any horse but Montana Jack.
I thought you saved Popcorn just for roping."
"Maybe we'll find something to rope."
Develyn ambled over to her taupe and white skewbald
mare. "Well, My Maria . . . Popcorn has about as much chrome
as you do. What a dashing pair you make."
"Yeah," Cree-Ryder grinned, "if he hadn't been cut, just
think of what interesting foals they'd produce."
Develyn rubbed her horse's nose. "I just can't imagine
My Maria as a mama."
"Yeah, I think the same about me, but I can dream."
"What are you talking about? You'll find the perfect cowboy
one of these days."
"Dev, I don't want the perfect cowboy. The perfect cowboy
wants a perfect wife. I'll take one with a few flaws, as long as he
loves me like crazy."
"Well spoken, Miss Cree-Ryder." Develyn peered into the
back of the silver-sided horse trailer. "We can't ride horseback
to this secret place you're going to show me?"
"We could if we had three days. It's quite a few miles west
of here."
"I didn't think there was anything west of here."
Casey's dark freckles waved with the smile. "Oh, sure,
sooner or later you'd run into Idaho."
"I don't know why you have to keep it a secret."
"You'll see." Casey untied her horse, led him out and
around a big circle behind the horse trailer, then walked
him straight into the trailer. When she had his lead rope tied,
she strolled out. "Your turn. I wonder if My Maria will trailer?"
"I thought you said it would be easy."
"Easy once you get the hang of it. Just show her confidence.
Walk right in there beside her and she'll follow your lead. She
trusts you."
"Are you sure you want me to do this?" Develyn said.
"You have to learn to trailer your own horse. You can't
expect Quint to do that for you."
"You have me tethered to Quint already."
"Me? You're the one that dreams about him every night."
"I do not." Develyn untied My Maria and circled behind
the trailer. "I've never done this before."
"Yes, well, until a week ago you hadn't danced barefoot with
two dozen cowboys either. It's a season to try new things."
"Are you sure she'll follow me into the trailer?"
Casey folded her arms across the front of her sleeveless
T-shirt. "Of course."
Develyn clasped the lead rope with her right hand and
marched toward the open back door of the trailer where the
Appaloosa gelding waited.
OK, Lord, I can do this. Just hike up here . . . step into the trailer
like I've done it a thousand times before and.. .
My Maria refused to put a foot in the trailer and froze like
a Remington bronze. She tucked back her ears and snorted.
"I don't think she wants to load," Develyn called out.
"Jerk on the rope. Show her who's boss."
Jerk on the rope. Yeah, right...
Develyn tugged hard on the lead rope. The halter stretched
tight, but the horse refused to move.
"Come, girl . . . it's time to go for a ride."
"Pull harder!" Casey hollered.
With all 108 pounds, Dev flung herself forward into the
trailer.
With all 942 pounds, My Maria hurled herself backward
away from the trailer.
"Hold on!" Casey yelled.
With both hands seared by the friction of the red nylon
rope, Develyn slid across the yellow, dry Wyoming dirt like an
empty can tied to a cat's tail. When the mare stopped pulling
back, Dev sprawled across the dirt like an anchor, the lead rope
still clutched in her hand.
Casey ambled over and stared down at her. "Good."
"What's good about it?" Develyn choked.
"You held her."
"I burned my hands and got drug through the dirt."
"Yeah, it happens to me all the time."
"Is that supposed to make me feel better?"
Cree-Ryder reached down her calloused hand. "It makes me
feel better. Come on, don't just lay around, you've got a horse
to load."
Develyn struggled to her feet while Casey Cree-Ryder held
the rope.
"That was exciting, wasn't it?" Casey's thick black eyebrows
bounced with each word.
"Exciting? That's probably the tenth time in the past month
that I wasn't sure I'd live another minute."
"You braggin' or complainin'?" Casey chided.
"What I'm saying is, My Maria is now quite tiffed at me,
and she's still not in the trailer."
"Do it again."
Develyn tucked her short blonde bangs under her cowboy
hat. "You have to be kidding."
"No, really. Show her you mean it. I'll help you this time."
"Good, you lead her in and I'll stand over here and take
notes. I'm a good student."
"You aren't a student; you're a teacher. You need to know
how to show others. You had to learn how to do yard duty
when you were a rookie teacher. Now you have to learn to
trailer your own horse. You lead her, and I'll provide a little
persuasion."
"What kind of persuasion?"
"Go on . . . lead her up there. When I shout 'now,' you
pull her up next to Popcorn."
Develyn brushed the dirt off her Wrangler jeans, then
grabbed the lead rope. "Now, My Maria, I realize you don't
want to go into the trailer, but you have to anyway. Honey,
there are just some things in life one must do . .. like cleaning
out the back seat of your car after two fifth-graders barfed all
over it. It's unpleasant . . . it's unfortunate . . . but it must be
done."
When Develyn stepped up into the trailer, My Maria balked
again.
"Now!" Casey shouted.
Develyn smeared a trail of dust across her forehead and
tossed her weight into the rope as Casey landed a two-by-four
on the horse's rump.
No!
My Maria lunged back, reared up on her two hind legs, and
lifted Develyn off the ground. She swung in front of the flailing hooves like a rope-tied volleyball circling a tetherball pole.
"Hang on!" Casey shouted.
My Maria reared again.
Once more, Develyn found herself dangling in the air.
"Why? Why am I doing this?" she shouted. "You can just
shovel up my parts and bury them in a bucket."
"Hang on! Show her who's boss."
Develyn hung on.
And My Maria stopped bucking.
"You have any other great suggestions? Because if you do,
I'm not following them," Dev growled.
A short brown burro ambled up beside her.
"Oh, now you show up." Develyn fought to catch her
breath. "Uncle Henry, you need to talk to this girl. She's being
very, very rude."

</text>
