<text id="P18" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Crossroads Cafe" Author="Deborah Smith" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="/">

Crossroads, North Carolina
 
January
 
Before the accident, I never had to seduce a man in the dark. I dazzled millions in the brutal glare of kliegs on the red carpets of Hollywood, the flash of cameras at the Oscars, the sunlight on the beaches of Cannes. Beautiful women don't fear the glint of lust and judgment in men's eyes or the bitter gleam of envy in women's. Beautiful women welcome even the brightest light. Once upon a time, I had been the most beautiful woman in the world.
Now I needed the night, the darkness, the shadows.
"Put the gun down," I ordered, as I let my bra and sweatshirt fall to the ground. Behind me, a full, white moon hung in a sky of stars above the winter mountains, silhouetting Thomas and me. My breath shivered in the cold air. Beneath my bare feet, the pasture grass was brown and frosted, glistening in the moonlight. There were no other lights in our world, not the pinpoint of a lamp in some distant window, not the wink of a jet high overhead. There might be no other souls in these ancient North Carolina ridges that night. Only Thomas, and me, and the darkness inside us both.
"I'm warning you for the last time, Cathy," he said, his voice thick but firm. He wasn't a man who slurred his words, no matter how drunk he was. "Leave."
I unzipped my jeans. My hands trembled. I couldn't stop staring at the World War II pistol he held so casually, his right arm bent, the gun pointed skyward. Thomas had been a preservation architect; he respected fine craftsmanship, even when choosing a gun with which to kill himself.
Slowly I pushed my jeans down, along with my panties. The scarred skin along my right thigh prickled at the scrape of denim. I angled my right side away from the moon, trying to illuminate only the left half of my body, my face. Half of me was still perfect. But the other half ... 
I stepped out of my crumpled clothes and stood there naked, the moonlight safely behind me. The night breeze was a tongue of embarrassment, licking my scarred flesh. My hand twitched with the urge to cover my face. How badly I wanted to hide the awful parts. Thomas watched me without moving, without speaking, without breathing.
He doesn't want me. I said quietly, "Thomas, I know I'm no prize, but would you really rather kill yourself than touch me?"
Not a word, still, not a flicker of reaction. I could barely see his expression in the shadows, and wasn't sure I wanted to. Shame washed over me like a cold tide. Me, who had once preened for the world without a shred of self-doubt. I turned my back to him, trying not to shiver with defeat. "Just put the gun down. Then I'll get dressed, and we'll forget this ever happened."
I heard quick steps behind me, and before I could turn, his arms went around me from behind. His hands slid over my bare skin. I twisted my head to the pretty side but he bent his lips to the other and roughly kissed the ruined flesh. I cried with relief, and so did he. No matter what might happen to us later, I saved his life that night. And, for that one night, at least, he saved mine. Hope is in the mirror we keep inside us, love sees only what it wants to see, and beauty is in the lie of the beholder.
Sometimes, that lie is all you need to survive.
Chapter 1
   
 
Thomas
Ten Months Earlier
 
The Day of the Accident
 
It was never a good thing when I woke up at sunset on a Saturday in the back of my pickup truck in the cafe's graveled parking lot. I had a fierce hangover, and I'd spent all day snoring in a sleeping bag in the truck's rusty bed. Not long after settling in the Crossroads I'd proudly rescued the truck - a sixty-year-old Chevrolet - from a mountain junkyard. I was an architect, not a mechanic, but since my specialty had always been preservation I couldn't resist the challenge.
Admittedly, my rusty but classic Chevy deserved better than to spend its weekend nights under the cafe's giant oak trees. The trees housed a large clan of bad-ass squirrels who crapped on the truck and on me. They were now cheerfully showering the truck, and me, with rotten acorn shells as they did their spring housecleaning.
When shell fragments bounced off my forehead I opened my bleary eyes. I nearly gagged when I recognized the musky, ballsy, bad-feta-cheese scent that filled my nose. Squinting, I stared up into the face of a small, white goat. He stood beside my head, placidly chewing. Bits of black plastic fell from his lips. Like a dog enjoying a bone, he was demolishing my new cell phone.
"There goes another one," I grunted. I brushed acorns and cell phone pieces out of my beard. "Tell the concierge I have some complaints about the wake-up calls in this hotel. If the maid service doesn't improve I'll have to remove myself to the comfort of my cabin when I drink. Can't a man sleep all day in his truck without being disturbed?"
Crack. Banger, the goat, looked at me innocently as the last section of my phone disintegrated between his teeth. Fragments of the casing dribbled from his hairy white lips. I sighed. "I didn't want that phone, anyway."
If my brother would just stop sending me replacements, Banger might switch to something more nutritious, like hubcaps. John, up in Chicago, was determined to keep me from becoming a full-fledged Luddite. As long as I owned a cell phone, he thought there was a chance I might not end up writing crazed manifestos by lantern light in my cabin. Or shooting myself.
I was confident I wouldn't do the former.
Stretching carefully, I gave every body part plenty of warning that we were about to move as a team. Sour stomach, greasy eyes, aching head, stiff back. The rest of me was only thirty-eight, but after a few hours in the truck, my back always qualified for the senior-citizen discount.
A rumble filled my ears. I looked up, squinting, as a big, late-model SUV rolled past, heading for the cafe's last available parking space. Well-dressed children gaped and pointed at me from behind the SUV's windows. Mom, what's that scary-looking man doing in that scary-looking truck with that goat? A woman pivoted in the passenger seat and stared at me, then mouthed something to the kids. Don't stare. It's not polite to stare at wildly bearded mountain men who sleep with livestock. We don't want to provoke him.
Whatever she really said, it made her brood sit back quickly and look away from me. I lifted a jaunty hand and waved. Beauty, after all, is in the eye of the beholder.
My personal cache of beauty could all be found here, at The Crossroads, a small cove high in the remote mountains of western North Carolina, where an old paved road known as the Asheville Trace and an even older, unpaved road called Ruby Creek Trail intersected in front of a cluster of buildings - a former farmhouse, an old log cabin, a string of whitewashed sheds, and a pair of gas pumps under a tin awning. Grocery, gas station, post office, thrift store, diner, and more. All of it known by one name that summed up the spirit, the sustenance, and the turning points of the lives that met there.
The Crossroads Café.
I was not necessarily an upstanding citizen of the Crossroads, but I had earned the respect of the people who mattered there. Or, at least, their tolerance.
I suddenly realized my long, brown beard was wet. And also my head, and my ponytail, and my face, and, when I lifted my beard, the front of my vintage New York Giants jersey. Soaked. Someone had doused the legacy of Hall-of-Famer Lawrence Taylor. Sacrilege.
That's when I noticed the note tied to Banger's collar. Written in black marker on a piece of torn cardboard with a Dixie Crystals logo still visible on one edge, it said:
 
Thomas Mitternich,
You get your behind into my kitchen by 6:30. Cathryn is on TV then. Tour sore eyes need the sight. Don't make me come back with more water.
Love, Delta
 
Cathryn Deen. I'd never met her, but of course, I knew who she was. Everyone knew who she was. A bonafide, glamorous movie star. Not much of an actress, but what difference did that make these days? She was drop-dead gorgeous and adorably perky, her movies made fortunes, photos of her appeared every week on the covers of major magazines, she'd recently married some swaggering mogul, and now she was launching her own cosmetics line. Pygmies in the Amazon and Mongolian yak herders living in straw huts on the Russian tundra knew who she was. Even in the Crossroads, one of the most secluded mountain communities on the Eastern seaboard, people could tell you Cathryn Deen's favorite color (emerald green, like her eyes,) her favorite hobby (shopping in Paris,) and what kind of flowers (white roses flecked with 24-carat gold,) had decked the gazebo at her very expensive, very private Hawaiian wedding.
What people in the Crossroads couldn't tell you was why she never visited the farm she'd inherited from her grandmother, north of the Cove, or why she never replied to the cheerful, friendly birthday and Christmas cards sent to her by her devoted, distant cousin, Delta, owner of the cafe and unofficial mayor of the Crossroads. To me and everyone else who lived in the secluded mountain valley, Delta was a queen. To Cathryn Deen, Delta was obviously nobody.
I didn't appreciate her attitude.
Wincing, I eased out of the truck and stood up. After a polite glance in all directions, I stepped between the truck and the oak, pulled up my water-dampened jersey, unzipped my jeans, and urinated on the oak's protruding roots. "Take that," I said to the squirrels and Cathryn Deen.
Banger dropped my ruined phone and hopped down from the truck. He affectionately stomped one hard, cloven hoof on the toe of my running shoe and butted my left knee, hooking one horn through a hole in the denim and into the tender center of my kneecap. I saw stars for a minute.
When my head cleared, I scrubbed a hand over his floppy ears. "If there is a God," I told the goat, "He appointed you to be my conscience."
Carrying a fresh Giants jersey and clean briefs - when you regularly wake up in public, it's a good idea to keep a change of clothes in your truck - I limped from under the tree. The fine, crusher-run gravel of the parking lot was a delicate material, as granite goes, yet it still managed to make ear-splitting sounds.
I tried to tiptoe, but it didn't help.
A cathedral of sky and mountain opened over my head. I took a couple of reviving breaths. Evening light cloaked the Cove in soft blue shadows; the Ten Sisters Mountains, circling the Cove like the thick rim of a bread bowl, glowed gold and mint-green above filaments of silver mist. I made my way to an old church pew that served as a garden bench beside the paved road. Sinking gratefully onto the weathered chestnut wood, I exhaled. The Trace meandered past, its aged gray surface cracked and pockmarked, its fraying edges gently disappearing into low green clumps of thrift sprinkled with tiny lavender flowers.
The Asheville Trace hinted that modern horsepower could get you to Crossroads and back to civilization without packing a lunch. Coming from its namesake, Asheville, of course, the Trace wandered out of the Ten Sisters along their foothills, curled through the grassy Cove, then yawned past the cafe before its intersection with Ruby Creek Trail.

</text>
