<text id="P24" category="" words="2004" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Hazards of Hunting a Duke" Author="Julia London" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="/">

One
LONDON MARCH 1819
The Marquis of Middleton, who was the sole heir to the powerful Redford duchy, had an
air about him,
a palpable energy that exuded power and wealth. There was also the potent sexuality of a
very masculine man that was felt by most women  - and perhaps a few men. It was indeed
a potent sexuality.
The marquis, Jared Broderick, said or did nothing to provoke such feelings in others, for
in all honesty,
he was quite unaware of his remarkable power. Had someone suggested that he caused
women to feel weak at the knees with just a look, he might have laughed and
unabashedly confessed to adoring all
women, for he did. Poor women, rich women, daughters of Qual ity or commoners, he
cared not - just as long as they were completely and unapologetically female. That meant
they must have a scent of sweet
waters about them, be soft, occasionally silly, vexing, enticing, and inspiring  - both in the
boudoir and beyond.
With his darkly golden brown hair, square jaw, broad shoulders, and hazel eyes flecked
with gold, he
was considered dangerously handsome among the haute ton, the elite society of London.
He was tall and broad and lean, possessed of an athletic build. His raki sh habits had a
slightly sinister side, too, for a man who enjoyed both gaming and women was bound to
run into a spot of trouble from time to time.
Whispered rumors of a duel persisted, a duel in which he had purportedly proceeded
fearlessly and had emerged victorious.
The most recent tale of his recklessness had to do with his performance during the course
of a stag hunt
last autumn. The stag had sensed the hunters and had broken through the forest to escape.
It was said that Middleton risked his neck and that of his big bay horse to catch the stag,
leaping over rock walls,
storming through dangerous gullies and thickets, racing far ahead of the other riders. But
when Middleton had cornered the stag, he reined up, turned his mount around, and
returned to the estate. They said it
seemed as if it wasn't the hunt that mattered but the ride.
In the posh interiors of London's gentlemen's clubs, more than one man remarked that
the marquis rode
so hard that day not because he was in pursuit of a prize stag, but b ecause his own
demons were in pursuit of him.
Whatever his habits, they were routinely reported, thinly disguised, in the London
morning newspapers,
and surely none endured around the elite Mayfair district of London as well as the tales of
his exploits in
the beds of some of the most important women in town. What made these rakish tales
even more scintillating was that he was heir to one of the most powerful duchies in
England and Wales, and the thought of him siring bastards about town was cause for
great distress to his father, the current Duke of Redford.
It was well known that many lords desired that their daughters be groomed for a match
with Redford's son, and the odds -on favorite was thought to be Lady Elizabeth
Robertson. Lady Elizabeth's father w as
a dear boyhood friend of the duke's, and it was agreed by all wagging tongues that her
pedigree for becoming a duchess was unparalleled.
What the gossips didn't know, however, was that the marquis and the duke had engaged
in many loud arguments about L ady Elizabeth in which the marquis had steadfastly
refused to entertain the idea of a match with her and the duke insisted he would approve
of no other match.
It was, in fact, another on dit in this morning's newspaper that had prompted the duke to
summon the marquis like a servant once again.
Jared came, but he sat carelessly as his father paced. The duke was gripping the latest
edition of the
Times in his hand, too angry to speak for several moments. " 'A certain widow,' " he
read, and threw the paper down as he pinned Jared with a cold glare. "I know very well to
whom they allude - everyone in
town knows of your affair with Lady Waterstone."
Jared shrugged. So he'd been visiting the widow's bed  - he was a man, and he'd
developed a certain corporeal fondness for Miranda, Lady Waterstone.
"Have you no care for your reputation? What if Lady Elizabeth should read this?" the
duke asked him through gritted teeth.
"What if she should?" Jared responded irreverently. He owed no measure to Lady
Elizabeth that he
could see, and frankly, if his father was so keen to see the woman married, Jared thought,
perhaps he, a widower for many years, should do the marrying. Jared was completely
unrepentant about his refusal  - 
he thought nothing of living every day as if it were his last, and no fatherly desire to see
him wed a woman with the face of a horse would keep him from it.
But as Jared's refusal became more entrenched, the greater umbrage his father took with
him, today notwithstanding. "I have suffered the indignity of hearing of your association
with this woman at my club
 - and now I must read it as well?"
"I am not responsible for what is printed," Jared said.
The duke's face turned dark. "Yet you are responsible for the contemptible behavior that
ignites such rubbish to be printed, are you not? I demand that you not debase our name
and title with the likes of that woman, do you quite understand me? You w ill not lie with
a harlot who married above herself," he
snapped. "Now that she is widowed, she would sink her talons in the heir to the Redford
title, and I will
not have it! Lady Elizabeth is perfectly suited to carry a legitimate heir, and as soon as is
possible within
the bounds of propriety!"
Jared bristled with indignation. "Is that all that I am, your grace? Breeding stock for your
vast realm of influence?"
His father's dark brown eyes narrowed. "You are vile."
"Very well," Jared said, quietly seething, "if the price for having been born to your
exalted house is to produce a bloody heir, I shall do so. But I shall do so at my leisure and
with whom I please."
"You will not produce an heir with whomever you please !" his father thundered. "There
is much more at stake here than your lustful cravings! I should think you would have
learned as much from the ugly consequences of your previous libertine habits!" he said,
piercing old wounds. "I warn you, Lord Middleton, i f you think to dishonor me further, I
will see you disinherited by order of the king!"
Jared threw his arms wide with a shout of incredulous laughter. "By all means, my lord! I
will not stop you - I would welcome it, for at least I'd be free of the yoke you have put
on me!" He meant that
sincerely. Granted, he'd made his fair share of mistakes  - but so had the duke. Let him
disinherit - Jared was a marquis in his own right; he had no need of the title of duke and
frankly, he did not want it.
But his father suddenly sank into his ornate mahogany chair behind an even grander desk
and covered his face with his thin hands for a moment. "For the love of Christ, Jared," he
said, his voice hoarse. "For the love of Christ, please do as I ask." He lifted his head from
his hands and looked at his son. "You cannot forget that our family was once steeped in
debauchery and made bed with whores and bastards. It took years for our name to be
recognized by the monarchy. For you to debase that good name now with your
slut is unconscionable. Marry a woman of proper standing and put a son in her, then
whore with whomever you please!"
"Just as you did?" Jared asked evenly.
The duke paled. He leaned back in his chair, gripped the edge of his desk, every muscle
in his body quivering with rage. "Get out of my sight," he said quietly.
Jared gained his feet. "Your grace," he said with a nod, and strode out of the massive
town house on
Park Lane bound for White's, desperately angry with his father, and even angrier with the
two footmen who had been ordered to follow him.
All his life, he had chafed under the absurdity of his supposed responsibility. His was a
dishearteningly simple and primal function  - he was breeding stock to the ducal
Redfords, valued for nothing more than
his ability to procreate. Honestly, he really remembered little else from his childhood,
particularly after his mother had died in his fourteenth year. His memory of her was
fading, and he could scarcely recall her softness, or the warmth of her breath, or the smell
of lilacs on her skin. He remembered that she would
laugh when she was with him, but in truth, he saw her only occasionally. His parents
resided in London or
the country, wherever his father's mistress resided.
Jared, on the other hand, resided elsewhere , with the nursemaids and governesses and
tutors who would sculpt him to be a duke one day.
Even when he'd gone off to school, his acquaintances were closely watched, his
schooling carefully monitored. He never felt close to anyone, really, save his two g ood
friends, Lords Stanhope and Harrison, who had been schooled alongside him.
The talk of producing an heir began the moment he'd come of age, the demands growing
louder each passing year. Now, on the eve of his thirtieth birthday, the demands were
deafening.
More than once Jared had wished he'd been born the son of a crofter, a merchant, a
banker - any occupation his father might have esteemed above his cock. But he'd been
born the son of a duke, and from the time he could remember, his father had sought to
control his destiny, whom he befriended,
whom he loved.
As a result, Jared loved no one.
He made his way to White's, the gentlemen's club to which he belonged, and moped
about, refusing to even hold a hand in a game of whist when his friends pressed him.
When the game ended, his oldest
friend, Geoffrey Godwin, Viscount Harrison, insisted he accompany him to the Fontaine
ball. "I can't let you drink alone," he'd said, clapping Jared on the back. "You may very
well harm someone."
"I don't want to go to any blo ody ball," Jared muttered. "I despise the vapidity of the
social season. It's scarcely begun and already there is a parade of debutantes and their
mothers before me, all hungry for a spectacular match and unparalleled fortune."
"Oh now, don't be so harsh on the poor birds and their mothers," Harrison said, touching
Jared's glass with his before swallowing the last of his whiskey. "Don't let the fathers off
so easily - there is nothing
more bloody stilted than the conversation of a man with an unmarried daugh ter."
"Ach," William Danvers, Lord Stanhope scoffed, waving a hand at them. "Walk in my
shoes, will you?
Have your fortune entailed for generations to come so that you must be the one to hope
for a spectacular match with a woman of unparalleled fortune."
"Impossible," Jared snorted. "Women don't have fortunes  - men do."
"That, sir, is precisely my problem," Stanhope said, and with a sound of disgust, pushed a
hand through
his blond hair.
"Come on, then," Harrison said. "Stanhope is headed for the gami ng hells to increase his
paltry fortune. But I have it on good authority that there will be a high -stakes table at the
Fontaine ball for the wealthy gentlemen who do not enjoy dancing."
Jared glanced at Harrison. "High -stakes?"
"Very high-stakes," Harrison confirmed with a smile.
Jared shrugged. "I would prefer the warmth of Miranda's body to a damn card game."
"But Miranda is not about, she is in the country.

</text>
