<text id="P29" category="" words="2009" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Highland Barbarian" Author="Hannah Howell" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="/">

He grinned, quickly shed all his clothes, and climbed in beside her. Taking her into his arms, he savored the feel of her soft warmth pressed close to his body and sighed with satisfaction.

"This is where ye belong, lass. This is how it should always be."

There was such sincerity in his voice, she knew she could trust in this. Artan wanted to be in her arms at night. At the end of the day, he wanted to be able to curl up with her beneath the blankets. It was a start.

Although she now held fast to a wariness that would be slow to leave her, she was willing to try again. He was right to remind her that few of their ilk married just because they wanted to. Lands, alliances, and coin were always involved. She found that she did believe that Artan would not marry her for gain alone, and she told herself she should count her blessings. No matter how she felt, there was one fact she could not argue: He was her husband and she belonged in his bed, not greeting him at the bedchamber door with ewers and rocks hurled at his head. Many another husband would feel that reason enough to beat her.

Wrapping her arms around his neck, she kissed him. Even though they had slept apart for only two nights, Cecily quickly found out that she was starved for the taste of him. He acted as if he was equally starved for the taste of her. He pushed her onto her back and crouched over her, studying her body intently as he smoothed his hands over her. She felt as if he was reacquainting himself with her body, and that only stirred her blood even more.

Their lovemaking soon grew wild, each of them acting as if they had been deprived of the other for months instead of just two nights. When they finally came together the ride was fast and furious, their cries blending in the room as they reached the heights together. The way Artan collapsed on top of her and slightly to the side so that he did not put his full weight on her made him appear to be as boneless as she felt.

"Now, do ye really think it was only Glascreag that I was thinking of when I married ye?" Artan asked as he inched his head over and let it rest more comfortably on her breasts. "I missed my pillows," he murmured. Cecily smiled and idly ran her hand up and down his back. "Nay, I guess there were one or two other things on your mind." She frowned up at the ceiling. "'Tis odd how that happened. I had ne'er e'en been properly kissed, and yet within four days of meeting ye I am creeping out of the keep and meeting ye down at the burn."

"Ah, fine as that was, mayhap we shouldnae speak of it."

"Why not?"

"Weel, I have just gotten ye to stop hurling things at me, I am nay sure I want ye to think too much on the other time ye were angry with me."

Smiling, she kissed the top of his head. "I didnae believe ye, so of course I was angry when ye tied me up and carried me away from my home. E'en before Sir Fergus confirmed all ye had said, I had begun to believe at least some of it. I also felt sure that ye believed it all, and how could I fault ye when ye truly felt ye were keeping me safe."

"I didnae do such a grand job of it, did I. The bastard got hold of ye."

She shrugged. "And ye rescued me. What I was trying to say is that complete innocence didnae save me from ye. It or this, whatever it is, was there from the start."

"Good. I was eager from the start, too."

She giggled when he briskly nuzzled her breasts, but then sighed. "He is going to come here after me, isnae he?"

"I suspicion he will, aye. There is a heavy purse he is hungering for."

"So I will be bringing trouble right to my uncle's gates."

"It has been there before."

"Aye, but that wasnae my trouble."

"And neither is this." Artan raised himself up on his elbows and kissed her. "This is all about greed. Sir Fergus's greed. Ye didnae ask to be betrothed to the fool. Nay, everyone involved in this is just tossing ye about to get what they want."

"Ye do ken how to make a lass feel so much better about things," she drawled.

Artan gave her an exaggerated grimace. "Sorry."

"No need to be. It is just the truth."

"Why do I have the feeling that, in some ways, ye have included me in that number."

Cecily knew her face revealed the sudden guilt she felt. "I dinnae want to and I certainly dinnae think of ye as akin to them. 'Tis just that discovering I have been surrounded by lies and deceit for so long and didnae have the wit to see it has made me question everything."

"As it should." He smiled when she looked at him in surprise. "I take no insult, lass. 'Tis my own fault that I dinnae have your full trust. Nay, I am just made determined to see that ye come to trust me again."

That should not make her nervous, Cecily told herself; then Artan kissed her and she found it hard to think. The fact that he could do that to her was one reason she knew she ought to be cautious. But as she wrapped her arms around him, she decided that in this there was some truth. He could no more hide his desire than she could, and although they were still new lovers, she had already learned that she had as much power over him as he did over her.
Chapter 15

Artan held Cecily closer, nuzzled her neck, and tried to ignore the banging on the bedchamber door. He had Cecily back where she belonged and he was eager for some morning delight. He slid his hand up her ribs and caressed her breast, grinning when she murmured huskily and rubbed her lovely backside against his groin. This was how a man should always greet the new day.

"Curse it, Artan!" yelled Bennet. "Get your arse out of bed! They are here!"

It took Artan a minute to understand the importance of that statement. Then, with a curse, he leaped out of bed and started to dress. A quick glance at the bed revealed that Cecily had already gotten out of bed and donned her shift. She looked pale and a little frightened and he tried to think of something comforting to say as he finished dressing.

"Does he have any Highlanders with him?" he asked Bennet, waiting until Cecily had her gown on before he opened the door.

"The MacIvors," Bennet answered even as Artan opened the door.

Cursing softly, Artan buckled on his sword. When Cecily stepped up beside him, he yanked her into his arms and kissed her. The fact that Sir Fergus had ruined his morning pleasure only made Artan even more eager to kill the fool. He set Cecily away from him, saw the fear still lingering in her eyes, and lightly stroked her cheek with his fingers.

"The MacIvors are enemies of Angus's?" she asked.

"Aye," replied Artan, "but Sir Fergus willnae find them verra good allies. They dinnae truly hate Angus, ye ken, but they do covet Glascreag. I suspicion they think they might use these Lowlanders to help them get these lands."

"They will soon find out they have made a verra poor choice," said Bennet.

"Aye, that they will. Do ye ken who Crooked Cat is, lass?"

Cecily nodded, "Angus has introduced me to nearly everyone in the keep."

"Go to her. She is the one who will be readying the women to do their part."

"Aye, I will find her. Ye will be careful, willnae ye, Artan?" she asked softly, fighting the urge to cling to him.

"Wheesht, this wee scuffle will be o'er and done ere the sun sets." He gave her a quick, hard kiss and strode out of the room to make his way to the walls with Bennet.

As Cecily finished dressing and braided her hair, she told herself to be brave. Artan was a warrior. It was why Angus wanted him to follow him as laird of Glascreag. The wife of a warrior had to be strong and support her husband, not weigh him down with tears and fear. She could not give in to the urge to crawl beneath the bedcovers and pray until the fighting was over. Cecily was determined not to shame Artan with any show of weakness.

She found Crooked Cat in the kitchens barking out orders to the women gathered there. It took a moment for the old woman to see that Cecily was standing there. After she looked Cecily over carefully, her rheumy eyes surprisingly sharp, she ordered Cecily to a table set in the far corner of the kitchen.

"Ye are to cut these into bandages," she ordered, setting a pile of old linens on the table along with a very sharp knife. "And when ye are done with these I have some herbs for ye to grind up."

"Are ye sure this is all ye wish me to do?" It was not a very exacting chore, not something Cecily thought a warrior's wife should do.

Crooked Cat leaned closer and lightly patted Cecily's cheek with her somewhat gnarled, calloused hand. "Ye are a new wife, lassie."

"Aye," she agreed, unable to hide her confusion, "although I dinnae ken why that matters."

"It matters. Ye havenae been hardened to the way of it all yet."

"Oh." She sighed. "I am nay sure I will e'er be hardened to the fact that men seem compelled to swing swords at each other."

The old woman laughed. "Aye, fools that they are, but e'en if they set down their swords, some other fools would quickly pick them up and probably take a swing at the ones who put them down. Our men do it to protect Glascreag and us, and that is no small thing, aye?"

"Aye," Cecily agreed and picked up some of the linen. "I will do this then, but I do have a skill at healing, ye ken. 'Tis the one thing I was taught to do and I am good at it."

After glancing around to make sure everyone was doing as they had been told, Crooked Cat looked back at Cecily and asked, "What do ye mean it was the only thing ye were taught?"

"My guardians didnae really teach me how to run a household for reasons I am nay sure I will e'er be told or understand. Howbeit, Lady Anabel considered the healing arts a lowly thing, fit only for peasants to learn."

"Ah, I see. She thought to shame ye."

Cecily found she could actually smile about it. "Aye, so I was always verra careful to ne'er let her ken how much I enjoyed it all. So, if ye need help tending to any wounds - "

"I will send for ye right quick."

After the woman hurried away, Cecily began to cut the linen into strips fit for bandages. At the moment, tucked away in the corner of the kitchens was probably the best place for her. It meant she could not see the men preparing for battle or see what force confronted them. She had told Crooked Cat the truth. She doubted she would ever be truly hardened to the fact that Artan would be facing men who sought to kill him, now and all the other times he might have to go to battle. She could only pray that she could hide her fear and thank God that Angus had taught him well.

</text>
