<text id="A02" category="" words="2017" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'RELATIVES' VICTIM-IMPACT STATEMENTS WILL BE LIMITED.' The Boston Globe, 29 September 2006, B4; 'PATRICK'S CANDOR GAP.' The Boston Globe, 29 September 2006, B1; 'SPECIALISTS URGE US TO FOCUS ON SOMALI STRIFE.' The Boston Globe, 28 September 2006, A3" Author="Megan Tench; BRIAN MCGRORY; John Donnelly" PublicationDate="29 September 2006; 29 September 2006; 28 September 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All" WebAddress="Factiva">

Diane Mattera wants to look nightclub owners Michael and Jeffrey Derderian in the eye and describe what her family lost when her daughter Tammy was killed in the The Station nightclub blaze that left 100 people dead 3 1/2 years ago. She wants the judge and the attorney general to know how outraged she was last week when she heard about the Derderians' plea deal, which she described as "shocking" and "lenient."
The grieving mother also wants the survivors, many of whom were badly burned and disfigured, to have their say in court at today's sentencing hearing.
But she won't be allowed any of that at today's sentencing hearing in Warwick, R.I.
Strict legal guidelines governing the proceedings prohibit addressing the defendants or offering opinions about the sentencing and allow only one representative for each person lost in the fire to make statements to the court. No pictures, placards, or other displays will be allowed inside the courtroom.
"It's been a very long and horrible week trying to write an impact statement that will have no impact," Mattera said yesterday.
Mattera will be among the crowd of victims' families, survivors, and supporters packing the small courtroom, hallways, and overflow rooms, as the Derderians each plead no contest to 100 counts of involuntary manslaughter today. Twenty-five relatives of victims have requested to read impact statements, which some said will include protests over the surprise plea agreement, despite the rules. The statements will be limited in length to five to eight minutes.
Other relatives of victims say they wrote a letter to the judge instead of facing the crowds and crush of media.
"Emotionally I feel like I've been hit by a tank," said Charles Sweet of Pembroke, whose son Shawn, 28, died in the blaze.
Sweet said he had little faith that the court will hear their voices. "I wrote an impact statement about how my wife and I feel. It'll probably be thrown in the rubbish."
In a letter sent to families last week, Superior Court Judge Francis J. Darigan Jr. said he will sentence Michael Derderian to four years in prison and spare Jeffrey Derderian jail time through a suspended sentence and 500 hours of community service. The sentence will mark an end to the criminal case stemming from the Feb. 20, 2003 fire, which started after pyrotechnics were ignited and flames tore through the soundproofing foam the Derderians had installed throughout the club.
The pyrotechnics were ignited by rock band Great White's manager, Daniel M. Biechele, who was sentenced in May to four years in prison after an emotional three-day hearing in which relatives of nearly half those killed either spoke or had their statements read aloud.
To prepare for the scores of survivors, relatives, and supporters expected to arrive at 8:30 a.m. today, court officials have added extra safety precautions, said Craig Berke, courthouse spokesman.
The proceedings, which will be broadcast live on Court TV and local stations, will begin at 9:30 a.m. with opening remarks by Darigan.
Karen Lapierre of Oxford wrote the impact statement her husband, Richard, will read at the hearing. The couple lost their son, Keith, 29, in the fire.
"As far as I'm concerned the judgment is out of our hands," she said. "When everybody is out there crying for blood, crying for vengeance, I just want to say that it is not our place to judge. When the time comes, and we are all judged, they will be held accountable."
After the statements are read, the judge will hear the defendants change their plea, then hear statements from the prosecution, defense, and defendants before handing down the sentence. If the hearing does not conclude today, it will be continued Tuesday.


Sorry, Deval, but the holier-than-thou act isn't going to cut it very long in the main draw of the gubernatorial campaign.
Deval Patrick was asked a few questions at a news conference this week that he apparently didn't like fair questions, the first and foremost being: You knocked Mitt Romney for raising $700 million in fees to balance the budget, so what would you have done instead?
His answer? He didn't. Rather, he ducked and dodged. And then he snapped at the reporter who had the audacity to be curious, "I'm not talking about government back in 2003; I'm talking about today." As questions continued, he abruptly stalked off the stage.
Now I'm sure that all his sandal- wearing, Volvo-driving acolytes from Newton and Lexington believe that their candidate has no obligation to offer specifics, just as they swoon every time he talks about collaboration in government and finding a better way.
But I'm guessing there are an awful lot of regular people who might be a little bit interested in knowing how Patrick would have bridged that yawning deficit of a few years ago, especially if he wasn't going to raise fees. And what they got was the back of his head.
Let's assume that he had to use the men's room in a hurry and by the time he got back, all the reporters were gone. So I called the campaign yesterday to give them another chance.
Campaign spokesman Richard Chacon patiently explained that everyone was missing the point, which is always a bad sign.
"The main point is that he thinks it's disingenuous for Kerry Healey and Mitt Romney to present themselves as tax-cutters when over the last four years, taxes and fees have risen significantly," Chacon said. "He was just calling for them to be honest."
I see. But back in April, Patrick released a written statement, covered in the Globe, in which he said Romney's fee hikes were "fiscally irresponsible."
So we're back where we started. If the hikes were irresponsible, and maybe they were, what would he have done instead?
To that, I got an e-mailed statement that, among other things, said, "A Patrick- Murray administration would have worked to increase efficiency and cut costs in state government."
Aha! Make state government more efficient! Press palm to forehead, please. Why hasn't anyone ever thought of this before? Every other governor in America is going to turn green with envy when they hear about this incredible plan.
The truth is, Deval Patrick may well make a good governor. He's certainly a charismatic figure with an inspiring personal story and a nuclear resume. But his campaign is heavy on the fuzzy rhetoric about new styles of leadership and light in the nuts and bolts of how exactly he might get things done.
During the primary, it was pointed out that Patrick was for the Public Safety Act of 2006, even as Patrick purported to be against specific provisions contained within it. Patrick seems to be for MCAS testing, but not entirely. He's against Romney's fee hikes, but won't say how he'd do things any different.
Sir, there's a Senator John Kerry on Line 3 commending your ability to be clear on the issues.
That little spat this week nags at something else as well. Many months ago, Patrick was the dynamic new voice in the state, passionate and matter-of-fact at the same time. He could walk into a room of activists or downtown leaders and answer nearly every question they had. If he couldn't, he'd say it up front.
These days, he seems so relentlessly on message that his words are getting the ring of scripted pap. He carries the veneer of spontaneity, but too little of the accompanying candor.
Maybe his advisers are telling him he doesn't have to answer questions, doesn't have to get specific to beat Healey. But they're woefully wrong.
Deval Patrick may well be no ordinary leader. But unless he levels with voters, he won't be given the chance to be any leader at all.



WASHINGTON Africa specialists criticized the Bush administration yesterday for not paying more attention to the increasingly volatile situation in Somalia, saying that senior officials were consumed by their efforts to stop the fighting in the Darfur region of Sudan.
In Somalia, Islamist militias have taken one town after another in the south-central part of the fractured nation since capturing the de facto capital Mogadishu in June. Now, they appear poised to attack the small town of Baidoa near the country's western border with Ethiopia.
Baidoa is the base of the increasingly powerless Somali transitional federal government, which is backed by the United States and Ethiopia. Analysts predict that if the Islamists attack the town, which appears likely, the conflict could evolve into a wider war with Ethiopia.
"We're completely distracted by Sudan," said J. Stephen Morrison, director of the Africa program at the Center for Strategic &amp; International Studies and a State Department official during the Clinton administration. "We should be engaging the Islamists . . . and find out what their intentions are."
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice yesterday delivered a major speech on Sudan before the Africa Society of the National Summit on Africa, calling on the government in Khartoum to end hostilities immediately and unconditionally accept a UN peacekeeping force. The fighting in Darfur has led to the deaths of several hundred thousand people and displacing an estimated 2.5 million people since 2002.
Rice talked about Somalia only in response to a question from Melvin P. Foote, president of Constituency for Africa, a Washington- based advocacy group, who asked what the administration was doing about problems in nearby Somalia, Ethiopia, and Eritrea.
On Somalia, Rice said, "We have been trying, despite the difficulties there, to support a transitional government that might be able to . . . help the country come together." She said the United States would not negotiate with any group that works with terrorists, a veiled reference to the Islamists who form the Consultative Council of Islamic Courts, the formal name of the extremist militia that is rapidly consolidating its grip on the country.
Somalia's interim Prime Minister Ali Mohamed Ghedi earlier this week appealed for outside help, saying it was needed to "protect the region from the expansion of this Al Qaeda network, these terrorists."
It is unclear whether Al Qaeda has recently made serious inroads in Somalia. CIA officials had been traveling extensively to Somalia before June under the protection of warlords, to whom the intelligence officers paid tens of thousands of dollars for information. The warlords are generally rivals of the Islamists. The CIA has been seeking three men in Somalia believed to have organized or participated in the 1998 bombings of US embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Most analysts say that small terror cells exist in the country, but that the chaotic nature of the country it hasn't had a functioning government in 15 years also poses a risk that Somalis could turn in members of a terror group for a ransom.
The question now is whether the Islamists, who appear to be led by members of Al Itihad Al Islamiya, a radical group that is part of the Islamic courts and led by hard-liner Hassan Dahir Aweys, want to provoke a war with Ethiopia, and what would trigger an Ethiopian decision to fight.
Among the worrisome factors: Aweys has said his movement aims to take over all historic Somali areas, including those in Ethiopia; Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, who is ruthless and pro- West, views Somali Islamists as a threat; and the tiny country of Eritrea, which has a recent history of bloody border wars with Ethiopia, is sending arms and money to the Ethiopian opposition movements in Somalia.
"My principal worry now is the Islamic hard-liners are creating conditions in which war with Ethiopia is increasingly likely," Kenneth J. Menkhaus, a Somali specialist and professor of political science at Davidson College, said in a telephone interview from Davidson, N.C. "A war would be bad for everyone the Ethiopians, the Somalis, the region, the US. The only people to benefit would be the [Islamic] jihadists."
Robert I. Rotberg, director of the program on Intrastate Conflict at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, said Ethiopia is clearly worried about Eritrea's involvement and also wants to "nip separatism in the bud.

</text>
