<text id="A04" category="" words="2019" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'FIRST OFFICIAL VALLEY CENSUS STUDY SHOWS US WHO WE ARE COMMUNITY'S NOT THAT DIFFERENT FROM OTHER AREAS, DESPITE IMAGE' Los Angeles Daily News, 8 December 2006, Pg N1; 'UNIVERSAL UNVEILS BLUEPRINT FOR ITS $3 BILLION EXPANSION ' Los Angeles Daily News, 7 D" Author="LISA FRIEDMAN; GREG HERNANDEZ;KAREN MAESHIRO;  " PublicationDate="8 December 2006; 7 December 2006; 29 November 2006; " SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning; " WebAddress="Factiva">

WASHINGTON -- "America's suburb" is as economically vibrant and ethnically diverse as the heart of Los Angeles, according to the U.S. Census Bureau's first-ever demographic snapshot of the San Fernando Valley. 

Officially quantifying what local leaders have long known, the report released Thursday shows the Valley has evolved from a predominantly white bedroom community into a metropolis, with top wage earners as well as poverty, long commutes and heavy immigration. 

If the Valley, Glendale and Burbank were one city, the area's 1.74 million residents would make it the nation's fifth-largest city, behind only New York, Los Angeles, Chicago and Houston. 

"It's time for people to understand that the Valley as it was envisioned in 1950 is not the Valley of 2005," said Robert Scott, chairman of the Valley Industry and Commerce Association. 

"This Valley has opportunities and challenges that are very similar, in many cases, to the rest of Los Angeles." 

The Valley census tract includes San Fernando, Burbank, Glendale, Calabasas and parts of Los Angeles city and county. 

It also mirrors data released last month for the 27th and 28th congressional districts -- technically not the entire San Fernando Valley, but a significant swath. 

With strong support from Rep. Brad Sherman, D-Sherman Oaks, the Valley won status as a separate region with the Census Bureau late last year -- a distinction that could give it the detailed information needed to achieve the economic and political clout it has sought for decades. 

The designation capped a five-year effort that began after the Valley's secession campaign failed in 2002 amid bitter challenges over the accuracy of information about what would have then been the nation's sixth-largest city. 

Scott, who led the campaign for the Valley census, said the data will help business leaders and policymakers prove that while the region is distinct from Los Angeles, its population has the same needs as the rest of the city and county. 

"For those people who somehow think of the Valley as a bedroom community of well-to-do whites, that's a myth of 40 years ago," said Eugene Turner, geography professor at California State University, Northridge. 

The new report, he said, "shows that the Valley is not that different from the Los Angeles (area) as a whole." 

The average Valley family is older, better educated and earns nearly $12,000 more annually than a family in another part of Los Angeles, the report shows. But in other ways, Valley residents are strikingly like their city counterparts. 

The typical mortgage in the Valley hovers in the $2,000-a-month range, about even with the rest of the city. That mortgage is likely to account for about 35 percent of a household's income in both the Valley and the remainder of Los Angeles. 

Meanwhile, 13 percent of Valley residents earned wages below the federal poverty level last year, compared with 20 percent citywide. 

And when it comes to immigration, nearly 42 percent of Valley residents are foreign-born, compared with 41.2 percent of city residents. 

Similarly, a language other than English is spoken in 59 percent of Valley homes. That's the case in about 61 percent of all Los Angeles city homes. 

USC demographer Dowell Myers said Los Angeles overall is "remarkably homogenous" and noted that the city and county poverty levels are not strikingly different. 

The image of the city as "an island of poverty" is as obsolete as the image of the San Fernando Valley as the predominantly white burbs. 

"Reputations are usually 20 years out of date. People also think Orange County is a largely white Republican bastion, too. It's not. The image from the past is always what people hold onto." 

Daniel Blake, director of the San Fernando Valley Economic Research Center at CSUN, noted that there are more jobs in the Valley than there are employed residents in the labor force. 

"That's an urban thing," Blake said. "The Valley has become a job center as opposed to a bedroom community." 

Blake, who has been crunching census data for the Valley since 2001, also has said future Census Bureau reviews will provide a greater perspective on the changing Valley. 

The greatest information boom will come after the 2010 Census. 

Sherman said the Valley census will have important political implications when it comes to fighting for everything from transportation dollars to social services. 

"We need what any important section of a huge metropolitan area needs," he said. "We need transportation and we need housing." ;

UNIVERSAL CITY -- After more than a decade of false starts and neighborhood opposition, NBC Universal unveiled a $3billion plan Wednesday for its 391-acre property that aims to boost tourism, create a new community of 2,900 apartments, condos and town homes and improve transportation. 

Designed as a blueprint for the next 25 years, the plan also calls for expanded studio production facilities, more office space, and a "refreshed" Universal CityWalk and its adjoining theme park, Universal Studios Hollywood. 

Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa, flanked by local business leaders, hailed the proposal as "a blockbuster" at an afternoon news conference outside the entrance of CityWalk. 

"I think you can tell by the look on my face that today truly is a great day," the mayor said. "It's a great day for Los Angeles, a great day for the San Fernando Valley, a great day for our economy, the entertainment industry and especially for the future of urban development in Los Angeles." 

Those behind the plan say it would result in 11,000 new full- and part- time jobs once the project is completed and 17,000 jobs during construction. 

The existing and future studio, retail, theme park and residential areas are expected to generate about $21million in new annual revenues to the city and county of Los Angeles and more than $4billion a year in total economic activity throughout Los Angeles County. 

But announcing the plan is just the first step of what could be a contentious process. Since Universal City resides in both the city and county of Los Angeles, NBC Universal must file applications with both jurisdictions. 

The proposals will be subject to a public review and hearing process that previously derailed development proposals. 

But Villaraigosa aggressively tried to sell the plan Wednesday. 

"The truth is, we have no choice," he said. "With a housing crisis, traffic congestion and an ever-growing population, this is the face of smart, responsible, environmentally friendly development for the future." 

Seeking a clean slate, NBC Universal has been meeting with residents to keep them informed. 

But a meeting Tuesday night left many with more questions than answers, said Polly Ward, president of the Hillside Federation, an umbrella group for 40 area homeowners associations. 

"We did not feel we got any purposeful information on what they are planning," Ward said Wednesday. "Knowing homeowners groups as we do and as they do, they may be concerned about our reactions to specifics. 

"Everyone is concerned about traffic. How is traffic going to get in and out? That's the major issue. Spicing up the business on CityWalk and revamping the backlot, all that stuff doesn't bother us." 

Involving community 

In March, Universal announced it would be working on a plan after more than a decade of starts and stops caused by changing ownership and other snags related to traffic and noise. 

At that time, officials said they were scrapping any previous development plans and meeting with residents every three months. 

Villaraigosa also sought to reassure residents. 

"While I welcome this project with open arms and I completely understand your legitimate concerns about its magnitude and scope ... let me be clear: I have NBC Universal's commitment that this project will be a national model for community involvement, input and collaboration. The community will be a part of the process every step of the way, and I will personally hold NBC accountable to deliver on that commitment." 

If approved, the plan would give Los Angeles three signature entertainment complexes, including l.a. live near Staples Center and the Grand Avenue project. 

"Not too many metropolitan areas can say that," said Jack Kyser, chief economist at the Los Angeles County Economic Development Corp. 

"(Universal City) is going to be very important because it's an investment into the second- and third-largest (industries) in L.A. County as measured by employment: tourism and motion picture and television production." 

Key elements of the revitalization of the film and television production facilities include new and relocated outdoor sets, new postproduction facilities, soundstages, a screening theater and an expanded prop/costume shop. 

Idea for offices, more 

There would also be 335,000 square feet of new office space, including two new buildings and an enhanced child-care center with improved parking. 

NBC Universal and adviser Thomas Properties Group will negotiate with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority for a proposed studio and office at the Universal City MTA station. 

It would include 200,000 square feet of production facilities and 450,000 square feet of entertainment-related offices. Thomas Properties is also proposing a second phase at the MTA campus that would not involve Universal but would include a 400,000-square-foot office building with retail and parking. 

The plan would also include protection and promotion of the historic Campo de Cahuenga and additional parking for MTA transit riders. 

Plans call for a refreshed Studio Tour at Universal Studios Hollywood theme park, with new attractions and enhanced retail and dining facilities totaling about 80,000 square feet within the theme park. 

It would include improved and expanded parking and improved landscaping and pedestrian connections to the MTA station. 

At CityWalk, work would include upgrading the movie theater complex and enhancing retail and dining facilities. A new 100,000- square-foot live production studio would offer guests the ability to become part of the action. 

About 124 acres of studio property would become a residential neighborhood known as "Universal Village." Made up of apartments, stacked lofts, town homes and condos, the complex would include 35 acres of open space with hiking trails and parks. 

Within three villages, about 2,900 residential units would be connected by a street that would serve as the spine of the neighborhood and a town center with 100,000 square feet of dining and retail businesses. 

Transportation plan 

NBC Universal is working with the Los Angeles Department of Transportation, the MTA, Caltrans and the community on transportation proposals they say are designed to enhance mobility throughout Universal City and the community. 

Improvements under consideration include a shuttle system from Universal Village and throughout Universal City to the MTA station and a possible on-ramp to the southbound 101 Freeway from Universal City. 

Other improvements include modification of the intersection at Forest Lawn Drive and Barham Boulevard and the possible widening of the Barham Bridge at the Los Angeles River. ; 

LANCASTER -- Three Antelope Valley school districts will get more than $2.5 million in grant funding this year from a federal program whose goal is to ensure all children in the United States learn to read well by the end of the third grade. 

This is the third year of funding under the Reading First program for Lancaster, Palmdale, and Wilsona school districts, which spend the money on teacher coaches, materials and supplies, and training. 

"We love the program. It's made a big difference for our kids. We wish we could do it at more schools," said Diane Parkins, Lancaster's director of special programs. 

Funding is based on the number of teachers who are teaching in kindergarten through grade three at schools in the Reading First program. Schools are eligible based on student poverty rates and low- achieving reading scores. 

Lancaster is receiving $1.2 million, Palmdale $1.04 million, and Wilsona $279,500. 

At the Palmdale district, nine schools are in the program: Chaparral, Golden Poppy, Los Amigos, Manzanita, Palm Tree, Tamarisk, Tumbleweed, Summerwind, and Yucca schools. 

The grant money is used to pay for Reading First coaches, who help teachers with language arts instruction, training for the coaches, and supplementary materials. 

"These are individuals who have a background in reading and language arts. Their main job is to support and assist kindergarten- through-third grade teachers to fully implement the district's adopted language arts series," said Betty Stiers, Palmdale's assistant superintendent for educational services. ;

</text>
