<text id="A06" category="" words="2004" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'War, economy sway race Democrats hope to ride wave of voter discontent into control of Congress' USA TODAY, October 24, 2006, Pg. 1A; " Author="Susan Page and Jill Lawrence; " PublicationDate="October 24, 2006; " SampledFrom="All; " WebAddress="Nexis UK ">

WASHINGTON -- Two weeks before Election Day, voters are more focused on national issues than in any previous congressional election, a USA TODAY/Gallup Poll finds, and they express unprecedented pessimism on the war in Iraq and downbeat attitudes about the economy.

Just 19% of those surveyed say the United States is winning in Iraq, an all-time low. And 38% say their own member of Congress doesn't deserve re-election, an all-time high.

As Republicans face a wave of voter discontent unmatched since they won control of Congress in 1994, Democrats are pouring money into congressional contests that until recently looked out of reach. They are running TV ads in 42 districts they are trying to wrest from the GOP, three of them new targets starting today.

Republicans have bought TV time to defend 33 seats and -- with the addition today of a Savannah, Ga., district -- are targeting five districts held by Democrats.

As the party in control of the government, Republicans need to convince voters that President Bush and Congress are doing a good job, that the war in Iraq was the right thing to do and that the economy is on the upswing -- the issues that are driving voter attitudes.

The poll, taken Friday through Sunday, shows no progress made on those fronts.

"It's been more bad news piled on top of already bad news" for Republicans, says Charles Franklin, a political scientist at the University of Wisconsin, Madison.

"Can they turn it around? In principle they can, but time is running short."

Some Republicans concede that Democrats are likely to capture at least one chamber.

"Most people think that we would have a hard time holding the House if we voted today," says Charles Black, a senior GOP strategist and consultant to the Republican National Committee (RNC). "That said, two weeks is a long time."

On one measure, Republicans did see significant improvement. Two weeks ago, likely voters favored the unnamed Democratic congressional candidate in their district over the Republican by 23 percentage points, 59%-36%. The survey was taken immediately after Florida Rep. Mark Foley resigned in the congressional page scandal.

Now, the Democratic advantage on the generic congressional ballot has narrowed to 13 points, 54%-41%.

Still, that is more than the 12-point advantage Republicans held at this point in 1994, weeks before they swept to control of the House and Senate during President Clinton's first term, and higher than the margin held by either party in elections since then.

For months, Rep. Tom Reynolds, head of the National Republican Congressional Committee and who himself is in a tough race, has insisted that GOP candidates would survive a difficult political landscape because House elections traditionally turn on local issues, not national ones.

However, in the new poll, 43% of likely voters say national issues will make the biggest difference in their vote; 24% say local or state issues. That's the first overwhelming edge for national issues since the question was first asked in a Times Mirror poll in 1994.

A cascade of Republican misfortunes, including a string of ethics scandals and escalating violence in Iraq, has set the stage for a Democratic resurgence. Only an event as dramatic as the capture of Osama bin Laden or a terrorist attack could reverse the trend toward Democrats, analysts say.

"Nobody's listening to the rhetoric anymore," says political scientist Gary Jacobson of the University of California, San Diego. "They're responding to the news."

GOP advantages dwindle

Democrats need 15 new seats in the House and six in the Senate to claim a majority. Non-partisan analysts Stuart Rothenberg and Charles Cook estimate Democrats will gain at least 18 to 20 House seats and possibly more.

Taking over the Senate is a tougher proposition. Democrats are favored to pick up four Senate seats held by Republicans and are competitive in three more in border states: Virginia, Tennessee and Missouri.

Democrats are keeping an eye on a potential pickup in Arizona, Republicans on possibilities in New Jersey or Michigan.

This year, some traditional Republican advantages "aren't quite what they seemed," says political scientist John Pitney at Claremont McKenna College in Claremont, Calif. Among them:

*Money. Republicans have raised more money than Democrats overall, but Democrats are competitive, and some candidates are experiencing a late surge.

The RNC and the GOP House and Senate campaign committees had a combined $77.6 million in cash on hand as of Sept. 30, according to federal reports. The three Democratic committees reported $67.3 million on hand.

Democratic Party committees have invested at least $12.6 million to support Senate hopefuls Claire McCaskill in Missouri, Harold Ford Jr. in Tennessee and Jim Webb in Virginia.

Republican committees have spent $8.6 million in Missouri and Tennessee, including $1.8 million Monday for TV ads against McCaskill.

Brian Nick of the National Republican Senatorial Committee says the GOP may be on the defensive in those three conservative states, but he notes Democrats have been forced to spend heavily to defend seats in New Jersey, Maryland and Michigan -- three traditionally Democratic states.

"Those dollars aren't going against our incumbents or for our open seats," he says.

*Redistricting. Pitney, a former Republican congressional aide, says districts mapped after the 2000 Census to protect GOP incumbents are changing and in some cases becoming less Republican.

"We're seeing demographic shifts that are bringing formerly safe Republican seats into reach for the Democrats," he says.

Robert Lang, a demographer at Virginia Tech's Metropolitan Institute, says new, far-flung mobility patterns mean the population and politics of a congressional district can shift "over half a decade, what would seem like the blink of an eye."

Many inner suburbs become more Democratic as Republicans move to outer suburbs. That has helped put into play seats such as the one held by Rep. Deborah Pryce, R-Ohio, near Columbus.

*Economic news. Low unemployment, falling gas prices and a record-setting stock market typically would translate into warm feelings about the economy. But 55% of Americans rate the economy as only fair or poor, and 54% say it is getting worse.

In places where the economy is a top concern -- including Ohio, Michigan and Pennsylvania -- people are upset about lost jobs, slow-growing wages for many workers and overseas competition. Democrats lambaste their opponents for voting against hikes in the minimum wage, promising a raise if they win control.

*Turnout by conservative Christians. Leaders of conservative Christian groups, including the Family Research Council, have complained that the Republican officials their members helped elect haven't delivered on such issues as a constitutional amendment to ban gay marriage. So-called values voters also have been buffeted by the scandal involving Foley's lewd computer messages to former House pages.

Democrats in several states -- including Ohio, Colorado, North Carolina and Tennessee -- allude to Foley and other scandals in ads on Christian radio stations.

Melissa Deckman, a Christian-politics expert at Washington College in Easton, Md., says the party may convert some listeners and encourage others to stay home.

"The more likely situation is Christian conservatives are not going to go out and vote," she says.

Foley was the third GOP House member to resign this year amid scandal. A fourth, Ohio Rep. Bob Ney, pleaded guilty to corruption charges this month. A new problem arose last week when the FBI confirmed it was investigating whether Rep. Curt Weldon, R-Pa., used his position to help his lobbyist daughter get contracts. Two days later, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee bought $1.6 million in TV time to run negative ads against him.

'Bogged down' in war

The war in Iraq is the single most powerful issue shaping the public's mood, the survey indicates, and attitudes toward the war have soured significantly. A record 35% say the war is going "very badly" for the United States. The number that says insurgents are winning the war has more than doubled since February, to 21%.

Now, 58% of those polled say the invasion of Iraq was a mistake. Of those with that view, more than three of four are supporting the Democrat for Congress.

"Foreign policy, whether it's Iraq or in general, has become a strong issue for the Democrats, and Republicans are running away from it," New York Sen. Charles Schumer, the Democrats' Senate campaign chief, said in an interview.

Former GOP House majority leader Dick Armey says small-government conservatives don't believe the United States can create a democracy in Iraq and have become convinced the war was unnecessary. "We've gotten ourselves bogged down in a mess we can't get out of," he says.

In the survey, one-third of conservatives called the invasion a mistake, as did two-thirds of moderates and more than 8 of 10 liberals.

Some Republican candidates closely aligned with President Bush have edged away from his "stay the course" message. Virginia Sen. George Allen, facing a stiff challenge from former Navy secretary Jim Webb, has begun talking in the past week about "adapting" and "adjusting" the U.S. approach. Rep. Christopher Shays, R-Conn., for years a staunch war supporter, said this month he is "losing faith" in how it's being fought.

Playing the fear card

Democrats call those shifts too little, too late. "Changing direction in Iraq starts with changing the people we send to Washington," Shays' challenger, Diane Farrell, said Saturday in the Democratic response to Bush's radio address.

Democrats, who since the Vietnam War have battled voter perceptions that they are soft on defense, are finding a more receptive audience for the argument that they could do a better job of protecting America and conducting its foreign policy. In the poll, 52% say the Iraq war has made the USA less safe from terrorism.

Nonetheless, Republicans continue to view the issue of terrorism as their strongest asset -- both to persuade independent-minded voters and to energize core supporters. After circulating it in an e-mail to millions of supporters, the RNC broadcast an ad Sunday and Monday that showed bin Laden and other al-Qaeda leaders making threats against Americans and then the orange fireball of an explosion. The only sound: the ticking of a bomb's timer. "These are the stakes," the ad concludes, stark white words on a black screen.

Those words echo an infamous commercial President Lyndon Johnson used against Republican Barry Goldwater in 1964. Then, a girl counting daisy petals gave way to a missile countdown and a mushroom cloud. "These are the stakes," LBJ declared.

Phil Singer of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee says the new GOP ad is a reminder that, five years after the 9/11 attacks, the Bush administration still hasn't caught bin Laden.

'Intensity of feeling' a factor

Though congressional elections customarily turn on local issues, voters by nearly 20 percentage points say national issues will make the biggest difference in their vote.

Bush, whose job approval rating remained at 37%, could be a liability for candidates. By 41%-27%, those surveyed say they are more likely to vote for a candidate who opposes the president than one who supports him.

The RNC has built a get-out-the-vote machine renowned for its sophisticated technology and targeting of potential supporters. Democrats have long relied on a combination of efforts -- by labor unions, interest groups, state parties and national committees -- that failed to match the GOP operation in the last three elections.

This year, analysts say the underlying landscape favors Democrats.

"The Republicans' turnout operation is better," says Curtis Gans, director of the non-partisan Center for the Study of the American Electorate. "But the intensity of feeling is on the Democratic side. The issue climate is on the Democratic side."

Some groups are trying to harness that intensity. The AFL-CIO is spending a record $40 million to contact union members and encourage them to vote. MoveOn.org is running a Web-based phone bank that matches tens of thousands of volunteers with Democratic-leaning voters in three Senate races and 50 House contests.

Eli Pariser, director of MoveOn's political arm, says the project targets people who voted in the 2004 presidential race but not in the 2002 congressional elections. ;

</text>
