<text id="A07" category="" words="1993" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'EU official defines rift in future of trade Mandelson's report to push imports as driver of economy' International Herald Tribune, 5 December 2006, Pg. 1; 'Poles going to work, but not in Poland ' International Herald Tribune, 17 November 2006, Pg. 1;" Author="James Kanter; Judy Dempsey; " PublicationDate="5 December 2006; 17 November 2006; " SampledFrom="All; All; " WebAddress="Factiva ">

Europe's top trade official this week will address a growing rift between European countries where companies have found ways to reap advantages from globalization, and those that continue to bleed jobs to low-cost centers in Asia. 

In a report to be issued Wednesday, Peter Mandelson, the EU trade commissioner, will raise questions about whether importers of inexpensive goods should be considered greater drivers of Europe's future prosperity than manufacturing sectors in some nations that have remained uncompetitive amid the inflow of low-cost products. The document, presented in the form of 30 questions about possible reforms to EU trade rules, could help large European retailers like Hennes &amp; Mauritz and sports shoe brands with global supply chains to hang on to their competitive advantages. The report could also lead to curbs on the ability of producers in Southern Europe to initiate trade disputes with more competitive exporters like China and Vietnam. 

"There have been far-reaching changes in the global economy and in the structure of the EU economy," according to a draft of the report, obtained Monday by the International Herald Tribune. 

"The challenge is to consider whether EU rules take sufficient account of the reality of outsourcing production by European businesses," the document, "Global Europe," said. 

Mandelson, an avowed free-trader, has been growing increasingly frustrated by a standoff between protectionist-minded businesses and politicians in Continental Europe and free-traders in Northern Europe over imports of inexpensive goods, particularly from Asia. 

Last year he was strongly criticized by retailers in Northern Europe after he imposed restrictions on Chinese imports of bras and sweaters destined for the likes of H&amp;M that were instead stalled and piled up at ports around Europe. 

This year, Mandelson again mediated a fight between the factions after shoemakers in Southern Europe called for steep duties on imports of leather footwear from China and Vietnam. Big sportswear brands like Adidas and Puma strongly opposed the duties, saying they amounted to protectionism and would mean higher prices for European consumers. 

In the shoes case, Mandelson trod a middle path by imposing a series of ascending duties on Chinese and Vietnamese footwear. But he is seeking to avoid a repetition in future cases that could concern low-cost imports of crucial products like steel and furniture from countries including China and Vietnam. 

"Mandelson recognizes that cheap industrial inputs in particular are needed from China and the Far East," said Laurent Ruessmann, a trade specialist in the Brussels office of the law firm Sidley Austin. 

Mandelson "would like liberalization of the trade rules to make the blockage of these and other imports from these countries less automatic," Ruessmann said. 

To make the EU's trade rules more workable, Mandelson plans to put forth his questions for public comment through March 15, 2007. EU member governments would have to agree on answers before rewriting any of the current rules. 

The questions raised by Mandelson and the answers from industry, governments and trade experts could eventually give EU officials power to: 

Attach "greater weight to the interest of companies which have moved some part of their production out of the EU." Such a rebalancing of the rules could give officials broader leeway to dismiss complaints by European producers that have kept production within the EU. 

Require less competitive EU companies to present restructuring plans before they benefit from protective tariffs. Phase in tariffs - rather than impose them at their highest levels - in order to give retailers and businesses relying on imports more time to adapt. 

Impose anti-dumping duties - which normally last for five years - for shorter periods of time. Some categories of products could be entirely exempted from duties. 

The proposals are likely to be seen among European countries whose manufacturing sectors have not kept up with the competitive forces of globalization as a reward to companies that have sent jobs offshore and put traditional industries out of business. 

In the past, countries in Southern Europe, like Italy, where small manufacturers of textiles, shoes and furniture say they are fighting for their lives against Asian producers, have complained loudly that imports from less-expensive countries should be slowed down, rather than sped up. 

Larger European manufacturers of chemicals and steel could also face fewer protections from cheap Asian imports, and they too could wage a determined lobbying campaign against the suggestions. 

Rene van Sloten, an executive director with the European Chemical Industry Council, which includes manufacturers like BASF of Germany and the British-Dutch company, Unilever, said his members "regard with concern" the possible paring back of trade defense measures. Chemical companies usually litigate six to eight cases against Chinese exporters at any time, van Sloten said, and would lobby over coming months to keep the current EU trade defense measures intact. 

According to a survey released Monday by the German Marshall Fund, half of European respondents in a said that they believed that freer trade costs more jobs than it creates. 

The survey also found that China was viewed as particularly threatening. Fifty-nine percent of Americans and Europeans saw a threat from competition from low-cost Chinese products and from U.S. and European businesses relocating to China. 

Seventy percent of French, 67 percent of Polish, 66 percent of Italian and 65 percent of Slovak respondents expressed fears over Chinese economic strength. 

But according to Robert MacLean, a specialist in trade at the Brussels office of the law firm Crowell &amp; Moring, some of Mandelson's questions probably will result in changes, since EU enlargement in 2004 has brought on board many more countries with a more freemarket outlook. 

"The influence of more protectionist forces in France, Italy and Spain is waning with the growth of the union to 25 countries," said MacLean. Mandelson will "face some ferocious opposition but the chances of his getting a package through are pretty high," MacLean said.;

A Polish nurse is running for Parliament in Iceland. A British labor union is establishing a special section for Polish immigrants. The Catholic Church in Ireland is going through a revival as Poles flock to Sunday services. New Polish-language newspapers are flourishing in Britain and Belgium, France and Sweden, Ireland and Germany, catering to Polish craftsmen, engineers, teachers, nurses, plumbers, architects, maids and drivers. These newspapers are the lifeblood for newcomers seeking to find cheap housing ferret out Polish food shops, and meet teachers to learn their new language. This is the "second" Poland, a diaspora of 800,000 Poles estimated by officials here to have left the country since it joined the European Union in May 2004. The exodus is believed to be one of the single biggest migrations by Europeans since the 1950s, when a wave of Irish crossed the Atlantic to escape poverty. 

But in Poland, this incredible movement of people has created a labor shortage so severe that Warsaw may not be able to spend the money that is due to begin arriving from the European Union for projects like improving roads and the water supply. The reason? A lack of manpower. 

"The money is there but so is the problem," said Bartlomiej Sosna, a construction analyst at the consultant group PMR in Krakow. "Now that we are in the EU, we have a fantastic opportunity to improve our infrastructure because we are due to receive billions of euros starting in 2007. But how?" 

The Polish Transport Ministry, for example, has already allocated 30 billion, or $38 billion, to be spent from 2007 to 2013 on a road and motorway construction program, some of it financed by EU funds, which will start flowing in January. 

"We do not have enough workers to build the roads," Sosna said. "If we don't take up the EU funds over a certain period of time, we will have to return them to Brussels. Do you know what this means? There will be a delay in the modernization of our country. And that would have negative repercussions for investment." Given the unemployment rate in Poland of 15.2 percent, one of the highest in the EU, it is puzzling why there is a labor shortage in the first place. But as hard as employers advertise, they cannot find enough workers in the construction, engineering and medical fields. "In some cases, the construction industry cannot offer tenders because they have not yet found enough workers," said Marcin Kulinicz, an immigration expert at the Labor Ministry. "But consider these statistics: Last summer, 61,700 bricklayers were registered as unemployed," he said, out of 100,000 construction workers on the jobless list. "So on the one hand, the industry says it does not have workers. On the other hand, 100,000 say they have qualifications as construction workers." 

Clearly, the Labor Ministry says, many of the construction workers have quit Poland to work abroad, lured by higher wages yet they register as unemployed back home in order to remain in the state health insurance system and receive other benefits. 

President Lech Kaczynski bemoaned this fact, and the costs to Warsaw, during his recent state visit to Britain. He criticized Poles for drawing unemployment benefits back home while enjoying good wages outside their country. 

To be sure, there is genuine unemployment in Poland, especially in eastern areas suffering from a depressed economy. But in much of the country, the economy is booming. 

With the economy expected to grow by 5 percent this year, according to the Economics Ministry, and the baby-boom generation of the early 1980s now in the labor market, there should be ample work, and workers to do the jobs. 

But Krystyna Iglicka, a migration expert and sociologist at the Center for International Relations in Warsaw, says Poland's education system failed during the 1990s to train enough skilled workers, including engineers and craftsmen. "The trendy professions were marketing and services, not focusing on vocational or technical skills," Iglicka said. "Vocational and technical schools were closed, teachers were made redundant. We are now paying the price. There is a shortage of skilled people in their twenties." So critical is the shortage of welders and shipbuilders for Poland's shipping industry that Poland and Germany are close to an accord to allow skilled ship workers from northern German ports who are unemployed to go across to Poland to work. 

The government is also granting work permits to skilled and unskilled laborers from its eastern neighbors in the hope of wooing Ukrainians and Belarussians to Poland, where wages are two or three times higher than at home. 

German companies here are adopting the same course. Hochtief, a large German construction company that has offices in Poland, says that hiring workers from Ukraine and Belarus "is one of the solutions we are pursuing." Last year, however, only 2,697 Ukrainians and 610 Belarussians took up the offer of work permits, although the Polish authorities issued a total of 10,304 such permits to foreigners. Migration experts say the low number is hardly surprising. Iglicka, for one, called the work permit system a "fiasco." 

"Polish labor costs are too high," he said, "so Ukrainians prefer to go south to Spain and Portugal. Employers here say it is now not worth their while to hire on the official labor market. Some resort to the black economy to employ Ukrainians, or Poles for that matter." The labor shortage is exacerbated by status issues. A booming economy has created a new middle class that is seeking domestic help. But many Polish women would rather work abroad than serve other Poles. 

"Some jobs are not being taken up by Poles because they are not considered decent," Iglicka said. "It's almost a shame to do these jobs. Maybe it has something to do with the past, under communism, when there were no servants, we were all deemed equal, and the working class was supposed to be the leading class. "Now people have money to hire domestic staff. But Polish women do not want to serve as maids. They would rather be a maid outside Poland, and let Ukrainian and Belarussian women come across to do those jobs.";

</text>
