<text id="A10" category="" words="2014" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Super-bad Bush nominees get a needless day in court.' Houston Chronicle, 27 September 2006, p. 11; 'Senators, Bush reach accord on detainees.' Houston Chronicle, 22 September 2006, p. 1; 'Immigrants find military a faster path to citizenship.' Houston Ch" Author="CRAGG HINES; PATTY REINERT; JAMES PINKERTON" PublicationDate="27 September 2006; 22 September 2006; 14 September 2006 " SampledFrom="All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

AT least Arlen Specter is a man of his word. He kept his deal with the devil.
To forestall conservatives from challenging his accession as chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee when the current term began, the Pennsylvania Republican essentially promised to give all of President Bush's judicial nominees a hearing, regardless of how bad some were certain to be.
In fastidious maintenance of that pledge, Specter scraped the bottom of the barrel Tuesday and paraded before the committee the only two Bush nominees to be rated "not qualified" by the American Bar Association this year.
Perhaps if there was all the time in the world for a thorough Senate committee review of the nominees, it could be argued the panel could indulge itself. But that is not the case.
It was Specter himself who only Monday said of the rush to a pre- election recess: "I've never seen so much work left to do."
Pending bills subject to the jurisdiction of Specter's committee alone include legal procedure in terror suspect cases, terror surveillance and immigration reform.
But, lo and behold, amid this legislative whirlwind Specter found time to convene a meeting of the full committee to consider judicial nominees that the nation's major group of lawyers has concluded do not belong on the federal bench.
The unnecessary hearing was, for good reason, lightly attended by committee members. "We have a lot more issues facing America that are a lot more important," said Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., who sat through part of the show.
As afternoon moved toward evening, it became clear that one purpose of the hearing was to allow Republican members to beat up on the ABA for daring to buck even a couple of Bush nominees. This was a preoccupation of Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, in his loaded softballs.
Unfortunately, one of the nominees is for a vacancy on the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, which hears cases from Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi. That's the federal appeals circuit, according to the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, with the highest percentage of minority residents.
So, naturally, Bush has nominated a lawyer with a career-long antipathy to such basic civil rights touchstones as the Voting Rights Act and single-member districts.
It's sort of a sick joke, but it's also perversely real. Bush wants this guy to have a lifetime seat on a court that remains an important gatekeeper in the world of civil rights litigation.
The superbly unsuited nominee is Michael B. Wallace, a politically well-connected Jackson, Miss., attorney.
He might be the only appeals circuit nominee who has received a unanimous "not qualified" rating from the ABA's standing committee on the federal judiciary. No one can recall another.
After two separate ABA inquiries into Wallace's nomination earlier this year, the bar committee came up with the same conclusion: Wallace, while of the "highest professional competence," lacks a judicial temperament and a commitment to equal justice.
Wallace's rating is hard to come by. Of the 90 Bushjudicial nominations that the ABA committee has rated in the current, 109th Congress, only Wallace received a unanimous "not qualified" rating. Twice - after he was nominated in February, and then when, because of procedural rules, he was nominated again earlier this month.
With the changing committee membership over the year, Leahy pointed out, 21 different members of the ABA panel have rated Wallace. "None found him to be qualified," Leahy said.
The ABA committee is not, as some Republicans seek to paint it, an ideologically driven panel. Almost half of Bush's nominees in this term have received a unanimous rating of "well qualified."
Only three other nominees have been rated as "not qualified" by what the committee calls a "substantial majority" (with a minority rating them qualified).
One of those is the other nominee considered by the Judiciary Committee on Tuesday, Vanessa L. Bryant, a state superior court judge in Connecticut whom Bush wants to serve as a U.S. district court judge in her state. After the ABA committee made its rating, the Connecticut Bar Association also found Bryant "not qualified," saying in a statement that she "does not possess the requisite judicial temperament."
Specter has been eloquent in opposing the Bush administration's policy regarding terror suspects.
"It is inexplicable to me how someone can seek to divest the federal courts of jurisdiction on constitutional issues - just inexplicable to me," Specter said Monday.
But almost equally inexplicable is wasting time in this legislative crunch on unworthy nominees.


The breakthrough, after months of negotiations, means that next week lawmakers could give President Bush what he called his "top legislative priority" ahead of the November elections. Republicans are counting on a strong showing on national security issues to prevent Democrats from gaining a majority of seats in Congress.
Bush, on the road in Florida, praised the agreement for preserving "the most potent tool we have in protecting America and foiling terrorist attacks, and that is the CIA program to question the world's most dangerous terrorists and to get their secrets."
Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., and a Vietnam-era torture survivor who had bucked the White House along with Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman John Warner, R-Va., and Sen. Lindsey Graham, R- S.C., a former military lawyer, said the deal gives the president the tools he needs to fight the war on terror and "bring these evil people to justice."
"I also believe that it's consistent with the standards under the Detainee Treatment Act," McCain said, referring to the anti-torture law he pushed through Congress last year. "And there is no doubt that the integrity and letter and spirit of the Geneva Conventions have been preserved."
New tribunal system
If accepted by both houses of Congress, the agreement would create a new military court system to replace the one Bush set up after the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks.
The U.S. Supreme Court threw out Bush's military commissions plan in June, saying it violated U.S. law and the Geneva Conventions, the 1949 treaties that govern treatment of wartime detainees.
The agreement resolved the major sticking points between the White House and the senators. The senators persuaded the White House to leave intact U.S. obligations under the Geneva Conventions' Common Article 3, which bars "outrages upon personal dignity (and) humiliating and degrading treatment" of wartime detainees.
But the White House and CIA gained the clarifications they were seeking in U.S. law, which will spell out what abuses could be prosecuted in the United States as war crimes because they are considered "grave breaches" of the Geneva Conventions. In addition to torture, the U.S. War Crimes Act would now make it clear other violations of the treaties - such as cruel or inhuman treatment, rape, mutilation, maiming or intentionally causing serious bodily injury - would be considered felonies under U.S. law.
The two sides also agreed to protect classified information by allowing prosecutors to keep their evidence secret, unless they decide to use it at trial. If they use it, though, the accused must be allowed to see everything the jury is allowed to see.
House Republicans may fight this part of the agreement.
Rep. Duncan Hunter, R-Calif., who heads the House Armed Services Committee, said prosecutors should be able to use classified evidence without sharing it with the accused in some cases. Graham continues to insist the accused must have access to any evidence used against him if the new commission system is to pass the Supreme Court's test for providing a fair trial.
Some coercion allowed
National Security Adviser Stephen Hadley said the administration now sides with Graham on that point.
The agreement also calls for allowing the military commissions to consider evidence gained through relatively minor coercive questioning methods, if a military judge overseeing the trial finds the evidence is reliable and serves the interests of justice. Evidence gained through torture or through other interrogation methods that would amount to "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment," as understood by U.S. courts interpreting the U.S. Constitution, would be barred from the trials.
Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist, R-Tenn., said the agreement will be circulated to other senators this weekend, with the hope of passing the legislation next week.
Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, who did not participate in the negotiations but was invited to participate in a press conference announcing the deal, urged Democrats to get onboard to pass the legislation now that Republicans have united.
"This issue is much more important than the next election," he said. "This is about the safety and security of the American people."


Only legal residents - or immigrants who entered the country illegally and then applied for residency - can enter the armed forces. And while the fast track to citizenship is a strong lure for some, it's not the main reason many Latino immigrants sign up, say military recruiters in the Rio Grande Valley.
"I'd put No. 1, the educational benefits," said U.S. Marine Gunnery Sgt. Levi Garcia, a Brownsville recruiter and himself an immigrant from Nicaragua. "No. 2, work experience, and three would be serving their country, or patriotism."
Citizenship benefits are a distant fourth, he said.
Kane agreed, rejecting the idea that immigrants join to become citizens.
"Immigrants who come into the military are doing it because of a strong sense of patriotism. They are embracing their adoptive country," he said. "When I hear people saying they are signing up to be citizens, it denigrates their service."
"They're there because they want to make a contribution. ... They want to give back to America."
Fast-track perk
Typical is the case of Delia Gutierrez, 18, an immigrant from San Luis Potosi state in Mexico. She said she didn't join the Marines for citizenship. She signed up out of gratitude to the United States.
But she'll also apply for citizenship, taking advantage of the fast-track perk.
Citizenship comes posthumously for some immigrants.
Since the 9/11 attacks, at least 80 immigrant troops have been declared U.S. citizens after being killed in Iraq or Afghanistan, U.S. officials say.
Julio Cisneros Alvarez, 22, a native of Reynosa, Mexico, had joined the Marine Corps and hoped that the U.S. government would help him pay for medical school.
But his plans were cut short in January 2005, a little more than a year after he enlisted. A machine gunner, he was killed when a rocket-propelled grenade hit his Humvee during a nighttime patrol in Iraq.
A month later, in a somber ceremony at the U.S. immigration offices in Harlingen, his mother accepted a certificate granting him U.S. citizenship.
"Julio went because he wanted to be a doctor," said his mother, Senobia "Marta" Alvarez, 40, a South Texas cantina owner.
He also wanted to fight terrorism, she said, so that his mother and his two brothers, Marcos and Santos, would have a secure future.
A 3-foot-tall poster of the slain Marine in his uniform is taped to a long mirror behind the bar at the family's cantina.
"Hopefully, this county will recognize the sacrifice he and all the others made over there - and that people never forget them," said Alvarez, as she wiped tears from her eyes.
`I'm here for your security'
Laws passed in 2003 and 2004 grant citizenship to immigrants killed in combat, give priority status to surviving spouses and children, and waive processing fees.
The provisions have allowed about 1,000 service members to become citizens while serving at overseas military bases in Iraq, Kuwait and Afghanistan, at U.S. Embassies, and even aboard warships.
The citizenship ceremonies are sometimes held close to the battlefield. In July, for instance, 69 active duty service members took the oath of allegiance at a military camp in Balad, Iraq.
Leaders of some Hispanic groups say immigrants' sacrifices in war aren't always acknowledged, especially by those pushing to seal the U.S.-Mexico border.
"How can we tell our young men and women to fight overseas to defend our nation ... when Congress is falling over itself to punish their families, neighbors and friends by deporting them?" said Brent Wilkes, director of the League of United Latin American Citizens in Washington.

</text>
