<text id="A16" category="" words="2012" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'(PLAYING) TIME ON HER SIDE: RIDING PINE CAN BE ROYAL PAIN HIGHLANDERS' VARGO MAKING MOST OF STARTING OPPORTUNITY' Los Angeles Daily News, 12 April 2006, PG S3; 'O'BRIEN'S RETURN WORTH CELEBRATING ' Los Angeles Daily News, 11 April 2006, PG S2; " Author="GIDEON RUBIN; Scott French; " PublicationDate="12 April 2006; 11 April 2006; " SampledFrom="All; Beginning; " WebAddress="Factiva">

SIMI VALLEY - Playing on one of the state's most successful softball teams can be a mixed blessing. 

Winning Marmonte League and Southern Section Div. I titles is a thrill, but playing in Royal of Simi Valley's successful program also means not always getting to play. 




TD 
 

Royal senior right fielder Paula Vargo has lived that experience. 

Although an elite travel-ball player for the Simi Valley-based SoCal Eliminators, Vargo was relegated to the bench her junior year, when she played behind standout Jen Troncoli on a loaded Highlanders team that went 29-2 on the way to league and section titles. She had just nine at-bats before suffering a season-ending Achilles' heel injury midway through season. 

Vargo now is making up for lost time with a vengeance. 

She leads the Marmonte League with a .588 batting average and has hit safely in all seven of the Highlanders' games. 

Royal (7-0 overall, 4-0 Marmonte), which has won 28 straight games, is ranked No. 1 by the Daily News and ranked No. 10 in the nation by USA Today. 

"It's my senior year, so I want to give it my all and go out with a bang," she said. 

Vargo said she enjoyed being part of the winning environment and was happy to contribute any way she could. But cheering on teammates and alerting infielders to opposing base runners on the move wasn't what more than 10 years of organized softball prepared her for. 

She acknowledges there were times she wished she was on the junior-varsity team, although she never shared those sentiments with coaches. 

"It was kind of hard just sitting around watching every play, but I tried not to let it get to me that much because I new my senior year I'd have my chance," Vargo said. "I just stuck it out and cheered for my teammates. I tried not to let it bother me." 

Vargo has made herself indispensable with her bat and glove, making several dazzling defensive plays, including an over-the- shoulder running catch that took away a two-run home run from an Agoura player at a crucial point in a 7-1 victory on March 21. 

"Without Paula, we would not be the same team," Royal coach Bill Dishon said. "Had we not had the situation we had last year, she might have done the same things. Right now, we can't afford to take her out of the lineup." 

Although Vargo didn't play much last season, her teammates and coaches say she was a more valuable asset to the team than she realized. 

"She just brought a really positive vibe to the team," Royal senior pitcher Rebecca Heteniak said. "I know I would have been really frustrated if I were her. It's a frustrating thing to not be able to play, for someone as good as Paula, but she just has a really positive attitude. 

"She kept her head in the game even when she was just sitting on the bench and would always compliment you when you made a great play. She was always just smiling and positive." 

Dishon said Vargo exemplifies the unselfishness he tries to instill in all his players. 

"There are some girls who don't get into games this year, and they know it's all about the team, not individual players," he said. 

Although her limited role last season didn't contribute to her development as a softball player, she believes the experience contributed to her development as a person, teaching her to set aside her personal feelings for the sake of teammates. 

"It encouraged me to work hard for something that you really want and to be a team player," Vargo said. "Even though I wasn't starting, I could still cheer for my teammates and help them out." 

gideon.rubin@dailynews.com 

(818) 713-3607 

DYNAMIC DUO 

Royal High of Simi Valley seniors Rebecca Heteniak and Jessi Waers form one of the state's most formidable pitching duos. Heteniak and Waers are a combined 6-0 and have yet to allow an earned run in 44 innings. Heteniak has struck out 34 batters and allowed nine hits and five walks in 27 2/3 innings. Waers has 20 strikeouts and has allowed nine walks and seven hits in 16 1/3 innings. 

RISING STAR 

Chaminade of West Hills sophomore catcher Brittany Cervantes' emergence has helped the Eagles to a strong start, one that included a six-game winning streak that ended with Friday's 5-3 Mission League loss to Alemany of Mission Hills. Cervantes is batting .344 with two home runs. "Brittany is a real rising talent who has demonstrated tremendous talent on offense and defense," Chaminade coach Jon Ellinghouse said. "She will be one of the premier players in the area for years to come." 

BIG UPSET 

The big news from the first weekend of the Birmingham of Lake Balboa tournament was Alemany of Mission Hills' 1-0 upset Friday over perennial City Section power El Camino Real of Woodland Hills, which was ranked No. 3 by the Daily News. 

Jen Day (4-1) pitched a five-hit shutout for the Indians, whose five-game winning streak was halted the next day in a 1-0 loss to Newbury Park. "They were definitely pretty intent on winning that game," Alemany coach Regina Hernandez said. "It was just matter of going out there and playing within themselves." 

LEAGUE UPDATES 

ALPHA 

After a sluggish start, Grace Brethren of Simi Valley (11-4, 1- 0) has won nine consecutive games and Saturday won its tournament. The Lancers are led by senior pitcher Jennifer Irvine, an early- season league MVP favorite who is 8-0 with a 1.70 ERA and is batting .556 with seven extra-base hits. 

FOOTHILL 

Valencia (14-2), ranked No. 2 by the Daily News, lost to Kennedy of La Palma 1-0 in Saturday's championship game of the prestigious Michelle Carew Classic in Anaheim. Valencia junior second baseman Nicole Matson went 3 for 3 in the title game and batted .533 in the five-game tournament, boosting her team-leading average to .468. Junior pitcher Jordan Taylor allowed just one earned run in 36 innings in the tournament and struck out 56 batters, pushing her season total to 203. 

GOLDEN 

Quartz Hill junior first baseman Candice Miller went 4 for 4 with a homer and two RBIs on Thursday in a 4-2 win over Lancaster. Miller last year helped Lancaster to its first league title before transferring. Quartz Hill (9-3-1, 3-1) was upset by Highland of Palmdale the next day, when the Bulldogs pushed across two runs in the top of the eighth inning of a 4-2 league win. 

MARMONTE 

Royal of Simi Valley, the Daily News' top ranked team, rallied from an early two-run deficit to defeat upset-minded Westlake 3-2 in 10 innings Thursday in a sloppy game. Royal committed three of the game's seven errors. Royal (7-0) climbed from No. 14 to No. 10 in USA Today's national rankings. 

OLYMPIC 

Junior pitcher Kaylyn Kolesar pitched a three-hit shutout to lead Paraclete of Lancaster to a 1-0 league-opening win Friday over Maranatha of Pasadena. Paraclete (7-5, 1-0) has won three in a row, none bigger than its triumph over Maranatha, which had won 15 of its previous 16 games. 

WEST VALLEY 

El Camino Real of Woodland Hills concluded a wild week with an 8- 0 victory over Agoura in its second game at the Birmingham of Lake Balboa tournament. Bianca Mejia homered in the 19th inning to lift the Conquistadors (13-1, 5-0) to a thrilling 2-1 victory Thursday over Hart of Newhall, and ECR breezed past Cleveland 9-0 Friday in a league game. ECR lost to Alemany of Mission Hills 1-0 in its Birmingham opener Saturday.; 


Today is huge for several U.S. players looking to show Bruce Arena something, anything, that might persuade him to include them in his Germany roster, but it's a World Cup lock's participation in the Americans' tune-up against Jamaica in Cary, N.C., that's cause for celebration. 

John O'Brien is a massively talented soccer player - as good or better than Landon Donovan or Claudio Reyna, the two most renowned Americans - and his return from injury offers more hope that the U.S. can overcome a horrific draw and reach the second round, or beyond, come June. 

Arena said Saturday that he hopes to give O'Brien 15-30 minutes, enough to gauge his health (finally good, O'Brien reports). Fitness will come, mostly through training and games with Chivas USA, which added the midfielder to its roster Tuesday. 

It'll be the first action he's seen since last summer, and he hasn't seen much action at all since the 2002 World Cup. Hamstring and Achilles' tendon injuries have limited him to eight club games in the past three years and led to his departure from Ajax Amsterdam, whose legendary youth academy he joined as a 16-year-old nearly a dozen years ago. 

He moved to ADO Den Haag last winter, made three appearances, then sustained a groin injury. If he plays for Chivas against the Galaxy on Saturday night, it will be his first club action since. 

O'Brien is adamant that he's not assured a World Cup trip, but common sense says otherwise. He was phenomenal in the Americans' quarterfinal run in 2002, and his unique qualities make him a must if he's anywhere close to healthy. 

"His decision-making is phenomenal," Donovan says. "People underestimate how quick he is. He's got a burst that's very deceptive. He's a soccer mind. He knows where the ball should go every time. He passes the ball, he puts it on the (correct) foot, he puts it in front of you when he needs to, he puts it behind you when he needs to - he understands those things, so you don't worry about service when he's in there." 

Arena has called O'Brien the Americans' finest passer, and Chivas USA coach Bob Bradley, aformer Arena assistant, agrees. 

"As far as his soccer brain, and the precision with his passing, John is a cut above ...," Bradley says. "It's not a surprise that he grows up in Ajax and he can play on those kinds of teams, because in terms of his thinking and his passing and the way he sees the game, I think he's pretty special." 

O'Brien has spent much of the past two years at Home Depot Center with Athletes' Performance, recuperating first from the hamstring/ Achilles' problems, then from the groin injury. AP trainers altered his mechanics, and O'Brien believes he won't be as prone to injury as he has been. 

"I've been susceptible to injuries - I don't know any other way to put it," he says. "I'm hoping to turn that around. I'm always hoping to do that, go out there and just play continually." 

--Big enough? Cuauhtemoc Blanco, no surprise, is moaning about being snubbed for Mexico's preliminary World Cup roster, also no surprise. 

The temperamental Club America striker might be the sole Mexican attacker capable of the truly unexpected, but he's woefully inconsistent, irritatingly outspoken and too often given to temper tantrums, qualities that have alienated coach Ricardo Lavolpe. 

Blanco, 33, who played at the 1998 and 2002 World Cups and was the pivotal figure in Mexico's 1999 Confederations Cup triumph, has seen limited national team action since Lavolpe took charge in late 2002. He pulled out after his selection for the CONCACAF Gold Cup last year, saying he needed rest, then quipped that Lavolpe didn't "have big enough trousers" when he was left off a World Cup qualifying roster in November. 

Lavolpe says there's nothing personal in his decision to leave Blanco home. He's content with Bolton striker Jared Borgetti, Mexico's all-time goals leader, Villarreal's Argentine-born Guillermo Franco and home-based stars Francisco "Kikin" Fonseca and Omar Bravo. 

--Chivas pays: Guadalajara was the big loser as the Mexican Primera Division headed into its stretch run without the World Cup hopefuls, who had the weekend off before joining Lavolpe's preparations Wednesday in Acapulco. 

Chivas, which by tradition fields an all-Mexican roster, surrendered six players to the national team - Bravo, Oswaldo Sanchez, Francisco Rodriguez, Carlos Salcido, Gonzalo Pineda and Ramon Morales - and paid for it with a 2-0 loss to Morelia. ;

</text>
