<text id="A17" category="" words="2014" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Big decisions for small stores: Go elsewhere? Or stick it out? ; Several new retail projects could transform the area for shopping Series: Regional Retail Race' Sarasota Herald-Tribune, 20 May 2006, PG A1; 'Fire danger worsens ; Wildfires force evacuatio" Author="LAUREN MAYK; WILL ROTHSCHILD; " PublicationDate="20 May 2006; 9 May 2006; " SampledFrom="All; Beginning; " WebAddress="Factiva">

As plans for new shopping districts with big-name retailers take shape in the Sarasota area, small independent store owners are quietly placing bets on the success -- or failure -- of each of them. 

They are betting with their businesses, trying to figure out which projects will make it and where their stores will fit in with the other retailers, and ultimately the customers, those districts will attract. 

Without experienced real estate divisions and corporate parents to guide them, the decisions can be tough -- and crucial. If location isn't everything, it's certainly a big factor in the success of any retailer. 

"Everything is so crazy right now in the city, where to go?" said Sergio Baril, owner of Mariposa Designs in downtown Sarasota. "Is it Main Street? Is it Lakewood Ranch? Is it the new mall at University (Parkway)? What's going to happen with St. Armands? 

"It's very difficult to predict what's going to be the center." 

Baril opened his store, which sells jewelry and other gift items, in fall 2004 in the Orange Dolphin Galleria building at the corner of Orange Avenue and Dolphin Street in downtown Sarasota. 

He has kept his eyes open for new spots despite a 10-year lease because of uncertainty about the building that was at one point considered for a city parking garage. 

Other retailers already are signing leases to be part of -- or close to -- new projects that could transform downtown Sarasota and Southwest Florida as a shopping destination. 

Janice McGuigan, for example, moved her 2 for me, 1 for you store from St. Armands Circle to Main Street earlier this year with the theory the downtown Sarasota is the place to be. 

Although McGuigan's store isn't officially part of Pineapple Square, a mixed-use project that includes 130,000 square feet of retail space, it could benefit from the added traffic -- or suffer if other projects pull shoppers away. 

Selling points 

Merchants looking for a site to open a business these days have a slew of new options. 

There's Pineapple Square and Main Street in the heart of Sarasota, where P.F. Chang's China Bistro and Morton's steakhouse are expected to draw tourists and locals. 

Close by, at Fruitville Road and U.S. 41, is a project to redevelop the old Quay property -- now Sarasota Bayside -- and its expected 145,000 and 210,000 square feet of retail. Ralph Lauren has been bandied about by developers as a possible tenant. 

The same developer handling leasing for the Quay project also created the new Main Street at Lakewood Ranch, featuring women's apparel retailer Chico's and gourmet grocery store Morton's Market. 

To the north, homebuilder Lennar has talked about a 500,000- square-foot lifestyle center at its Heritage Harbour development. 

Meanwhile, Benderson Development is working on a massive project called University Town Center, an upscale outdoor retail center to be built in two phases. So far a SuperTarget and Muvico movie theater have been named as tenants. 

A new theater also is planned at Westfield Sarasota Square where construction is under way to redevelop the mall, moving the food court, adding restaurants and making room for new specialty stores. 

Westfield is expected to overhaul both its malls in the Sarasota market, with plans still uncertain for Westfield Southgate, anchored by Saks Fifth Avenue. That mall is the tonier of the two centers and preliminary plans have shown a new two-story Saks and a total of 135,000 square feet of new shopping space. 

Even with those plans up in the air, the malls are among the known commodities in the market, along with the tourist mecca of St. Armands Circle. 

But uncertainty about what big retailers will anchor each of the new projects, Pineapple and the Quay, makes evaluating them difficult. 

Mike Fox, the former president of Maryland-based Chesapeake Bay Outfitters, is developing a new retailer he hopes to launch in the Sarasota area. Fox, who said Chesapeake splits sales about 75-25 between resort business and the local community, is working with a partner who has national retail expertise. 

"The problem that we're having is we're very experienced, therefore we're immune to each group's hype. We know the industry and we know how difficult this is going to be." 

Fox said he considers the two critical ingredients for a site to be the amount of traffic a site will draw and the rent structure in relation to how much sales he expects to generate from that movement of shoppers. 

"That basically rules out St. Armands," said Fox, meaning the destination's relatively high rents. 

Fox said putting a convention center downtown, easily accessible from Main Street and the Quay project, would be an important asset for the downtown region. 

"The convention center is the horse that's going to pull the cart," he said. "If I knew that convention center was going to built tomorrow, I would be signing a lease today." 

Parking is another factor important to retailers, just like their customers. 

Easy parking has always been a selling point for indoor malls, a contrast to downtown districts that struggle with issues of paid parking, street parking and reserved spaces. 

"If they don't solve the parking problem, there will be no location that is great," said Baril, who worries that the Florida heat could wilt some shoppers as they make the trek from their cars to the shops. 

"Shopping is a joyful experience. If you have to get there already sweating, the joy is gone." 

More locations, more stores? 

Lee Younger's Pineapple House Collection takes its name from a street in downtown Sarasota, but it doesn't have a store there. 

The business actually started in a 600-square-foot store on Pineapple Avenue, where it spent five years. 

It moved to Westfield Southgate after Younger and business partner Larry Bass started bulking up the retail side of the dual retail-interior decorating business. 

"We felt that our retail client was a little different than the market was at that time," said Younger, who also was looking for the extended hours and traffic a mall could provide. 

But the market has changed as Younger's business has swelled to three stores -- one in Westfield Southgate, one in Westfield Sarasota Square and one under construction at Lakewood Ranch's new Main Street project -- and a return to downtown is now a possibility. 

He started reading about the new retail developments coming to Sarasota about two years ago, and has talked to developers for "a couple different ones." 

For merchants like Younger, new shopping districts in the Sarasota area offer an opportunity for growth. 

Instead of moving from an old spot to a new one, they are expanding and recognizing the different niches forming as the market grows and shows different personalities for communities such as Lakewood Ranch, South Sarasota County and downtown Sarasota. 

In addition to his signature black-and-red theme, Younger plans different concepts for each of his stores. 

The one at Westfield Southgate will get an expanded gallery of Waterford crystal pieces. The Lakewood Ranch store now under construction will be more suburban and "high style." If a downtown store opens, it would likely have a sleeker, more contemporary and "metro" feel, he said. 

If Pineapple House renews its lease to keep a store in Westfield Sarasota Square, it might go for a more casual look to match the family-friendly mall. 

Yvonne Schloss opened up a second store for her Sunglass Express &amp; Rx Optical on the Lakewood Ranch Main Street in part to be closer to her customers, who used to travel to her other store on St. Armands Circle. But she also liked the feel of the project, choosing that site over ones in downtown Sarasota. 

"I just liked the whole idea of the feeling of the project," she said about the shopping district that includes a Morton's Market, a second site for the gourmet grocery store that is on Osprey Avenue in Sarasota. "I'm more of a hometown girl than a downtown girl." 

Younger, the Pineapple House owner, suggests some careful consideration before jumping into any of the new options facing merchants today. 

"You have to really consider what you're doing, think it through," said Younger. 

It's important to talk with a project's developer and marketing representative to get a feel for what they really see the project becoming, he said. 

"Let's face it, they're selling something, and everyone's going to be the best." 

ABOUT THE SERIES 

THURSDAY 

The retail landscape is being transformed in Southwest Florida as growth in condominiums and homes draws stores and restaurants we might not have otherwise seen. 

FRIDAY 

With the retail boom in Southwest Florida come high-end restaurant chains. Developers say these chains will complement the existing restaurant base, but people expecting to compete against P.F. Chang's China Bistro and Morton's steakhouse worry about a turn toward "Generica." 

TODAY 

Southwest Florida's boom leaves many existing businesses 

in the crosscurrent between their old home and newly developing shopping nodes. These businesses face a difficult choice: Stay or go? 

RETAIL BONANZA 

Developers and retailers are set to gather next week for the International Council of Shopping Centers annual convention in Las Vegas. 

More than 37,000 people are expected to mingle and make deals at the event, which kicks off Sunday with an appearance by former President Bill Clinton.
 
Sarasota retail players, including Casto Lifestyle Properties, Benderson Development and Westfield Group, all are expected to have spots on a massive leasing mall covering 1.3 million square feet. Herald-Tribune business reporter Lauren Mayk will be there, reporting on retail projects in the works from Manatee County to Punta Gorda. ;

Consider yourself warned: if you live in southern or Central Florida, you live in a tinderbox. 

A Monday afternoon brushfire that shut down a section of Interstate 75 in Hillsborough County and a much larger wildfire ravaging Florida's east coast should underscore that sobering reality, one that fire officials from Sarasota to Orlando to Daytona Beach and points southward have been dealing with since March. 

Indeed, nearly the entire Florida peninsula south of the chain of lakes is dangerously dry and capable of lighting up at the drop of a match. 

And, especially for folks who live in or near rural and forested areas, there's another month of wildfire angst to cope with before, it is hoped, the return of daily rains will drench the region and the threat. 

Just how dry is it? 

The state forestry division measures how dry conditions are on the ground on a scale between 0 and 800. The higher the number, the drier the conditions. Fire officials start becoming especially concerned about the risk of wildfire at about 500. 

Sarasota, Charlotte, DeSoto and Hardee counties all are well above 600 for the first time since 2001. Manatee County is nearing 600 and should top it this week. 

Only three-quarters of an inch of rain has fallen since March 1, nearly 5 inches below normal for that timeframe. 

And there's no rain in the forecast for the next week, and not likely to be much precipitation for at least another month, according to SNN Channel 6 meteorologist Justin Mosely. The only hint of good news, Mosely said, is the dew point, which has been inching up in recent weeks, indicating more moisture in the air. 

Adding to the concern is the amount of dead vegetation on the ground, left over from two years of hurricanes and an ill-timed freeze earlier this year. Combined with a dry start to the year that forced fire officials across the region to shelve their prescribed burn programs in March, there is enough fuel on the ground to make even the smallest brush fire a threat to turn into something much worse. 

"I would say we're on high alert," said Mike Keegan, state forester for the five-county district of Manatee, Sarasota, Charlotte, DeSoto and Hardee. "When we do have a fire, we are probably throwing more resources at them than needed. ... Everyone is being more cautious, and rather than just using water they're usually putting a line around it so it can't creep out of the burned area." ;

</text>
