<text id="A18" category="" words="2007" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Enrollment Isn't Adding Up', The Tampa Tribune, 13 September 2006, Pg. 1; 'Harris' 3 Challengers Are Tired Of Backseat' The Tampa Tribune, 27 August 2006, Pg. 1;" Author="MARILYN BROWN; WILLIAM MARCH; " PublicationDate="13 September 2006; 27 August 2006; " SampledFrom="All; Beginning; " WebAddress="Factiva">

TAMPA - For more than a decade, students poured into Florida schools like water from an open faucet. 

Now that enrollment numbers are well under state projections in most counties, including Hillsborough County, experts say they know why. The state forecast 50,536 new students but will be lucky to see 30,000, said Wayne Blanton, Florida School Boards Association's executive director. 

The repeat theme: Housing and insurance in Florida are just too expensive for working families with children. 

"The productivity type individual - young families, the service workers - just aren't coming," Blanton said. 

The state won't tally numbers until October, but most districts report that growth has slowed or stopped because fewer families with children are moving to the state, Blanton said. 

In Hillsborough, the nation's ninth-largest school district, with nearly 192,000 students, 4,200 to 7,500 more students enrolled annually for the past seven years. This year, Hillsborough's growth is just 1,703 students more than last year. 

That's fewer new students than much smaller neighboring counties. Although both saw new enrollment under state projections, Pasco County reports 1,996 more students so far this year and Polk County 2,500. 

Officials in those counties say their growth rates may be outstripping Hillsborough's in part because of lower housing costs with easy commuting to nearby counties. 

"This year and the year before, it's just been astronomical," said Bruce Tonjes, Polk County schools' associate superintendent. 

For years, Polk experienced about 1 1/2 percent growth, Tonjes said. This year it looks like it will double to about 3 percent over last year. 

"It's not a single issue," said Tonjes, who has tracked student numbers for about 14 years. Polk still has many rural areas, few condominium conversions and a number of mobile home parks. 

Hillsborough's numbers aren't low because students are leaving. In fact, 2,093 fewer moved out of the district or state after the school year ended in 2006, compared with 2005, district records show. 

Cost Of Living Blamed 

School principals said they know what's changing growth patterns. 

"I know exactly the reason," said Sharon Beaubien, principal at Chiles Elementary in New Tampa, which is nearly 100 students below projections this year as it builds 16 additional classrooms. 

"We have four really upscale apartment complexes that have gone to condo conversions, three within a block of my school," Beaubien said. "A lot of my families had to move out. I called each of the property managers. Between the four of them, there are 500 empty units." 

Leasing signs are back up on the condos, Beaubien said, so she expects students will move back in to fill the new classrooms, also built to move students out of nine portable classrooms. 

Older, established neighborhoods such as Tampa's Seminole Heights also are seeing lower enrollments. The school is 122 shy of its projected 573 students. 

"I think the community dynamics are changing," said Jackie Masters, principal at Seminole Heights Elementary. "There are young, young couples who haven't started families yet. There are families with life partners. Some grandparents are returning to the neighborhood." 

Like other Hillsborough schools with lower than expected enrollment, Seminole Heights Elementary will be more easily able to meet state class-size reduction requirements - and move classes from portables to four empty classrooms. 

Last year, when numbers started falling below projections, Blanton said, "I thought it would be a blip on the screen - we would jump back up. Apparently it's not a blip on the screen." 

Having the opportunity to catch up to growth in building and not fall further behind in the quest for teachers is good news, Blanton said. 

On the other hand, "if we're not careful, the insurance crisis is going to turn into an economic crisis in terms of the workers we need." 

Miami-Dade Is Losing Students 

This year, lower, flat or negative growth is statewide and includes Miami-Dade County, which experienced a 41 percent increase in growth from 1985 through 1995 but now is losing students. Other districts in declining enrollment are Pinellas County, in its third year of dropping numbers, and Orange, Duval and Broward counties. 

Palm Beach has about 1,100 fewer students than last year, including fewer kindergarten students, said Art Wittman, demographer for Palm Beach County schools, which saw their first decline in enrollment since 1971. 

"The baby boomers are here," Wittman said. "As that bubble creeps forward, they're going to be a larger share of the housing market." 

South Hillsborough Realtor George Bodmer said he knows of no agency that tracks types of families moving in and out of the state, but records show second home and condo sales were responsible for increased sales last year. 

"I don't know what's happened to the kids," Bodmer said. "We don't see anybody bailing out of the state." 

Meanwhile, many districts were caught off guard, even those such as Hillsborough that saw the number falling despite state projections. 

"We could see that it's slowing down, so we ratcheted down our numbers," said Lorraine Duffy Suarez, Hillsborough's manager for growth management. "We've talked to a lot of builders who are saying, 'Where are the people?' I don't think they've ratcheted down enough either or they wouldn't have empty houses sitting out there." 

In rural Highlands County, "we have a lot of homes under construction," said Mike Averyt, the school district's director of business operations. Lower housing costs seem to be buoying a reverse trend. 

Highlands grew by more than 300 students this year after adding just 105 the year before, Averyt said. The district has 12,178 students. 

"We're trying to get more portables in here," Averyt said. The district hasn't built a school in a decade, he said, but plans a new elementary and bought an old Food Lion store to convert to a kindergarten center. 

"It's still cheaper to live here than the east or west coast," Averyt said. 

(CHART) GROWTH LEVELING OFF 

The Hillsborough County school district's enrollment figures for the 20th day of school posted large, steady gains until this year. 

'00 - 160,608 

'01 - 166,074 

'02 - 171,399 

'03 - 177,573 

'04 - 185,024 

'05 - 190,179 

'06 - 192,184* 

* 24th day of school year ;

TAMPA - Most Republican voters face a simple decision in the U.S. Senate primary - Katherine Harris, or one of the three others? 

Many probably can't name the three others. 

LeRoy Collins Jr., Will McBride and Peter Monroe, however, each hope to emerge as the challenger who could have a shot at taking the nomination from Harris. 

Their battle seems to be narrowing to two: 

--Collins, a Tampa resident, retired nuclear missile submarine officer and son of an illustrious former governor 

--McBride, a young Hispanic immigration lawyer from Orlando with connections to a family of high-level conservative activists 

The winner of the Sept. 5 primary will run against the incumbent Democrat, Sen. Bill Nelson. 

Harris, meanwhile, scarcely notices her challengers. A Harris campaign television ad that began airing Friday attacks Nelson but doesn't mention her Republican rivals. 

McBride, in part using his own money, is the only challenger so far to run television ads, and it might stay that way. 

Besides that, his biggest advantage might be his alignment with the party's religious conservative base. 

Collins, in part because of his defense credentials, has won several newspaper endorsements and might benefit from the name made famous by the late Gov. LeRoy Collins, who served from 1955-61 and was a hero in the civil rights movement. 

Both, though, have political problems. 

Monroe and Collins have attacked McBride over immigration, citing his participation in an April rally in Tampa by immigrants who oppose immigration reforms and favor amnesty for illegal immigrants. 

McBride says he got involved only because rally organizers asked him to be their legal adviser and deal with reporters and authorities. He said he doesn't favor amnesty. 

Meanwhile, McBride points out that Collins is pro-abortion rights, disagreed with Gov. Jeb Bush's intervention to prolong the life of Terri Schiavo and favors civil unions for same-sex couples. 

"He might as well put a 'D' after his name," McBride said. 

Collins acknowledges those stands, though he adds that he personally opposes abortion and thinks most women who have abortions later regret it. 

He said his "common-sense approaches" to social issues put him closer to the mainstream than McBride, a staunch religious conservative. 

Monroe's Experience 

Monroe has more experience in government than either but appears from the scanty evidence available - polls and the buzz among Republican insiders - to have attracted the least support. 

A Harris campaign spokeswoman wouldn't comment directly on the three challengers. 

Harris "is the only Republican candidate with a proven record of success that can beat Bill Nelson in November," Jennifer Marks said in a written statement. "Our campaign has one focus and one focus only: to beat Bill Nelson in November." 

There are no concrete indications so far that any of the three threatens Harris, who plans to continue running television ads. 

"Nothing's wrong with these three guys, but they're all political novices, and none has the financial resources to bump their name identification into Katherine Harris territory," Tallahassee Republican political operative Rick Wilson said. 

But primary voters probably will at least look for an alternative, said another veteran GOP operative, Todd Harris, who is of no relation to Katherine Harris. 

"There is a mountain of evidence as tall as the Sunshine Skyway that suggests Katherine Harris should not be the nominee," he said. "It's causing people to give some of the other candidates a look." 

Collins spokesman Chris Ingram said he's under no illusions. 

"We've certainly got to get past the 800-pound gorilla first," he said in reference to the Harris campaign. "This campaign's biggest enemies are time and money." 

McBride said polls show that Republicans who think Harris can't beat Nelson should rally behind him. 

A July Mason-Dixon Polling &amp; Research survey showed McBride leading among the challengers with 11 percent, followed by Collins with 8 percent and Monroe at 2 percent. Harris got 36 percent, and 43 percent were undecided. 

A Quinnipiac University poll in June showed Nelson far ahead of any of the four. McBride, however, came slightly closer than Harris. 

In May, when all three filed at the last minute to challenge Harris, McBride got the most attention because of what some said was his promise to spend $5 million of his own money to defeat Harris. 

State Rep. Dennis Ross of Lakeland decided against entering the race as a result. 

McBride denies he ever said that. He has put $728,000 of his money into the race so far. 

"We're going to do what it takes to give us a shot at winning," he said. "But at the same time, I don't want to just throw it away. I want to take calculated risks." 

McBride's Connections 

McBride's wife is the daughter of Stuart Epperson of North Carolina, wealthy founder of a national chain of conservative Christian radio stations and an associate of activists in the conservative wing of the Republican Party, including prominent religious right figures and White House political guru Karl Rove. 

So far, however, there aren't any signs of national-level help for McBride from that connection. 

McBride denied that he changed his views on immigration when he decided to run, as Collins and Monroe have charged. 

He said he favors immigration reform and thinks border security should be a top priority. Although he opposes "amnesty," he said, he thinks a reform bill should allow illegal immigrants to "adjust their status" and continue working here. 

At one point during the rally, however, he was photographed carrying the sign of a pro-amnesty group. He later made a Spanish- language television spot advertising his legal services and urging immigrants to call Congress members and vote for their interests. 

Collins' Stands 

Collins comes from a larger city, where he and his family name are well-known, but says he'll probably depend on news coverage and personal appearances to make himself known. 

He said a major TV campaign "sends the wrong message anyway, the huge amounts of money. ;

</text>
