<text id="A23" category="" words="1990" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Clinton Says Bush Adviser Obsesses About Her and '08' The New York Times, 28 February 2006, p. 4; 'Good Fights, Both Real And Imagined' The New York Times, 27 February 2006, p. 1; 'Mistrial Is Declared In Slain Baby Case' The New York Times, 26 February 2" Author="JENNIFER MEDINA; Joyce Purnick; N/A; MONICA DAVEY" PublicationDate="28 February 2006; 27 February 2006; 26 February 2006; 26 February 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; End" WebAddress="Factiva">

ALBANY, Feb. 27 -- Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton took a swipe at the White House on Monday, saying that Karl Rove, the president's political adviser, ''spends a lot of time obsessing about me.'' 
Mrs. Clinton's comments came during an interview with an Albany radio station, after she was asked about a new book that quotes Mr. Rove as saying she is certain to be the Democratic presidential candidate in 2008. 
''I don't know where he gets his information from,'' Mrs. Clinton said of Mr. Rove during the interview on WROW-AM. ''If I were thinking about this, I'd say, 'Why are they spending so much time talking about me?' '' 
In ''Strategery,'' a book released on Monday by Bill Sammon, a White House reporter for The Washington Examiner, Mr. Rove is quoted as calling Mrs. Clinton ''the dominant player on their side of the slate.'' 
''Anybody who thinks that she's not going to be the candidate is kidding themselves,'' Mr. Rove is quoted as saying in the book. Mr. Rove is also quoted saying that he believes Mrs. Clinton would have a tough time in the general elections because of a ''brittleness about her.'' 
When pressed to add more about her strategy and future, Mrs. Clinton demurred, saying that she was focusing on winning re-election this fall. 
Republicans, Mrs. Clinton said, are hoping ''that all of their missteps, which are now numbering in the hundreds, are going to somehow be overlooked because people, instead of focusing on the '06 election, will jump ahead and think about the next one,'' she said during the radio interview. 
A spokeswoman for the Republican National Committee, Tracey Schmitt, said, ''Senator Clinton would be better served if she spent less time flattering herself with perceived obsession and more time focusing on her job.'' 
Mr. Rove has reportedly spent some time courting possible challengers to Mrs. Clinton. Last fall, Edward F. Cox, who was considering a bid to run against Mrs. Clinton, said that he had received an e-mail from Mr. Rove saying that ''we have to do something about her,'' referring to Mrs. Clinton. 
Mr. Cox, a lawyer who is married to Tricia Nixon, later decided not to challenge Mrs. Clinton. 
Earlier this month, John Spencer, the former mayor of Yonkers and the only declared Republican candidate for the Senate, said he had met with Mr. Rove's aides at the White House. 
Later on Monday, as Mrs. Clinton spoke to hundreds of municipal officials gathering for a conference in Albany, the senator zeroed in on local issues like economic development and the declining populations in upstate New York. She continued to assail the Bush administration's proposal to allow a Dubai company to take over operations at six American ports. 
''I want to keep focused on what's actually going on,'' she said. ''We have a lot of serious problems right now.'' 

NEW York politics has a way of veering toward the unpredictable, to the dismay of many a politician. Just when he thought he'd sail into office as the state's next governor, Attorney General Eliot Spitzer finds himself beating back a fellow Democrat who is way behind him in money and recognition -- but who can make Mr. Spitzer's life uncomfortable anyway. 
And New York City's business establishment, already hunting for an alternative to the familiar Democrats lining up to take back City Hall, has found a dream candidate: the chairman of Time Warner, Richard D. Parsons. He says he's not interested. Which deters his fans not one bit. 
A headache for the politicians, but fun for everyone else. After all, what is politics without a good fight? 
Mr. Spitzer's challenger, Thomas R. Suozzi, left no doubt that he is ready for one when he declared his pursuit of the Democratic nomination on Saturday, in a windswept parking lot near the center of his hometown, Glen Cove. 
The Nassau County executive, Mr. Suozzi has politics that are more in sync with moderate Republicans than with the liberals who dominate Democratic primaries. But a happy maverick, he is trying to make a virtue of being the underdog, while painting Mr. Spitzer as the insider in a dysfunctional Albany. 
Not an easy task, challenging Mr. Spitzer, who is nationally known for taming Wall Street with his prosecutions and has broad party support. And Mr. Suozzi, 43, has to resolve some inconsistencies: even as he denounces the influence of Albany lobbyists, he has not said if he would refuse contributions from lobbyists. And though the self-appointed outsider, he is accepting donations from well-heeled businessmen who have been sued by Mr. Spitzer's office. 
But the Nassau executive, amiable and popular in his county, stands in contrast to the fierce, coldly determined Mr. Spitzer, who has in fact chosen to focus on high-profile white collar crime rather than dueling with Albany's power structure over government reform or Medicaid waste. 
So, if nothing else, Mr. Suozzi's candidacy will force the front-runner to run for his nomination this fall. 
THE next mayor's race is four years away, but already some New Yorkers are worried about Michael R. Bloomberg's successor and are looking for a candidate with business acumen and independence from traditional special interests. Therefore, the frequent mentions in some quarters of Mr. Parsons, who is black and Republican, was born in Bedford-Stuyvesant and reared in South Jamaica, and, at 57, has been active in public life since he was Nelson A. Rockefeller's prodigy. 
Among those mentioning Mr. Parsons is Rupert Murdoch, chairman of the News Corporation, which owns The New York Post. At a lunch honoring Mr. Parsons last fall, Mr. Murdoch said he hoped they might be honoring Mr. Parsons again ''in November of 2009, but this time on the steps of City Hall.'' 
Since Mr. Murdoch is never reserved about communicating his strong political likes and dislikes in The Post -- a practice widely credited with catapulting Edward I. Koch into City Hall in 1977 -- his comments intrigued many of the communication executives who heard them, and they continue to echo. 
Asked about the Murdoch remarks, his press representative, Howard J. Rubenstein, said that Mr. Murdoch told him last week that he was ''quite serious,'' and thought Mr. Parsons would be ''a great public official.'' 
Aides to Mr. Bloomberg said that the mayor thought highly of Mr. Parsons, too, and approved of government outsiders serving on the inside. 
A quiet long-distance runner who has not nurtured a public profile, Mr. Parsons has impressed the business community by holding Time Warner together. He most recently beat back a challenge from investment banker Bruce Wasserstein and the financier Carl C. Icahn to break up the company. 
Mr. Parsons has to focus on raising Time Warner's stock prices for the next two or three years, when his heir apparent, Jeffrey L. Bewkes, the company's president and chief operating officer, is expected to take over -- and when New York will be starting to think about its next mayor. 
Edward I. Adler, a spokesman for Time Warner, said that Mr. Parsons ''is 100 percent focused on moving Time Warner forward. The talk is flattering, but he is not running for mayor.'' 
Mr. Parsons has to take that stance for now, say his political advocates -- undaunted, of course, this being New York. 

McKINNEY, Texas, Feb. 25 -- A judge declared a mistrial Saturday in the murder trial of a woman accused of cutting the arms off her 10-month-old daughter. 
Jurors deadlocked in the fourth day of deliberations in the case of the woman, Dena Schlosser, who pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity. 
The police arrested Ms. Schlosser, now 37, in November 2004 after finding her baby, Margaret, known as Maggie, dying in her crib, and Ms. Schlosser covered in blood, holding a knife and listening to a hymn. 
The prosecution argued that she knew what she was doing, showing the jury grisly photos of the baby and emphasizing several witnesses' observations of Ms. Schlosser as a healthy, seemingly sane mother. 
One psychiatrist testifying for the defense said Ms. Schlosser had told him that she felt commanded by God to cut off Maggie's arms, followed by her own limbs and head. 
John Schlosser, her husband, has filed for divorce and has custody of their other two children. 

''It's the right thing,'' said Leslee Unruh, leader of the National Abstinence Clearinghouse. ''It's like Martin Luther King's approach -- it's never the wrong time to do what's right. South Dakota is in a unique position to do something for the 800 children aborted every year.'' 
But these opponents are also counting on the retirement of Justice John Paul Stevens and the appointment by President Bush of another justice amenable to overturning Roe -- all uncertain calculations, Mr. McConchie said. Think of what damage may be done, he said, if the court hears the case, but reaffirms Roe. And, should their forces devote money to this strategy, he asked, over all other efforts? 
In some ways, the split mirrors the rift among gay-rights advocates over the question of same-sex marriage. Some gay-rights advocates pressed for marriage as the ultimate goal, while others warned that a slower approach, seeking other legal rights for gay couples, for instance, might stir less fury and be more effective. 
As it turned out, after the Massachusetts Supreme Court legalized gay marriage in 2003, the reverberations were fierce. Opponents campaigned in many states for constitutional amendments to bar gay marriage, and in 2004, 11 states passed such amendments. 
But even as the anti-abortion forces wrestled with internal division, abortion-rights leaders were repeating their mantra that a challenge to Roe would awaken their complacent supporters and strengthen their side of the national debate. 
Representatives from groups like Planned Parenthood Federation of America and Naral Pro-Choice America said they were receiving hundreds of calls and e-mail messages from people around the country. 
But a full-fledged national fight over the right to abortion must also be a chilling prospect for abortion-rights advocates. 
The legal costs of fighting the South Dakota law in court -- as Planned Parenthood has already pledged to do -- are certain to be steep, but there could soon be more states with similar laws to fight. Kentucky and Ohio have already considered such measures, and other states might well be emboldened by South Dakota. 
''It sounds a very dire signal that states think that they can pass laws that ban abortions and have them upheld by the newly configured Supreme Court,'' said Eve C. Gartner, a lawyer for Planned Parenthood. 
And if, in the end, the Supreme Court were to overturn Roe, the ensuing battle for abortion-rights advocates would be complicated and costly, too. 
Separate campaigns would be needed in every state, and even then, some would surely be lost -- particularly those in states that already have so-called trigger laws on their books that would make most abortions illegal as soon as Roe is overturned. They include Arkansas, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Missouri, Montana and South Dakota. 
A sense of building momentum -- the hints of a more conservative Supreme Court, the loud statement from at least one state legislature, the prospect of a long court fight -- could help build steam for abortion opponents. Just as those opposed to gay marriage seemed to draw strength and rising support from their early election victories, those opposed to abortion may see the new political climate as a call to action. 
In South Dakota, Gov. Mike Rounds, a Republican who said he is inclined to sign the abortion ban in the coming weeks and send it on to face a lengthy court challenge, acknowledged that it might, at least for this moment, energize some otherwise dormant abortion-rights supporters. 
On the other hand, he said, it will also most likely energize another silent group: those at the opposite end of the spectrum, a frustrated segment that had given up on overturning Roe in the blur of passing decades. 
''Only time will tell,'' the governor said.

</text>
