<text id="A24" category="" words="2001" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Mall Hosts Party, Professional Fireworks Show' Tampa Tribune (Florida), June 29, 2006, Pg. 9; 'Flood Of E-Mails Weigh In On Bowden's Future' November 3, 2006, Tampa Tribune (Florida), Pg. 1; 'Officer Heads For Cruiser Instead Of Court' Tampa Tribune (F" Author="JIM SLOAN; SCOTT CARTER; THOMAS W. KRAUSE; JONATHAN KAMINSKY; PHILIP MORGAN; D'ANN WHITE;" PublicationDate="June 29, 2006; November 3, 2006; July 11, 2006; August 5, 2006; November 24, 2006; September 16, 2006;" SampledFrom="All; All; All; All; All; Beginning;" WebAddress="Nexis UK">

For fireworks fans who aren't into do-it-yourself displays, Westfield Brandon is offering a chance to watch the professionals do it.

The mall will host Brandon Blast on Tuesday, a July Fourth celebration that includes a 9 p.m. fireworks display in partnership with the Greater Brandon Chamber of Commerce.

"Theis the third year for the Brandon Blast," said Taylor Clifton, marketing director for Westfield Brandon. "The chamber hosted it for the last two years, and we're really excited to take over the event and continue this great tradition."

The event kicks off at 4 p.m. with a children's patriotic parade inside the mall. The Summer Kids Club will be held at Westfield Playtown near the Sears store, with face painters, balloon artists and youngsters painting a large patriotic mural.

A military salute will be staged near the Center Court entrance on the west side of the mall.

"We feel it's important every day, and especially on Independence Day, to recognize and appreciate all our military personnel," Clifton said.

With 84 percent of MacDill Air Force Base's personnel living in the Brandon area, she said a military appreciation at the mall is "a perfect fit."

The salute will be followed by performances by two bands, Weszt and Sweet Spot.

Vendors will be selling hamburgers, hot dogs and ice cream, and there will be a beer tent. Visitors with a valid military identification will receive free food and drinks.

Visitors also can go on rides, climb a rock-climbing wall, play in an inflatable jousting ring and maneuver through an obstacle course.

The fireworks display will be on the west side of the mall starting at 9 p.m.

Admission to the event is free, and free parking is available.

The Brandon News, News Channel 8, TBO.com and The Tampa Tribune are sponsors of Brandon Blast.; 

TALLAHASSEE - The e-mails and letters poured in from across the country last month. They came from boosters, alumni, teachers, businessmen, and of course, Seminole fans. Yes, even a few Gators fans shared their thoughts. All of the correspondence - 259 pages worth printed out - was sent to Florida State University president T.K. Wetherell's public e-mail account in October.

The topic? FSU coach Bobby Bowden's future.

Wetherell's mailbox overflowed on days following an FSU loss, and with the Seminoles losing three of four games in October - their only win came against Duke, which now owns the nation's longest losing streak at 16 games - those venting to the president's office had plenty of material to work with.

"We're not used to this," Bowden said Wednesday during his weekly conference call about FSU's 4-4 record, its worst entering the final month of the regular season since Bowden arrived in 1976. "A lot of people, naturally, [say], 'Oh, Bobby, we're so sorry this is happening.'"

Not everyone, though. When it was revealed last week that Palm Beach attorney Peter Mettler, a former board member of Seminole Boosters, Inc., recently wrote Wetherell and stated, "Coach Bowden should retire or be forced to retire," some in Seminole Nation labeled him a traitor.

However, based on a public-records request and subsequent review of the 259 pages of e-mails and letters by The Tampa Tribune, not only does Mettler have plenty of company who share his views, but also, his letter to Wetherell is one of the tamer ones.

Overall, about three-quarters of the correspondence asked Wetherell to either force Bowden to make changes on his coaching staff or to force the legendary coach to retire after this season.

Bowden, in his 31st season at the school, has consistently maintained he has no plans to do either. Wetherell continues to say Bowden can coach the Seminoles as long as he wants. Meanwhile, the e-mails and letters continue to pile up.; 

TAMPA - Florida Highway Patrol Trooper Brandon McElderry will spend 40 hours this week keeping an eye out for aggressive drivers as he patrols the area in an unmarked cruiser.

He said he will enjoy every minute of it.

This week, instead of working, McElderry was supposed to be a witness in the trial of Darian Maurice Wright.

Testifying meant reliving Jan. 5, 2005, the day he and Wright fought in the yard of a south Seminole Heights home. Wright bit McElderry's face. McElderry tore open Wright's nostril.

Then, Wright grabbed McElderry's .40-caliber Beretta handgun. It fired and McElderry was shot in the leg.

To avert a trial, Wright pleaded guilty last week to 13 felony and misdemeanor charges including attempted murder and aggravated assault of a law enforcement officer. He was sentenced to 23 years in prison followed by 10 years' probation. Wright must receive psychiatric treatment while on probation.

"It's good to see justice being served," McElderry told The Tampa Tribune on Monday.

McElderry said he had never been shot before and was unsure of the legal process. He said he was glad for the professionalism exhibited by the Tampa Police Department - who arrested Wright - as well as the state attorney's office. McElderry said his superiors were more than accommodating.

"The highway patrol, from the colonel on down, said to take the time I needed, not just for court but for my family," he said.

Just 28 days after his injury, McElderry returned to his patrol. He said he does not dwell on the shooting while performing his duties.

"Ninety-nine percent of people I deal with are good people," McElderry said. "They're just running late or accidentally cut somebody off.";

The Alonso High School swim team is close to practicing at the Westchase Swim and Tennis Center free of charge on weekday afternoons.

Westchase Community Association President Daryl Manning said the school district needs to provide Westchase with proof that the athletes are insured and that the coaches are certified lifeguards.

The arrangement was approved recently by the community association pending receipt of the documentation.

"We are enthusiastic about doing it," Manning said. "We want to move forward."

The high school wanted to use the pool last year, but Westchase refused, citing safety concerns.

The school uses the pool at the Northwest YMCA on Waters Avenue. Because of the YMCA's schedule, the team starts practice at 5 a.m.

"We're their guests, and we appreciate whatever times they give us," said Kent Glover, Alonso's athletic director. "But it's tough on the kids getting up so early."

Of the 27 members of the swim team, 22 are Westchase residents. Several of the team members are also part-time lifeguards at the Westchase pool. Because of that, allowing the team to use the pool makes sense, Manning said.

"It's almost a no-brainer," he said.;

TAMPA The old people's reaction amazes the kids. How, they ask, can they be so thrilled over such a small gift?

"They're just so happy someone came to see them," answers Richedean Hills-Ackbar, who started Caregiver's Helping Hand five years ago to accommodate both givers and recipients.

Throughout the year, the mostly teenage volunteers mow lawns, do minor repairs and paint houses for elderly low-income residents who have been cited for code violations.

On the first three Saturdays in December, they deliver gift baskets and sing holiday songs to hundreds of assisted living and nursing home residents in Hillsborough County. Hills-Ackbar hopes Tampa Tribune readers will help them play Santa again this year.

Last year, a Target store donated $100 toward the effort when employees read of the charity's request for gift basket items and money in the Tribune's Holiday Wish List column.

For the 12th year, the Tribune is inviting local charities and nonprofit agencies to publish their needs in the wish list, which will run from Thursday through Dec. 24 in BayLife (details, below left).

From baby bottles for teenage moms to business machines for a children's chorus, all sorts of things make the list, although priority is given to organizations that fill the most immediate needs of people and animals.

Donors don't always say how they learned of a charity's particular needs, so it's difficult to discern which gifts came as a result of the wish list.

Betsy Miller of the Children's Home Society Inc., which supports Joshua House - a home for abused and neglected children - believes the wish list may have inspired donations from companies the group hadn't solicited.

"We wondered how they knew about us," she says.

Sheryl Kershaw, spokeswoman for the Hillsborough County Foster Angel Program, which provides gifts for the county's foster children, says donations come from many sources. She adds, "The more publicity we have, the better it is."; 

EDITOR'S NOTE: Jim Sloan, east and south Hillsborough education reporter for The Tampa Tribune, died Sunday of an apparent heart attack. D'Ann White, a co-worker with Tribune affiliate The Brandon News, wrote about Jim in her column this week.


BRANDON - I had a lighthearted column ready to run this week when I received word Monday morning of Jim Sloan's death.

He had been working in his yard in Brandon on Sunday, probably relishing the manual labor after a hellish week covering the primary election.

I couldn't bring myself to run a humorous column, although no one appreciated a good laugh more than Jim. That's something we all agreed on Monday as I listened to the stories Brandon Tribune staff members shared as they gathered in the conference room at lunchtime.

In the next room, Jim's desk remained untouched, as if he would walk back in, sit down and start doing one of his cherished crossword puzzles at any moment. His wry sense of humor remained memorialized in classic Sloan quotes on index cards taped to a column in the middle of the newsroom.

The Trib had just switched to a new computer system, and Jim couldn't get the hang of not having to hit the quote key twice, so his supervisor had written a reminder and taped it next to his desk:

"I will only hit the quote key once. I will only hit the quote key once. I will only hit the quote key once. I will only hit the quote key ONE TIME."

I met Jim in 1986 when he moved here from Brainerd, Minn., to take the position as county commission reporter for the Tribune. I'd been covering the commission for Sunbelt Newspapers for a year, so I introduced him around, told him which commissioners' aides would be most forthcoming with information, which copy machines were most reliable and the best places to hide from commissioners and editors.

We spent many an hour laughing in the pressroom. But that was only after Jim had filed his stories. When he was writing, you could have ignited a bomb next to him and he wouldn't have heard you. He was all business.

Over the next 20 years our paths would occasionally cross as he moved on to become bureau chief in Brandon and then part of the special projects team at the Trib. I'd see him at events we were covering, or we would bump into one another at Home Depot.

A couple of years ago, Jim and I found ourselves sharing the same office on Robertson Street when he asked to return to the Brandon bureau as a reporter. He wanted to be closer to his wife, Peggy, and son, Carey.

A couple of days after he returned to Brandon, I heard a racket from the break room that sparked a distant memory. I went to investigate and, sure enough, the noise was Jim laughing uproariously at one of his own jokes. I hadn't realized until then how much I'd missed that sound.

I wasn't the only one who was fond of Jim's tendency to laugh at his own jokes. Several of his co-workers mentioned how it was his laugh, not the joke, that would cause everyone else to crack up.

"He would tell a stupid joke and then laugh, and everybody would laugh because he was laughing so hard," said reporter Liz Bleau.

"You couldn't have a bad day when he was around," reporter Yvette Hammett said.

</text>
