<text id="A26" category="" words="2004" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'WINDS FEEDING KILLER BLAZE / ARSON PROBE: Fast-moving flames fatal to 4 firefighters -- investigators say fire was set to be fanned by Santa Ana winds.' The San Francisco Chronicle, 27 October 2006, A1; 'Lettuce brand recalled over E. coli fears / Compan" Author="James Sterngold; Demian Bulwa" PublicationDate="27 October 2006; 9 October 2006" SampledFrom="All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

Charles Miner screamed in pain as flames lashed the right side of his face, but he was lucky. 
Miner was one of about 600 residents who escaped to safety as a wall of flames 100 feet high raced through Twin Pines on Thursday, killing four firefighters and leaving a fifth in critical condition. 
The U.S. Forest Service firefighters were trapped when gusting winds suddenly blew flames in their direction as they attempted to save a house. 
Investigators determined that the so-called Esperanza Fire was started by an arsonist around 1 a.m. Thursday in a remote mountainous area of Riverside County, said Capt. John Hawkins of the Riverside County Fire Department. By evening, the fire had blackened 19,000 acres and was still burning out of control. 
"It appeared to have been set in a place where it would spread the fastest and cause the most damage," said a visibly angry Hawkins during a news conference. "This is an arson fire," he said. "(It) constitutes murder." 
Miner, a 42-year-old construction contractor from the desert bushland community 25 miles west of Palm Springs, was awakened before dawn by the rampaging fire and fled to safety as firefighters rushed in to protect the town's properties. 
He had evacuated his family from his home and managed to save some of his belongings before the danger became overwhelming. He abandoned his home, cutting through flames in his backhoe to save himself. 
"It was so intense I was screaming,'' said Miner, who escaped with blisters to his face and burns to his arm. "Sparks were flying everywhere. 
"I looked back and the roof was already gone," Miner said as he huddled with his neighbors at the Banning Community Center, near Cabazon, which was serving as an emergency evacuation center. "It's all just gone." 
The Esperanza Fire is now the deadliest wildfire for firefighters in the United States since July 10, 2001, when four firefighters were killed battling the Thirtymile Fire in Washington's Okanogan National Forest. 
The Southern California blaze was first reported at 1:12 a.m. 90 miles east of Los Angeles, prompting a U.S. Forest Service firefighting crew from the Alandale Ranger Station in Idyllwild to rush to the scene. 
Five firefighters were trying to save a home at about 8 a.m., according to Hawkins, when gusting winds suddenly pushed the flames toward them. The firefighters apparently were overcome before they had a chance to use their emergency shelters or seek refuge in their fire engine, said Pat Boss, a Forest Service spokesman. 
"They had left their truck to do structure protection when the fire overran them," Boss said. "They were trapped." 
Three firefighters died on the spot, and the fourth died later at a local hospital. Hawkins said a fifth firefighter was in critical condition. The names of the dead and injured firefighters were not immediately released, but forest service officials said all were members of the Idyllwild crew. Some news reports identified one of the dead as Capt. Mark Loutzenhiser, 43, of Idyllwild, who leaves behind a wife and five children. 
A mandatory evacuation was ordered for up to 400 homes in the Twin Pines, Poppet Flats, Vista Grand and South Banning areas. More than a thousand firefighters from various agencies battled the blaze, assisted by 144 engines, 13 helicopters and 10 air tankers, according to the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection. 
The blaze was burning in the same general vicinity as July's Sawtooth Complex fire, which killed one person, injured 15 and scorched more than 80,000 acres, including 58 homes and residences. 
Local and federal authorities are jointly investigating the arson, but no suspects have been identified. James Cowell, an agent with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, said that, if caught, the arsonist could be prosecuted for murder under federal law. 
As many as 1,000 other residents in the sparsely populated region were forced to hunker down in a recreational vehicle park after a twisting ribbon of flame threatened to engulf the only road out. 
The Esperanza Fire is one of two fires that broke out almost simultaneously in different parts of California. 
Another fast-moving fire burned 80 acres near the Silverado Country Club Resort, about two miles northeast of Napa, forcing a brief evacuation of nearby homes, but that fire was contained by Thursday night. 
The Riverside County Board of Supervisors is offering a $100,000 reward for any information that leads to the capture of the Esperanza Fire arsonist, who, officials believe, set the fire just as Santa Ana winds were kicking up to maximize its destructive potential. 
Boss said all U.S. Forest Service personnel were pulled off the fire so they could "gather their thoughts, say their prayers." 
The fire quickly moved southwest over steep, rocky terrain toward Twin Pines and Poppet Flats, two hamlets dotted with houses and a boys' juvenile home, according to fire officials. The area was evacuated at about 3:30 a.m., forcing residents to hastily pack their cars with belongings and gather their pets. 
The evacuees described a terrifying scene as a towering orange sheet of flames bore down on them. 
Vince Regalado said he was awakened by the smoke shortly before 4 a.m., just as fire trucks were driving down the street ordering residents to clear out. When he looked toward the canyon, he saw a small orange spot, but within minutes flames were dancing 100 feet high up the canyon wall. 
"At least we had time to get the dogs and the cats, but we had to leave the goats and the chickens," Regalado said. 
John Robinson said friends helped him move several cars before the fire reached his house, but the smoke began to suffocate him when he returned to collect his personal items. All he could do, he said, was save himself. 
"I'm in really bad shape," he said. "I got nothing out." 
The fire, fed by winds gusting up to 35 mph, moved too quickly for residents of the Valley Club recreational vehicle park near Poppet Flat. Between 400 and 1,000 residents of the RV park had to wait out the fire after firefighters decided that the only road out, Highway 243, was too dangerous to use. Some vehicles gunned it through the flames and smoke just before firefighters closed the road. 
The flames headed Thursday night roughly in the direction of a desert-like region called the Badlands, where few people live and there is hardly any fuel to burn. Fire officials are concerned, however, that if the blaze continues moving south it will reach the San Bernardino National Forest, where thousands of trees killed by a bark beetle infestation could serve as tinder, endangering more homes. 
Santa Ana winds, which blow out of the interior toward the coast, are a typical occurrence this time of year in Southern California and have fueled many fires in the past. 
They are generated by high pressure over the Great Basin. A "red flag" warning for extreme fire danger had been issued in the region before the fire broke out. 
Henry Renteria, director of the state Office of Emergency Services, said the state is sending resources to the area to make sure the 600 evacuees have everything they need. Renteria said he requested and received a fire management assistance grant from FEMA, which will reimburse local governments 75 percent of their costs for fighting the fire. 
Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger held a news conference in Sacramento on Thursday afternoon to express his sympathy for the families of the dead. 
"The people who fight fires are amongst the bravest men and women anywhere. We must never take for granted the hard work, the sacrifices and the danger that they deal with," Schwarzenegger said. "Anyone that is risking their own lives to save others is a true hero." 

Reviving concern about bagged greens just a week after regulators lifted a warning on eating packaged fresh spinach from three California counties, a Salinas company recalled a popular brand of lettuce Sunday, saying it may have been contaminated by E. coli. 
The firm's president said he does not believe the discovery is linked to a recent outbreak of the bacteria in spinach, which has killed three people, sickened nearly 200 more and prompted a federal criminal probe. 
The new, voluntary recall affects shipments of Foxy brand green leaf lettuce made Tuesday through Friday by the Nunes Co. Inc. The lettuce went to retailers in California and six other states and to distributors that may have passed it along to restaurants. 
The recall involves different crops and a different farm from the spinach outbreak. But it may compound the woes facing Salinas Valley growers just beginning to measure the economic damage from the 3- week-long spinach debacle, which put a focus on the region's 11- year record of E. coli outbreaks. 
Company and federal officials said Sunday that no infections had been reported. Company President Tom Nunes Jr. sought to soothe consumers. 
"This is a precautionary measure based upon the recent events in the produce industry, our concern for our customers and our concern about the product," Nunes said in an interview. 
Nunes said the recalled lettuce came from one farm -- he would not disclose its location -- where some of the water used to irrigate the crop tested positive for E. coli. The contaminated water came from a backup reservoir; the well water primarily used to irrigate the farm tested clean, he said. Nunes said he did not know the reason for the contamination or why the reservoir was being used. 
Nunes said he does not yet know for certain whether any of the recalled lettuce was tainted. It is sold as "Green Leaf 24 Count, waxed carton" and "Green Leaf 18 Count, cellophane sleeve, returnable carton." Both are designated by the lot code of 6SL0024 and would have been purchased Tuesday or later. Consumers can return the product to the place of purchase for a full refund. 
Nunes said 97 percent of the product had been successfully recalled by Sunday afternoon. 
"We emphasize that we are reacting to a water test only. Samples of the product are now being tested," Nunes said. "We're not sure, but a very small percentage of this may have made it to the consumer. ... We're not taking a chance." 
Investigators have traced all the similar E. coli bacteria detected in September to spinach packaged by Natural Selection Foods LLC but have stressed that there is no evidence that anyone intentionally tainted it. E. coli can cause diarrhea and, in a small portion of cases, kidney damage and sometimes death. 
Julie Zawisza, a spokeswoman for the Food and Drug Administration, declined to comment in detail about the new recall but said the regulatory agency is investigating. 
"At this time, I can only confirm that FDA is aware of the firm's voluntary recall and we are looking into it," she said Sunday. "If this is a case of bacterial contamination, we would need to find out the scope and whether it affects all Nunes lettuce or is limited, for example, to only certain lots. 
"As a standard course of action," she said, "we would expect the firm to identify the source of the contamination and take steps to correct and prevent it, to ensure that it doesn't happen again." 
Last week, agents from the Food and Drug Administration and the FBI served search warrants at Natural Selection in San Juan Bautista and Growers Express in Salinas in an effort to find out if the companies followed proper procedures to keep spinach safe. 
The FDA assured consumers last week that all fresh spinach is as safe as it was before the outbreak began. 
The outbreak marked the 20th time since 1995 that leafy greens from California have been contaminated by a deadly strain of E. coli and the ninth instance that the bacteria was traced to the Salinas Valley. In most outbreaks, agricultural experts say, investigators are able to trace the bacteria to a specific product but cannot pinpoint the exact cause of the contamination.

</text>
