<text id="A27" category="" words="1998" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Rising economic tide fails to lift poor, middle class.' USA Today, 30 August 2006, A12; 'Teachers rise to top ; On summer 'vacation,' they become students to meet requirements.' USA Today, 30 August 2006, D1; 'More time in PE doesn't add up ; Study finds " Author="N/A; Greg Toppo; Nanci Hellmich " PublicationDate="30 August 2006; 30 August 2006; 24 August 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; End" WebAddress="Factiva">

There's an old saying that "a rising tide lifts all boats." Popularized by President John F. Kennedy, it generally refers to how a growing economy benefits everyone. 
These days, however, it might need to be revised to say: "A rising tide lifts all yachts." Or perhaps it should be retired entirely, because it no longer appears to be accurate. 
That's the inescapable conclusion from Tuesday's Census Bureau report on poverty. Some 37 million Americans lived below the poverty line ($19,971 for a family of four) in 2005 -- that's 4million more than at the height of the last recession, in 2001. 
The same report showed that the median annual income of $46,326 was essentially unchanged from where it was in 2001, and that the ranks of those without health insurance, now at 46.6 million, continue to grow. 
What makes the numbers so troubling is that they come four years into an economic recovery that by other measures has been robust. From 2001 to 2005, the gross output of the economy increased by about 12% above the rate of inflation, worker productivity surged and corporate profits doubled. 
Traditionally, those trends have been the key to lifting living standards for everyone -- the cornerstone of a stable, successful society. But not this time. Technological innovation and global competition have hurt wages for low-skilled workers while creating new opportunities for skilled workers. 
Indeed, while poverty has been rising, so has the percentage of households making more than $100,000 a year. In 2005, 17.2% of households made six figures. In 1990, just 12% made the inflation- adjusted equivalent. 
The poverty numbers and rising income inequality pose troubling political issues. Large segments of society might see little reason to support policies -- notably free trade -- that promote economic growth. Instead, they could turn to protectionism and to demagogic political leaders more interested in promoting class warfare than in economic expansion. 
So what can be done? Most immediately, the nation needs sweeping health reforms that arrest runaway costs and assure coverage for all, particularly workers forced to choose between health care and other life necessities. 
More broadly, the numbers show what a horrible job the nation is doing in providing the education and job skills its citizens need to compete. The principal problem is not that the economy is producing too few good jobs. It is that society is producing too many unskilled workers. 
Government is very good at spending money on programs that support key constituencies. Benefit programs, led by Social Security and Medicare, make up more than half of all federal spending. 
But government is not very good at investing in the future. If society cannot figure a way for everyone to share in the nation's economic growth, future tides could be shallow indeed. 

HUNTSVILLE, Ala. -- Somewhere between curriculum committees, writing conferences and presentations to principals about computerized blackboards, Bridget Kay Call found a few hours this summer to rise up and fly. 
An airplane ride simulating a near-zero-gravity environment was the icing on summer's cake for the high school English, speech and theater teacher from Matewan, W.Va., one of nearly 90 state Teachers of the Year who spent a week here swapping ideas at a special workshop courtesy of Northrop Grumman and other sponsors. 
The experience of weightlessness left Call speechless -- and able to sympathize with students who struggle to describe the world around them. "The speech teacher is speechless, and that's not quite like me," she says. 
Though the flight was unusual -- the first just for teachers -- the teachers are not. Like most educators these days, they often spend summers working to fulfill new state and federal requirements. 
"People think teachers are off for the summer, and they're not," says Kathleen Blake Yancey of the National Council of Teachers of English. 
The trend toward better qualifications has intensified with No Child Left Behind, President Bush's education reform law, which demands that all teachers be "highly qualified" in every subject they teach. 
A federal review found that not a single state had met the Education Department's spring deadline that every core-subject teacher be qualified in his or her subject. 
Only nine states received favorable reviews for filing plans that show how they'll get all teachers qualified by the end of the 2006- '07 school year. 
Many districts require summer courses and workshops to get their share of the nation's 3million teachers up to speed. Teachers these days also study sea turtle habitats in Costa Rica, evolution in the Galapagos, geology in Wyoming, physics at Los Alamos, N.M., and the history of the Wright Brothers in Dayton, Ohio, among others specialties. 
While public money is limited, teachers tap into hundreds of public-private partnerships that, in many cases, take them far from home for once-in-a-lifetime training experiences. 
"If I don't keep growing, how do I expect my students to?" says Call, 53, her zip-up navy-blue flight suit adorned with a tiny silver pin in the shape of West Virginia. 
She and others say young teachers have especially busy summers, with rules that all but force them to earn a master's degree early in their career. A colleague of Call's on the flight, Durand Payton, 33, teaches biology in Moss Point, Miss. He has taught only four years and already is taking four classes at the University of Southern Mississippi to keep his job. "It's been a very busy summer," he says. 
Shannon C'de Baca, a veteran science teacher in Council Bluffs, Iowa, and a trainer in the federally funded Teacher-to-Teacher workshops every summer, estimates that 60% to 70% of her colleagues take some sort of summer coursework, either to keep certification current or to "learn tricks of the trade" from other teachers. 
"We don't have time to talk to other teachers except before school and after school," she says. 
Meetings and tutoring sessions intrude on training and discussion among colleagues, which teachers "seem to crave," C'de Baca says. 
The government established the Teacher-to-Teacher program in 2004 to serve students who don't always get well-trained instructors. 
"Teachers were desperate for high-quality professional development done by their peers," says Carolyn Snowbarger, who directs the program. By the end of this summer, the program will have trained about 10,000 teachers. 
"By the time you multiply that out, we will have reached the teachers of a million students," Snowbarger says. 
This summer, teachers have traveled to Dayton to learn about the early work of the Wright Brothers; to Billings, Mont., to learn about the history and science of the Lewis and Clark expedition; and to West Orange, N.J., to learn about the work of Thomas Edison. 
The program is a relative bargain at $2 million. Teachers or their school districts cover travel, meals and hotel expenses, and many teachers carpool and share hotel rooms to cut costs. 
At San Francisco's Exploratorium, a popular hands-on science museum, hundreds of teachers spend four weeks training each summer. Each Friday they take part in an Iron Science Teacher competition to see who can come up with the best lesson using identical supplies. In a tongue-in-cheek tribute to the Iron Chef TV series, trainers at the last minute throw in a surprise supply to be incorporated. In 25 years, they have trained about 3,400 teachers and 1,000 teacher trainers. 
Though no reliable data exist on how many teachers train or work during the summer, national data show the percentage of teachers earning a master's degree more than doubled from 1961 to 2001, from 23% to 56%. 
The No Child Left Behind law is just one of the factors driving the changes. Businesses are demanding better-prepared students, adding to the pressure teachers feel to keep up-to-date on the latest research and developments in their fields. 
Yet recent research shows that U.S. teachers spend less time collaborating with their colleagues than teachers elsewhere. In Japan, for instance, teachers spend about one-third fewer hours a day in front of classes but more time brainstorming with colleagues. 
On any given day, Japanese teachers are far more likely than U.S. teachers to be in the teachers' lounge, asking one another, "What worked in your classroom today?" says Dennis Bartels, the Exploratorium's executive director. 
Though thousands of teachers take advantage of programs such as those at the Exploratorium, the numbers are "infinitesimal compared to the number of teachers we want to be constantly learning and improving our practice," says Dennis Sparks of the National Staff Development Council, a non-profit advocacy group based in Ohio. 
Snowbarger agrees. She hopes Congress will raise her budget from $2 million to $3 million to expand her summer workshops next year. 
"If we're going to have accountability for students, we're certainly going to have accountability for how we're training our teachers," she says. 


Just increasing the amount of time students are supposed to spend in physical education class is no guarantee they'll move more, a new study shows. 
Obesity experts have been calling for children to go to gym class more often to help stop obesity in young people. About one-third of children and teens in the USA are either overweight or on the brink of becoming so. 

Most states introduced legislation this year and in 2005 to toughen up PE requirements. 
To figure out whether higher PE time requirements are effective, economist John Cawley of Cornell University and colleagues analyzed data on 37,000 teens in grades nine through 12 from government surveys in 1999, 2001 and 2003. The economists did calculations on students' height, weight and amount of time in gym classes and compared the data with states' PE requirements. 
They found that when states required an extra year of PE for high school students, which is roughly 200 more minutes a week of physical education: 
*Male students said they spent another 7.6 minutes a week exercising or playing sports in gym class. 
*Female students spent an extra eight minutes and six seconds a week doing exercise in PE. 
There may be several reasons for this small increase in time, Cawley says. "Some schools are ignoring the laws and not meeting the state requirements." And some teachers are not keeping children moving during class time, he says. 
His research also showed that the amount of time states required for physical education classes didn't seem to have an effect on teens' weight or risk of obesity. 
He says another study showed that 26% of schools in the country fail to comply with state regulations for PE, and research on elementary school students in a county in Texas showed that the children did moderate to vigorous activity for 3.4 minutes of a 40- minute class. About two-thirds of class time was spent in sedentary activity; one-quarter of the time was spent doing minimal activity. 
"The real risk here is that states may increase the time requirements, think they've addressed the problem of childhood obesity and may move on to other priorities," says Cawley, whose paper is in the fall issue of Education Next. The journal is published by the Hoover Institution, a non-profit think tank at Stanford University. 
If states want to increase physical activity, they also need to consider revising PE curricula to ensure that schools offer motivating classes that actually get kids to play games, run around and move more, he says. Plus, there's the question of enforcement. Parents and policymakers need to hold schools and teachers accountable to meet the requirements, Cawley says. 
Russell Pate, professor of exercise science at the University of South Carolina, who has also studied PE, says classes run the gamut from ones in which students spend a lot of time moving to those in which children are standing around most of the time. 
"That would be the equivalent of a math class where nobody is working on their math problems," he says. 
Craig Buschner, president-elect of the National Association of Sport and Physical Education, a group of professionals in the field, says, "Physical education, if taught well, can be a cornerstone of helping people become physically active throughout their lives."

</text>
