<text id="A29" category="" words="2000" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Rebuilding blocks Health care, tech are likely keys to D/FW rebound' THE DALLAS MORNING NEWS, February 12, 2006, Pg. 1D; 'The wages of sin For investors who've bet on it, Vice Fund pays off' THE DALLAS MORNING NEWS, September 7, 2006, Pg. 1D;" Author="ANGELA SHAH and BRENDAN M. CASE; WILL DEENER;" PublicationDate="February 12, 2006; September 7, 2006" SampledFrom="All: Beginning;" WebAddress="Nexis UK">

Five years ago, Dallas-Fort Worth took a major jolt when the telecom industry crashed. Only now is the North Texas economy finally emerging from the wreckage.

But instead of the high-flying telecom employers who hired workers by the tens of thousands in the late 1990s, economic growth is now diffused across numerous industries, including trade, business services and health care, according to members of The Dallas Morning News' Board of Economists.

And "completely under the radar" is the potential merging of regional expertise in information technology and life sciences - just in time to deal with baby boomers hitting retirement age.

"We're the best-positioned region in the U.S. to exploit the coming pressures in health care because we provide the information systems," said Don Hicks, a professor of political economy at the University of Texas at Dallas.

For all the talk of an improving outlook, a boom in Houston overshadows Dallas' recovery.

In the last six months, a robust energy sector has boosted job growth in Houston. Evacuees from the Gulf hurricanes last fall filled up residential and commercial real estate, and Louisiana port closures boosted trade activity.

"It's real interesting to look at the reversal of fortune in the Houston area and Dallas-Fort Worth," said Bernard Weinstein, director of the Center for Economic Development at the University of North Texas. "Houston is the superstar in Texas."

As telecom thrived in the Dallas area in the '90s, regional job creation outpaced Houston's. In the last five years, that trend reversed. Houston has added 60,000 jobs; Dallas payrolls are at a 50,000-job deficit, with total employment of 1.96 million at the end of last year, compared with 2.01 million in December 2000.

The economists expect North Texas to recoup those losses this year.

"We are coming back. It's just very up and down," said Mine Yucel, vice president and senior economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. 
"The tech bust is continuing to hurt us."

In a wide-ranging discussion last week, the economists described a generally positive outlook for North Texas as they examined opportunities, problems and ticking time bombs in the economy.

Texas faces the same challenges as the nation as a whole - higher energy prices, soaring health care costs and rising concern over pensions, retirements and exploding federal deficits.

"While the economy here is pretty strong on the surface, I worry about what I call the soft underbelly," Mr. Weinstein said.

"Trade deficits, budget deficits to infinity, a negative savings rate for the last eight months," he said. "Pensions, bankruptcies, mountains of debt and borrowing that our prosperity is based on. Consumers continuing to spend when real incomes are falling. I mean, how long can this go on?"

The question is growing increasingly urgent as many people see their real incomes stagnate.

"We're losing real ground in terms of wages and salaries," said Stanley Suchman, regional commissioner for the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Wages and salaries in the South, for example, in 2005, went up about 2 percent. Prices in the South ... went up about 3.7 percent in 2005."

Add to that a rapidly changing economy that can quickly render jobs obsolete, even as it creates opportunities, and the strain is felt in household budgets.

"Where we're creating wealth is exactly where we are breaking apart these processes," said Lyssa Jenkens, the Greater Dallas Chamber's chief economist.

"It's in these productivity gains and this breaking apart that we are creating wealth," she said. "It's a good thing, but it's a hard thing to talk about in terms of 'Where do people get jobs?'"

Health care

Health care is one of the largest concerns for both consumers and employers. But it also offers some of the greatest potential.

Nationally, health insurance premiums have risen 73 percent since 2000, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. The number of people without insurance has surpassed 45 million, according to federal figures.

While lawmakers and health care executives consider ways both to control costs and extend health care coverage to more people, the economists said the industry must become more efficient.

That's key for North Texas companies, which are well positioned to leverage their expertise in communications and information systems into the health care arena.

"The key to health care is often not more biology and chemistry," Mr. Hicks said. "It's information flow. What we provide in this mix of resources is the ability to move information."

Right now, the region's maturing high-tech sector is still focused on established areas such as computers, semiconductors and telecommunications. But profits there aren't what they once were.

"Our high-tech sector is no longer a leading-edge high-tech sector," said Gary Preuss, economist at the Texas Comptroller's office. "We've got kind of old-guard tech here."

Future growth will probably come from seeking new opportunities, especially in health care.

"It plays absolutely to our competitive advantage in technology," Ms. Jenkens said. "We have that right mix of talent and skill to grow that industry."

Pensions

Another major question mark facing the U.S. economy is the looming pension crisis.

Companies from General Motors Corp. to International Business Machines Corp. have been scaling back their multibillion-dollar pension obligations, a trend that is widely expected to continue.

"We've just seen the tip of the iceberg of the old Rust Belt basically cashing in and saying to the government, 'You take care of it,'" said Michael Granfield, managing director of FTI Consulting.

Factor in Americans' dismal savings levels, and long-planned retirements may no longer be affordable.

"It's going to be an intergenerational clash," Mr. Granfield added. "It's going to be really ugly."

Mr. Hicks said society will adapt by redefining retirement. The trouble for some is that might mean doing away with it - an unhappy prospect for those hoping for a leisurely golden age, though potentially good news for those who want to stay active.

"People will want to be engaged," he said. "You may not work for a major employer, but there will be alternative sources of incomes. So I don't see any sort of apocalypse."

Trade

In recent years, Texas has become the largest exporter among the 50 states. Mexico remains the state's largest trading partner.

Many border communities enjoy higher employment levels today than during the 1990s boom.

"The border economy has grown tremendously over the past 10 years," said Suad Ghaddar, research associate at the Center for Border Economic Studies at the University of Texas-Pan American. "Employment has been growing very rapidly."

But the heavily Hispanic region is also an epicenter of one of the state's key long-term challenges - and opportunities. Hispanics are expected to account for a majority of Texans by 2020.

Educating their children is shaping up as a critical task in keeping the Texas economy competitive. Right now, wages on the border are about 60 percent of the U.S. average, Ms. Ghaddar said.

"There's a huge emphasis that we need to place on education, especially given the demographic shift we're going to see in Texas," she said. "This is a group that's characterized by low levels of education and high dropout rates."; 

Investing heaven may be only a sin away.

The Dallas-based Vice Fund has left political correctness to others and boldly gone where other mutual funds fear to tread - Sin City. The Vice Fund, which celebrated its fourth anniversary on Aug. 30, invests in casino stocks and in companies that make liquor, tobacco and bombs.

Given people's proclivities to drink, smoke, gamble and blow each other up no matter what the economic climate, it should come as no surprise that the Vice Fund has been a consistent top performer. It has beaten the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index in each of the past three years and is on track to do it again this year, with a 10 percent gallop so far in 2006, compared with a 5 percent gain for the S&amp;P.

The Vice Fund holds Morningstar's highest five-star rating and over the past year ranks 22nd out of the 174 mutual funds that invest in midsize growth and value stocks.

"We have a history of outperforming the market," said Charles L. Norton, co-portfolio manager of the Vice Fund and principal at GNI Capital. "You soon realize that there is true investment merit in these sectors."

Merit indeed. Cigarette maker Altria Group Inc.,
Enhanced Coverage LinkingAltria Group Inc., the fund's largest holding, is up almost 70 percent for the past 18 months. Another holding, London-based Diageo PLC, which makes and distributes wine and spirits - including Johnnie Walker Scotch and Smirnoff vodka - is up about 30 percent for the same period. In the gaming sector, one of Mr. Norton's favorites is Las Vegas Sands Corp., which has gained about 40 percent.

He says these defensive sectors should perform even better - relative to the overall market - if the economy slows as most financial experts predict. That's because people will spend money to smoke, drink and probably even to gamble during a recession.

The defense sector is essentially tied to the U.S. military budget and moves independently of U.S. economic cycles. But given the current geopolitical turmoil in the Middle East, no one is projecting big budget cuts in defense.

"Based on historical precedent, right now is the most opportune time to be invested in this fund," Mr. Norton said. "The reason is we are at an inflection point in the economy. We are already seeing signs of softening in the economy."

Too limited?

Not everyone shares this much enthusiasm for the fund. Hugh Johnson, chairman of Johnson Illington Advisors in Albany, N.Y., said that although it's true the sin sectors have outperformed the broader market in recent years, there's no assurance that will continue.

"The Vice Fund clearly has hit it right recently, where all four of those sectors are doing well at the same time," he said. "The odds are against that working all the time."

Further, Mark Luschini, head of asset management at Parker Hunter Inc., a Pittsburgh money management firm, said these four sectors are by no means all of the defensive plays. Health care stocks, utility stocks and other consumer staples, such as soft drink companies and household products, should hold up reasonably well if the economy slows.

"The Vice Fund seems to be pretty narrowly focused," Mr. Luschini said. "I would be a little shy of being that tightly focused. You are leaving out a lot of prominent industry sectors."

Mr. Norton said, however, that there are hundreds of companies to choose from in those four sectors, so "it's pretty broad-based." Further, he said there are more nuanced strategies in vice investing than just playing on human weaknesses.

First, there are high barriers of entry into the sectors. For example, a limited number of gaming licenses are issued, and "you are not seeing any new tobacco companies that are starting up," Mr. Norton said. Second, companies in these sectors are highly profitable, with excellent cash flow and solid management.

Third, many of these vice stocks, especially the distillers and tobacco manufacturers, have substantial overseas operations. Some Asian countries are opening up to U.S. gaming companies.;

Lasting appeal

Las Vegas Sands is becoming "the most prominent player in the Asian gaming market, which is extremely fast-growing," Mr. Norton said. "There is even talk that Japan is going to allow casinos there for the first time."

Obviously, tobacco companies have faced litigation for years, but analysts are saying the legal risks are subsiding. Tobacco companies have won three major legal victories in the last nine months.

Recently, the Florida Supreme Court upheld a decision to negate a $145 billion judgment. This was one of the last remaining class-action cases involving the industry.
And finally, alcohol, tobacco, gaming and defense industries have been around for hundreds of years. Fads come and go, but people will probably always engage in those activities, he said.
"In the case of the alcohol and tobacco industries, those products are never made obsolete by new technology," Mr. Norton said.

</text>
