<text id="A30" category="" words="2001" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Insanity verdict in two '04 slayings The suspect had tried repeatedly to plead guilty to the men's stabbings.' Denver Post, 29 August 2006, B3; 'Sex-crime solutions elude cities.' Denver Post, 21 August 2006, B1; 'Police: Rapes in Brighton false reports." Author="Howard Pankratz; David Harsanyi; Monte Whaley; Kirk Mitchell" PublicationDate="29 August 2006; 21 August 2006; 8 August 2006; 6 August 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; End" WebAddress="Factiva">

A woman charged with fatally stabbing two men in 2004 was found not guilty by reason of insanity Monday.
Amber Torrez was charged with first-degree murder in the stabbing deaths of 55-year-old John Hand on March 28, 2004, and Denver cab driver Masfin Gezahgn the next day. Gezahgn, 45, was stabbed 39 times; Hand, the founder of the alternative Colorado Free University, was stabbed 30 times.
Torrez had repeatedly tried to plead guilty to the killings. But Denver District Judge Christina Habas rejected Torrez's request and entered a plea of not guilty by reason of insanity. The trial was scheduled for two days, but Habas was able to complete testimony Monday.
During testimony Monday, Denver police Detective Shawn Webster gave a gory description of the crime scene at Hand's home. 'There were obvious signs of a struggle,' he said. 'There was lots of blood. There was blood in the living room near the couch and a lot of blood in the work area.'
Two psychiatrists have determined that Torrez was insane at the time of the killings.
But one doctor, Karen Fukutaki, said that while Torrez was insane when the men were killed, Torrez was sane when Hand was robbed - just moments after he was stabbed to death.
Early in the day, defense attorney Holly Lucas made a brief statement, asking Habas to find Torrez not guilty by reason of insanity.
Webster testified Hand was pronounced dead soon after police responded to calls from a neighbor. 'The person in the downstairs unit called 911 after he heard his upstairs neighbor yelling he was being killed,' he said.
Webster said that there was a blood trail leading for blocks away from the home. DNA found in the blood matched Torrez's DNA, he said.
The surveillance cameras at the Denver gas station where Torrez allegedly used Hand's credit card showed something white wrapped around her fingers, the detective testified. Torrez told investigators that she was injured while stabbing Hand, he said.
Webster also testified about detectives the next day responding to an area near East 18th Avenue and Gilpin Street where Gezahgn was found dead.
In prior court hearings, Dr. Mark Diamond, chief of psychiatry at the Colorado Mental Health Institute, testified that Torrez was schizophrenic, has a bipolar orientation, which makes her manic and difficult to control, and has an antisocial/borderline disorder.
Fukutaki testified at an earlier hearing that Torrez told her at the age of 15 she was attacked by a man who held a knife to her throat and at age 18 was knocked out with a date-rape drug.

With JonBent Ramsey back on the front pages, parents will undoubtedly be reminded of the dangers posed by sexual predators.
Only last month, Greenwood Village became the first city in the state to pass an ordinance prohibiting convicted sex offenders from residing near schools, parks or playgrounds - essentially making the city off-limits.
There isn't a parent in Colorado who wants to live within close proximity of a sexual offender. And that might be the glaring flaw in this piecemeal solution.
According to Jeralyn Merritt, Denver-area lawyer and proprietor of TalkLeft.com, it's not the only problem.
'I think these are terrible laws,' Merritt says. 'First of all, they are a short-
sighted non-solution. Either these laws drive people underground or the result is that fewer people end up registering. You are pushing people to the outer limits, further not only from their jobs but also treatment centers. Making people live their lives in the shadows is not a solution. A lot of these people will become homeless.'
Sorry. I have zero empathy for sex offenders. Still, there are reasons to believe banishment laws are feel-good exercises with little positive outcome.
The majority of pedophiles, according to experts, are familiar to the family - and that could mean a neighbor. But there is nothing to prevent a predatory pedophile from driving to the next town.
Greenwood Village, in fact, has only four registered sex offenders. Not one of the more dangerous neighborhoods in the area. What happens when a predator from Greenwood Village packs up his belongings for Commerce City? Do children there deserve this new neighbor?
Another dilemma faces parents. The present system of registering offenders does not distinguish between the dangerous and the formerly dangerous - bundling statutory rape cases with violent pedophiles.
Without excusing anyone's criminal behavior, it's obvious such a system is unreliable and unfair.
'The question is, what was that person convicted of and how long ago was it?' Merritt asks. 'One of the problems is that we register violent sexual predators and someone who 10 years ago pled to having sex with an underaged girl as the same. A lot of these people are just not dangerous.'
Yes. And a large number are. Reviewing recidivism rates among pedophiles and sexual offenders will give the most confident parent chills. 'Not dangerous' is a concept that is hard to swallow for obvious reasons.
So I almost recoil when asking this question: But where exactly are these people expected to live? And if we relegate offenders to ghettos, are we pushing them to avoid treatment and registration?
According to Merritt, banishment laws 'help no one, but they hurt the sex offenders. They hurt those who have come out of prison and are trying to get a job and get their life back together. This could prevent them from living and finding a job, and then they may revert to economic crimes. A better solution would be to provide treatment.'
There is another nagging problem, and this involves principle: If a criminal has paid his debt to society, what right do we have to tell him where to live? Has this sort of banishment law met the constitutional test? 'It's been upheld in some places,' says Merritt, who explains there is a major test underway in the Georgia court system right now.
In 2002, Iowa passed a state law prohibiting sex offenders from living within 2,000 feet of schools and child-care centers anywhere in the state. But the law applied only to criminals whose victims were younger than 18. As of now, 15 states have similar laws on the books.
Greenwood Village would like to rid itself of offenders. Guess what? So would every other city in Colorado.
Is there a fair and productive way to protect children and rehabilitate sexual offenders? I don't know. But I do know no one wants the banished offenders of Greenwood Village in their town.
There has to be a better solution.


Brighton - The tales of rape among the spacious homes and well- kept lawns of the Sugar Creek subdivision were terrifying, and, for about four months, residents thought they were true.
A 14-year-old girl selling newspaper subscriptions said in April that she was grabbed by three men from behind, dragged to a nearby field and raped.
Then, five days later, a 34-year-old woman reported she was raped, having been pulled from a sidewalk by three men about two blocks from where the first alleged attack occurred.
'Oh, my God, everything changed for us,' said Sadie Escarcega, a three-year resident of Sugar Creek. 'We were always looking behind us and worried about someone behind us.'
Brighton police announced Monday that the girl and the woman were never assaulted, though it remains unclear why they would fabricate such a tale.
The alleged victims didn't know each other, police said.
'Personally, I've never seen anything go this far,' said Brighton Police Chief Clint Blackhurst. 'These crimes did not occur, and (the rapists) did not exist.'
The Brighton community rallied behind the neighborhood, putting up $19,000 for the capture of the assailants. Public meetings were held while police logged 1,400 man-hours and 300 hours of overtime investigating the claims, including a door-by-
door canvass of Sugar Creek, Blackhurst said.
Police also encountered several dead ends, including lack of DNA evidence and discrepancies in the descriptions and timelines the alleged victims gave police, Blackhurst said.
The 14-year-old reportedly told her supervisor that she made up the story, and the supervisor notified police. During interviews with detectives last week, the two alleged victims recanted their stories, the police chief said.
'I think both are remorseful and sad,' he added.
Blackhurst declined to identify the alleged victims. The teenager lives in Jefferson County, and the 34-year-old woman is a Brighton resident.
The case is being handed over to the Adams County district attorney, who will consider charges of false reporting to authorities, a Class 2 misdemeanor that carries a penalty of up to six months in jail and a $750 fine.
Blackhurst said he is not angry with the two alleged victims, but he is relieved. 'At least we know this type ofcrime didn't happen in Brighton,' Blackhurst said.
Still, he admits, his department may have to mend some fences with some in the Latino community. Both alleged victims described their attackers as Latino, and some Latinos thought they were being unfairly targeted by police.
'We certainly hope to alleviate any tension between the Hispanic community and elsewhere,' Blackhurst said.
Sugar Creek resident Steve Gonzales said police did little to shift suspicion away from law-abiding Latinos. 'We absolutely felt targeted,' he said.
Escarcega, however, said police were only doing their jobs. 'Whoever was doing this could be black, white, Chicano, whatever,' Escarcega said.
Many residents said they changed their daily lifestyles because of the reported attacks.
Escarcega quit jogging and made sure her three kids were always inside the house, especially in the weeks following the reported assaults. 'We were just terrified about going out,' Escarcega said.
In a way, the allegations brought out the best in Brighton, said Sugar Creek resident Diana Wiant. Posters were put up all over the city in English and Spanish, and people began watching out for one another, she said.
'This is just a shame because of the all the resources and time spent on this case,' Wiant said. 'This is just sad.'
Real rape victims, meanwhile, will face another hurdle when they come forward, said Tamika Payne, executive director of the Colorado Coalition Against Sexual Assault.
'A lot of attention gets placed on these instances of false accusations, which are so rare,' Payne said. 'It just makes it that much harder for survivors to step forward.'


The 22-year-old Boulder County resident stopped breathing and was taken to a Lafayette hospital but was pronounced dead about 8 p.m. Friday, Lafayette police Sgt. Fred Palmer said in a news release.
Authorities have not released the man's name pending notification of his family.
On Saturday, the suspect's uncle questioned the use of the Taser by police.
'He's not a very intimidating kid,' the uncle said. 'The end result in this case just doesn't fit the crime.'
The Boulder Drug Task Force and Louisville police were working on a drug operation when the suspect started running about 7 p.m. near Paschel Drive and Waneka Lake, Palmer said.
A Lafayette police officer spotted the suspect in a field north of South Boulder Road and started to chase him in his squad car, he said.
The officer drove in front of the suspect, got out of the patrol car and ordered the man to stop, Palmer said.
The suspect kept running as the officer yelled at him to stop. After a short foot chase, the suspect turned around and took an aggressive stance when the police officer fired the Taser, Palmer said.
The suspect collapsed, Palmer said. He was taken to Exempla Good Samaritan Medical Center in Lafayette.
The suspect's uncle, who did not want to give his name until all family members were notified, said his nephew was an unemployed plumber who had a few run-ins with the law.
He was about 6 feet tall and 130 pounds, the uncle said.
The cause of death is under investigation, Palmer said.
Lafayette police did not return phone calls for comment. It was not known what action, if any, was taken against the officer who fired the Taser.

</text>
