<text id="A31" category="" words="2005" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Bid farewell to tax collector's auction' St. Petersburg Times (Florida), May 28, 2006, Pg. 1; 'Scholarship winners beat tough beginnings' St. Petersburg Times (Florida), March 16, 2006 , Pg. 1B; " Author="BRIDGET HALL GRUMET; NANCY WACLAWEK; " PublicationDate="May 28, 2006 ; March 16, 2006 ; " SampledFrom="All; Beginning; " WebAddress="Nexis UK ">

The auctioneer announced 3611.

"Quarter!" a couple of dozen folks shouted, as a flurry of white papers with black numbers shot into the air.

"Quarter, number 967," the auctioneer said.

Then he announced 3612.

"Quarter!" they shouted, bid numbers outstretched.

"Quarter, number 963," the auctioneer said, picking another buyer from the crowd.

The rapid-fire auction continued this way for a day and a half, with bankers and personal investors wrangling over the right to pay someone else's taxes. By the end of the auction Thursday at the West Pasco Government Center, nearly $9.5-million in delinquent taxes had been collected on 6,616 properties.

A legal mandate to collect unpaid taxes, the tax collector's auction has become an annual ritual of sorts, with buyers trying to outbid and outshout one another, clerks plowing through massive stacks of paper and fast-talking auctioneers picking winners in a split second.

But it's a ritual that's coming to an end.

Tax Collector Mike Olson said he plans to switch to an Internet auction for next year's tax certificate sale - making last week's live auction Pasco's last.

"It's not that there are disadvantages in the old system," Olson said. "It's just there are so many advantages in going to the Internet sale," which takes less staff time, opens the field to more buyers and randomly picks the winner when scores of bidders offer the same amount.

"The positives of going to the Internet sale then make the old way of doing it look antiquated," Olson said. "But it's a hard thing. It's tradition, and they like being there and doing it."

Four counties tried the Internet auction in 2004. A dozen more joined them in 2005. This year, about half of Florida's 67 counties have traded the gavel for the mouse, although the counties still use live auctions for selling the actual properties if the owners fail to pay off the tax liens.

Live tax certificate auctions usually take days and can add up to hundreds of hours of staff time, as clerks painstakingly record each sale by hand and then enter the data into computers.

But an online auction, which features hundreds or thousands of tax certificates up for bidding at the same time, can be done in a matter of hours, with little or no data entry.

Rather than asking a bleary-eyed auctioneer to determine which bidder first yelled "quarter!" - as in quarter-percent, the lowest possible bid - the online auction randomly picks a winner among the tied bidders.

And the computerized version doesn't cost the tax collectors a thing: The online auctioneers make their money by tacking a small fee onto each tax certificate that is sold.

Some investors say the online auction will be an improvement. Instead of sifting through pages of property listings and researching each tract, buyers can find most of the useful property information by clicking around the auction Web site, James Mathieu Jr. said.

"They give you all of it at your fingertips," said Mathieu, a Port Richey lawyer who invests for himself.

But other investors say the online auction will push them out of the game.

The banks and financial institutions, which snatch up most of the tax certificates at a quarter-percent, have enough money to bid on everything in sight. But individuals can bid only on what they can afford. They can bid more or less as a live auction unfolds, because tax certificates are sold one at a time. But in an Internet auction, bidders are competing for hundreds or thousands of tax certificates at the same time, and no one knows how much they've won until that batch closes.

"The individual investor is overwhelmed by the banks that are investing in the tax certificates now," said Hank Stone, 56, a retired mortgage company vice president who personally invests in tax certificates. He lives in Valrico but came to Pasco's live auction last week because Hillsborough's auction is online.

"Whenever you bid online, you don't know how much you're going to get," Stone said. "That leaves the little investor out."

Kathi Hoker picks up the junk at tax certificate auctions.

She sits back while the bidders from the banks compete for quarter-percents on houses and shopping centers. When scrappy little properties come up and the room goes quiet, Hoker raises her number and offers 18 percent - the highest interest rate allowed.

"This is my retirement money," Hoker, a 52-year-old real estate agent from Plant City, explained during a break. "I'm in it for the long run."

But the live auctions are quickly becoming a thing of the past. Hoker used to collect the junk in Citrus until that county switched to Internet auctions last year. She came to Pasco's auctions in 2005 and 2006 because it was the only county in the area that hadn't gone online.

Hoker tried the Internet auction in Citrus last year. She said she put in 60 or 80 bids, but "I didn't even get one."

In a live auction, folks can look around the room and see their competition. But an Internet auction is open to anyone with a computer. When Brevard County took its auction online in 2005, for instance, the number of bidders shot up from 205 to 1,835.

Because she picks up the junk no one else wants, Hoker can get a high interest rate for her investment. But when hundreds more bidders enter the fray, she's no longer the only one trolling for junk.

"I'll have to find something else to invest in," Hoker said. "Or find another county that's off-line and hope it's not too far."

Olson, the tax collector, has heard those concerns. But he said his job is to collect delinquent taxes, not ensure the best opportunity for private investors.

"It shouldn't matter to a county tax collector," Olson said. "The duty is to collect the taxes, to have a legal and fair auction and collect as much of the tax roll as you possibly can."

Last week's live auction collected the taxes on 6,616 of Pasco's 7,227 delinquent properties. About 83 percent of those certificates went to financial institutions at a quarter-percent, although Florida law ensures a minimum 5 percent return when the lien is repaid.

Some of the unsold tax certificates could not be sold because the property owner has filed for bankruptcy or the land is homesteaded and the taxes are worth less than $100. That left only 162 tax certificates - about 2 percent of the delinquent properties - that could have been purchased but weren't.

Olson considers that a pretty good success rate and doubts an Internet sale will do much better. But he said an online auction will bring greater efficiency and fairness in picking the winners.

"It is the end of an era in every county that goes to an online sale," Olson said, "but the world changes, and technology changes, and things move forward."; 

"The thirst for knowledge is never quenched," wrote one of the 2006 Barnes Scholarship winners in her application essay. It is that commitment to learning that characterizes the four winners of the 2006 Barnes Scholarships, announced today by the St. Petersburg Times Fund Inc.

The winners are Erin Braden Hendricks of Armwood High School in Hillsborough County, Gregory Horn of H.B. Plant High School in Hillsborough County, Zorana Kojic of Palm Harbor University High School in Pinellas County and Abbey Surrena of Springstead High School in Hernando County.

These two boys and two girls were selected from among 10 finalists interviewed at the newspaper's St. Petersburg office in February. A total of 278 students from public and private high schools in Pinellas, Hillsborough, Pasco, Hernando and Citrus counties had applied.

The scholarships were created in 1999 to help college-bound teens who had overcome significant obstacles in their lives while remaining committed to academic achievement and community involvement.

They were renamed in 2004 to honor former Times chairman and CEO Andrew Barnes upon his retirement.

It was Barnes who had encouraged the establishment of the scholarships.

For each winner, the scholarship is worth as much as $60,000 over four years at an accredited U.S. college or university.

This year, the Barnes program will provide more than $230,000 in financial aid to college students. The fund has been providing scholarships to college students since 1953.

"The selection of these scholarship winners is one of the highlights of every year," said Paul C. Tash, chairman, CEO and editor of the Times and president of the St. Petersburg Times Fund Inc.

"You can't help but feel good about the future when you see such talented and resilient young people. It's our real pleasure to help boost them along life's path toward big things."

Family strife and upheaval affected the childhoods of three of the Barnes winners. Braden Hendricks, 18, and Gregory Horn, 17, were in elementary school when they watched their parents' marriages sour. Ultimately, they ended in divorce. Braden was 12, Greg was 13. The financial impact on their lives was immediate.

Braden Hendricks

Braden went to live with his mother and moved four times in 18 months to households that did not champion his educational goals.

Eventually, Braden's paternal grandparents took him in, providing the emotional, financial and educational support that he needed. His grandfather also taught him to play golf, which has become an important part of his life.

"Golf taught me to be a better person," Braden said in his scholarship interview. "It's the process of learning the finesse of the game: Don't rush the execution. . . . Think. . . . Plan. . . . Be confident. . . . All of this filtered into my character as a person."

When Braden was in the seventh grade, his father got custody, and they moved to southern Illinois and then to Florida.

Although he has a law degree, his father has worked odd jobs so he could spend time with his son.

"He wanted to make sure I came out right," Braden wrote in his application. "Living with my dad has been the best, but we've never really had a lot of money."

Braden has a part-time job to help make ends meet.

Braden is 14th in his class of 384 at Armwood and has received straight A's throughout high school. He is a National Merit Scholarship commended scholar, a Golden Key Scholar and Florida Academic Scholar.

He has played on Armwood's golf team for three years and been captain for two years. He is a member of the National Honor Society, Spanish Honor Society, debate team, Fellowship of Christian Athletes, Mu Alpha Theta, Interact and X-Press, the student literary magazine. He has tutored students in math, science and English and has volunteered in public library and county parks programs.

Braden wants to be a writer and has applied to universities with strong liberal arts programs, including Duke, Harvard and Yale.

Gregory Horn

For Greg, divorce brought financial struggles, but it also brought a more peaceful home environment.

With his sister at college in New York, Greg and his mother lived in an apartment in South Tampa. Because it was severely damaged by flooding during Hurricane Jeanne in September 2004, they had to move out.

Greg wanted to remain at Plant High School, so he moved in with a friend's family. His mother, who has health problems, moved to Pinellas County to live with friends. She and Greg see each other on the weekends.

Through it all, Greg has stayed focused on his goal of being the best he can be. "I set out to continue doing my best, whether that be in school work or as being a good man," he wrote in his application. "Mostly I work, taking each day in stride, allowing things to get just a little easier as time passes."

Greg is valedictorian of his class of 430 at Plant and a National Merit Scholarship commended scholar. He is a Key Scholar and vice president of the National Honor Society, and he has worked as a tutor.;

</text>
