<text id="A33" category="" words="2003" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Fifty Windows on the World' Time, 17 April 2006; 'Let's Get Connected' Time, 18 September 2006; 'Digging for Clues After Sago' Time, 30 January 2006; 'How the New Philanthropy Works' Time, 25 September 2006; 'Why we should study Theodore Roosevelt' Time," Author="KATHLEEN KINGSBURY; JOHN BRIDGELAND; DOUGLAS WALLER; BILL CLINTON; NEWT GINGRICH" PublicationDate="17 April 2006; 18 September 2006; 30 January 2006; 25 September 2006; " SampledFrom="All; All; All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1181618,00.html; http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1533441,00.html; http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1151792,00.html; http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1538662,">

Think globally, act locally. That's the message as more and more communities turn to nonbinding ballot initiatives to chime in on national and foreign policy. In Wisconsin last week, residents of 24 counties passed resolutions calling for U.S. troops to pull out of Iraq, joining dozens of towns in Vermont that have passed similar measures. Seven states--Alaska, Arizona, Colorado, Hawaii, Maine, Montana and Vermont--and nearly 400 counties have voted either to criticize or ignore the Patriot Act. Come November, voters in localities across the U.S. will be asked to say yea or nay to affirmative action, abortion and embryonic-stem-cell research. "All of these are very personal issues. Who better to decide them than citizens themselves?" asks Archon Fung, a government professor at Harvard. "This is true direct democracy."
Except, of course, that these resolutions have only symbolic power--and real policy change still has to come from state and federal governments. "Referendums are the protest vehicle for the new century," says Elizabeth Garrett, director of U.S.C.'s Initiative and Referendum Institute. "People are dissatisfied with federal leadership, and voting is the best way they know to voice it." Lawmakers rarely take heed of such ballot measures, but maybe they should. The initiatives bring voters to the polls--turnout in Baraboo, Wis., tripled this election cycle. "More votes," says Garrett, "is a message politicians on every level understand."


America could really use a civics lesson. And it's about to get one. The National Conference on Citizenship, a federally chartered nonprofit founded in 1946 to strengthen civic ties, will release the first Civic Health Index next week, tracking changes in the awareness and engagement of the citizenry over the past three decades. It presents a bleak picture--steep declines in most of the 40 measures that were analyzed, including how much people trust one another and major institutions, and their connections to their communities. The index offers a couple of bright spots: more citizens, especially young ones, vote now than in the disco era; and although volunteering has flattened out since spiking after 9/11, it's still on the rise among those between the ages of 16 and 24.
Still, we find it alarming that a country that is so prosperous, free and secure shows such serious signs of weakness in its civic infrastructure, especially at a time when it most needs that strength. The growing polarization of its politics has made compromise and unity on crucial matters far more difficult. Indeed, people's trust in others has declined even as their voting has climbed, suggesting that they're using the ballot to protect personal interests rather than out of a sense of shared responsibility. Americans are keenly aware of the fissures in society. Our surveys find that 96% believe the nation is deeply divided along economic lines, as many as say we are equally split along political ones.
So what's to be done? First, get a sharper picture of where we stand. The U.S. routinely collects minutely detailed information to gauge the vitality of its economy. This new index is the beginning of an effort to do the same for its civic life. With this data, we can begin to seriously debate and ultimately fashion robust policies to fix our communal machinery. As Congress geared up for this week's hearings on the Sago mine accident, which killed 12 coalworkers earlier this month, disaster struck another West Virginia mine. A fire at Alma No. 1 last week left two people dead--and put new pressure on the federal Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA), which regulates mining operations. House Democrats are asking whether MSHA oversight has been not only weaker but also more secretive under the Bush Administration. Sago was cited for 208 alleged safety violations in 2005, Alma No. 1 for 95. In the past, the MSHA made its inspectors' full notes public, but since 2004, it has released only briefer citations. Critics say the inspectors' notes provide more information on conditions in dangerous mines. Representative Henry Waxman, top Democrat on the House Government Reform Committee, has sent a letter to Labor Secretary Elaine Chao--whose department oversees the MSHA--arguing that if the inspector notes for the Sago citations had been disclosed, "it is possible that lifesaving reforms could have been identified and put in place." Waxman tells TIME, "The Administration's obsession with secrecy is literally endangering lives." Mine-inspection officials dispute such allegations, insisting enough information on safety infractions is made public. An MSHA official explained that the policy change made procedures "consistent with [those of] other enforcement agencies."

Bill Clinton
In our increasingly interdependent world, we have seen the terrifying power of individuals to do great harm. Yet there is a more hopeful side of this interconnected age: private citizens have never had more power to advance the common good and secure a brighter future.
Three developments have dramatically increased the potential of individuals to be agents of change: for the first time more than half the people in the world live under democracies; the spread of information technology has empowered individuals to pool their resources and make common cause at a speed and on a scale previously unprecedented; and, finally, nongovernmental organizations, or NGOs, have grown and become important agents of assistance. During the responses to Hurricane Katrina and the tsunami in Southeast Asia, citizen power was on full display, as the Internet provided a conduit through which enormous sums of money flowed from millions of people of modest means.
I created the Clinton Global Initiative (CGI) to accelerate that kind of activity and to offer a new model for philanthropy in the 21st century. For three days in September, CGI brings together some of the world's best minds and problem solvers. It functions like a marketplace for global change, where those with the passion to make a difference--and others with the means to finance them--come together. Each attendee is asked to make a pledge of resources, time or leadership.
At this year's meeting, Richard Branson grabbed headlines by pledging to invest all future proceeds of his Virgin Group's airline and train businesses to fight global warming. But other commitments with smaller budgets were similarly designed to have a real impact. The Global Partnership for Afghanistan pledged to launch 100 commercially viable orchard and woodlot businesses. The Sanam Vaziri Quraishi Foundation partnered with child-rights activist Craig Kielburger to "adopt a village" in the Masai Mara of Kenya. With an investment of only $68,000 in the first year, they will help change the lives of 1,000 children and adults.
CGI is still in its infancy, but in two years, hundreds of commitments have been made, totaling almost $10 billion. That is a testament to the concern and generosity of the leaders and activists from around the globe who have attended CGI. But I believe it also reflects a growing realization that in today's world we all have a responsibility to influence change. The future our children inherit depends on whether or not we will act accordingly.
Laura Bush and Jean Case
Consider the scene in Boikarabelo, South Africa. It's 10 o'clock in the morning in this village outside Johannesburg, home to some 300 children, many of whom have lost their parents to AIDS. Time for recess is approaching. After hours of morning instruction, the children are ready to burst forth into the schoolyard--eager to run, jump and take a spin on the merry-go-round.
Yet there is more going on here than meets the eye--and the American people play a key role in the story. The merry-go-round is not just a simple piece of playground equipment. It's a PlayPump water system. Lack of access to clean water is one of Africa's biggest health challenges. Through technology developed by an African entrepreneur, the children are pumping clean water for their village when they turn the merry-go-round.
How can we spread wonderful innovations like that? U.S. support for Africa has more than tripled during the Bush Administration, yet even the most dedicated governments can't meet all the needs of the developing world. We can do more when each sector is doing what it does best. The private sector can lead with innovation and capital. Nonprofit groups can apply solutions where they're needed most. And governments can help expand these solutions on a global scale.
Last week we announced a partnership with the U.S. government and the Case Foundation to install 4,000 water pumps in 10 African nations, bringing clean water to as many as 10 million people. That same spirit of innovation is showing up in other public-private collaborations. In partnership with the Pfizer drug company, the U.S. is working to tackle tuberculosis, malaria and HIV/AIDS. In partnership with Starbucks and the government of Rwanda, the U.S. supports farmers developing specialty coffee. The U.S. helps rebuild the country's infrastructure and coffee-washing stations, while Starbucks provides training and expertise to improve Rwandan coffee cultivation.
Cooperation between governments and citizens isn't just smart policy. It's our best hope for fulfilling the moral obligation of decent societies and caring individuals to end the suffering of millions around the world.



One hundred years ago America had its most popular President since George Washington. TR, as Theodore Roosevelt was popularly known, captured, to an extraordinary degree, the imagination of the American people. At the same time, he also captured the respect of much of the world, culminating with his being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for helping negotiate peace between Russia and Japan.
There is much Washington could learn from studying Theodore Roosevelt. Paying little regard to either the Republican or Democratic bosses, he was a natural maverick who did what he thought was right. A passionate believer in technology, TR, in 1902, became the first President to ride in an automobile  -  something for which at the time, he was praised by the newspapers as an act of courage and foresight.
TR was also a deep believer in the moral power of reform. He was a reform police commissioner in New York City, a reform leader of the Civil Service Commission and a reform Governor of New York. He knew that modern society required honesty, transparency and accountability. His commitment to reform was so great that the New York Republican bosses promoted him for the Vice Presidency simply to get him out of Albany. Little did they know what a reformer they were about to foist on the nation.
After less than a year as Vice President, TR found himself the youngest President in American history, after President William McKinley was assassinated at the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York. As Mark Hanna, the leading Republican politician of the era lamented, "Now look  -  that damn cowboy is president."
One area of reform that Republicans and Democrats alike could learn from was TR's approach to the environment. He understood that conservative and conservation have the same root and he was passionately committed to conserving America's natural resources for future generations. Most Republicans would do well to study his commitment to national parks, national forests, and the management of the natural world. On the other hand, Democrats would do just as well to note that Theodore Roosevelt saw man as part of nature and not as its opponent. As a rancher, big game hunter, fisherman and perhaps the most outdoor President in American history, TR believed that conservation included land use and not merely its preservation. I believe he would have resoundingly advocated a multiple use approach to Federal lands.
TR was President during a period of enormous stress over immigration and the meaning of being an American. He was unequivocally for control of immigration and for encouraging immigrants who wanted to be American while opposing those who would radically change America. As TR put it, "In the first place we should insist that if the immigrant who comes here in good faith becomes an American and assimilates himself to us, he shall be treated on an exact equality with everyone else, for it is an outrage to discriminate against any such man because of creed, or birthplace, or origin."

</text>
