<text id="A34" category="" words="1992" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Clinton wins right to have wish granted / Ted prize from exclusive group also comes with $100,000 cash.' The San Francisco Chronicle, 31 October 2006, D1; 'GDP rises 1.6% as growth slows.' The San Francisco Chronicle, 28 October 2006, C1; 'Cleaning up wi" Author="Dan Fost; Carolyn Said; Ilana DeBare" PublicationDate="31 October 2006; 28 October 2006; 8 October 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

If you were given one wish -- and $100,000 and access to some of the top thinkers in technology, entertainment and the arts -- what would you wish for? 
That's the premise of the Ted prize, a potentially world- changing award given to some of the same sorts of big-idea people who populate the exclusive annual Technology, Entertainment, Design conference in Monterey. 
This year's winners were announced Monday night in San Francisco -- and in March, those at the conference will find out the big wishes of former President Bill Clinton, Harvard biologist E.O. Wilson and Time magazine photojournalist James Nachtwey. 
The organization, led by former publishing entrepreneur Chris Anderson, has a panel of judges who select the winners based on nominations from members. No one applies for a Ted prize; no one knows their wishes in advance. The winners are announced now so that they can use the next several months to formulate their wishes. The organization supports the winners in making their dreams come true. 
Although the prize is only 3 years old, it's already paid some big dividends. Rock star Bono, who won the first year (when the prize came with three wishes), was able to get more than 1 million people to sign up for his organization that advocates debt relief in Africa. He also produced ads online and on television reaching more than 2 billion people. 
What might Clinton wish for? Chances are he already has the money and the contacts to make things happen, and he's been working on a variety of issues through his foundation: AIDS, global warming, hunger, health and urban problems. 
Or maybe he just wants his wife to be president. 
The wishes don't come with any restrictions. 
"Ted is a nonpartisan group," said a spokesperson for Anderson, who calls himself Ted's curator. "The judges awarded the Ted Prize to President Clinton not for his political views, but on account of his astonishing achievements since leaving office." 
Anderson called Wilson "biology's most inspiring voice" and said that Nachtwey's "pictures are in a class of their own." 
They have also thought big. Wilson is one of the leading scientists examining humans' impact on the natural world and the importance of biodiversity. Nachtwey travels to the world's worst danger spots, shining a light on wars and famines. 
Last year's winners had a distinctively Bay Area flair, led by Dr. Larry Brilliant of Mill Valley, who had helped fight smallpox and blindness in developing nations and is now the head of Google.org, the philanthropic arm of the Mountain View Internet giant. 
When he received the award last year, Brilliant was working to prevent a potential avian flu pandemic, and he wished for a powerful early-warning system to keep pandemics from spreading. 
He's already got an organization up and running, International Networked System for Total Early Disease Detection, and is pulling together experts on the Internet, medicine, disaster preparedness and business to get a response ready for whatever worldly ill might arise. 
Another winner last year was Cameron Sinclair, co-founder and executive director of Architecture for Humanity, a nonprofit group that looks to provide design solutions to humanitarian crises. 
This year, Sinclair has been focused on rebuilding the post- Katrina Gulf Coast and the areas of Southeast Asia ravaged by the tsunami. 
Sinclair wished for an open-source architecture network that would enable designs to be spread quickly through the developing world, using the open-source software model. 
"The Ted prize allowed us to generate a new way of working so we could scale up," Sinclair, 32, said Monday. 
Not only that, but contacts he made at the conference, which he had never heard of before, paid off in his short-term efforts as well. Palm executives provided him with Treo phones, which have come in useful in his group's post-Katrina work, and Dr. Dean Ornish, who has done groundbreaking work on reversing heart disease through diet and exercise, offered him free office space in Sausalito. 
"Most organizations have 5-, 10- or 15-year plans," Sinclair said. "This has allowed us to speed up a little bit. Some of the things we thought could take us 15 years will take us only two or three." 

The U.S. economy clocked a sluggish growth rate in the June- through-September period, starkly demonstrating the effect of the slumping housing sector. 
Gross domestic product rose 1.6 percent in the third quarter, the weakest growth rate in three years, the Commerce Department estimated Friday. The increase fell short of the 2.1 percent growth rate economists had expected. 
In the first quarter of 2006, GDP was up at a robust 5.6 percent rate, while for the second quarter it was a 2.6 percent rate. 
"Housing, as we expected, was one of the big drags on GDP," said Steve Cochrane, senior economist at Moody's Economy.com, a forecasting service in Pennsylvania. "It's very clear housing is the primary cause right now of the economic slowdown." 
Investment in residential real estate fell 17.4 percent, the biggest dip since early 1991 and the fourth consecutive quarter of decline. 
Gross domestic product, which tallies the value of all goods and services produced in the United States, is considered the best gauge of the country's economic health. 
On Wall Street, investors appeared spooked by the report. The Dow Jones industrial average fell 73.40 points to close at 12,090.26. 
With the Nov. 7 midterm election just over a week away, a bigger question is how voters will react. 
The White House mustered an array of voices to explain away the numbers. 
"Everyone expected this," said White House press secretary Tony Snow. "You have a combination of rising energy prices and also rising interest rates, and now you've seen a reverse on both." 
Some economists were unfazed by the softening numbers. 
"My feeling is this is the worst of it," said Peter Morici, a professor at the University of Maryland School of Business. "It's a reflection of the new economy. We don't have recessions anymore. We just have growth slowdowns." 
There were several bright spots. 
Corporate profits continue to be strong. Inflation had throttled back to 2 percent, following a 4 percent rise in the second quarter. Excluding food and energy, inflation was 1.9 percent after increasing 2.9 percent in the second quarter. Real disposable income was up 3.7 percent, following the second quarter's 1.7 percent increase. 
And consumers evidentially were not yet tightening their belts. Personal consumption expenditures were up 3.1 percent in the third quarter, following a 2.6 percent increase in the second quarter. Durable goods orders rose 8.4 percent, after having fallen 0.1 percent. 
"The consumer seems to be quite resilient," Morici said. "While they might not be buying bigger houses and spending money on cars, they're spending money in other places, like white goods (major kitchen and laundry appliances), computers and so forth. It portends a good holiday season." 
A separate report issued Friday showed consumers feeling more upbeat about the economy than they had in some time. The University of Michigan consumer sentiment index was up to 93.6 from 85.4 in September. 
Analysts said the Commerce report seemed likely to bolster the Federal Reserve's recent moves to leave interest rates unchanged after a long campaign of tightening and could even spur the Fed to lower interest rates next year. 
While California, which had a major run-up in real-estate prices, is likely to feel the pain of the housing slowdown, experts said the state's economy is well cushioned in other ways. 
"California, like New York, will have a bigger adjustment in home values because it had a bigger boom," Morici said. "But you can take it, as can New York, because you had so much appreciation." 
But unlike the Midwest and Southeast, California has such strong economic diversity that it can withstand some problems, he said. 
"California has a very resilient economy because of the entertainment business, Silicon Valley, the vineyards," Morici said. "Those kind of things tend to be less cyclical. I think California will know the economy has slowed like getting up one morning and feeling a little queasy, but then you get through it fast. Whereas in the Midwest, they'll get up and feel sick the whole day, but it won't be a terrible illness." 
Friday's report was what is called the advance estimate the Commerce Department produces quickly. It will issue revised numbers for the third quarter based on more comprehensive data on Nov. 29. 

Six years ago, at the height of the Internet boom, Eric Ryan's friends laughed at him as he turned down one dot-com job offer after another to start a company in the stodgy, low-tech business of household cleaning products. 
Today, many of those dot-coms are long gone. 
And Ryan's company, San Francisco's Method Products, was recently named the seventh fastest-growing private company in America by Inc. magazine. 
Method, with its minimalist design and trendy-looking soap bottles shaped like teardrops and bowling pins, is a familiar sight to shoppers at stores such as Target, Safeway and Office Depot. 
Its revenue of about $45 million is just a drop in the wash- bucket compared with long-standing industry giants like Clorox, which had total sales of $4.4 billion in 2005. 
But Method has managed to grow prodigiously at a time when the cleaning products industry overall is largely stagnant. 
And the young company's determination to shake things up is changing practices within the industry, as well as turning heads in the design world. 
"Method has reoriented how people perceive these household cleaning products that they used to shove under the sink," said Hsaio-Yun Chin, an assistant professor of industrial design at San Francisco State University. "It's very sexy. It's something you can display proudly on top of your sink. It's another accessory to "cool," almost a lifestyle item rather than a cleaning item." 
Today, Method has 132 products -- everything from pink grapefruit cleaning spray to cucumber-lemon dishwasher cubes, mint window washing liquid and vanilla-apple air fresheners. 
But six years ago, the company was little more than a wild idea shared by two high school buddies from Michigan who were rooming together in San Francisco. 
Ryan, now 33, was working in advertising and his friend Adam Lowry, now 32, was a chemical engineer who had worked for a foundation researching global warming. The two were intrigued by companies like Apple Computer Inc. that had used a cutting-edge design sensibility to become industry leaders. 
"We started to discuss different industries that needed to be reinvented from a design standpoint and from an environmental standpoint," Lowry said. 
The two became intrigued by household cleaning products. It is a huge industry, with annual sales of about $18 billion. But it hadn't changed much since the 1950s. Companies talked mostly about how well their products killed germs; brands like Cascade and Comet changed little from decade to decade. 
"The household cleaning aisle was so big, yet everything was so boring," Ryan said. 
Ryan and Lowry decided to create a brand of household cleaning products that would appeal to the fashion sensibilities of hip, young urbanites. 
"Your house is this high-interest, high-emotion place, but the products people used for it were just commodities," Ryan said. "We were the first ones to treat cleaning as cool. The category treats it as a chore, and to a lot of people it is a chore -- but it's also therapeutic, a ritual, with a sense of purpose to it. Method is very much about design, fragrance, the romance of it and trying to tie (cleaning) back to your home." 
They started working with exotic scents like cucumber, lavender and mandarin orange. They developed a sleek, uncluttered style for their bottles and labels. They looked for nontoxic, non-polluting ingredients, although they consciously decided not to market themselves as a "green" brand. 
"There are plenty of eco-brands out there, but it's a very small category," Ryan said. "If you go out and call yourself a green cleaner, you'll just steal shelf space from Seventh Generation."

</text>
