<text id="A35" category="" words="2011" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Bush Sticks to Iraq Policy, Resists Drawdown Calls' The Wall Street Journal, 1 December 2006, PG A3; 'Politics &Economics: Schwarzenegger Wrestles With Health Care --- Governor Aims to Cover California's Uninsured Millions, Raising Issue's Profile Nation" Author="Yochi J. Dreazen and Cam Simpson; JIM CARLTON" PublicationDate="1 December 2006; 21 December 2006;" SampledFrom="All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

AMMAN, Jordan - The U.S.'s next steps in Middle East diplomacy appear to include speeding the transfer of Iraqi security forces from American to local control and stepping up efforts toward renewed Israeli-Palestinian talks.

But obstacles emerged on both fronts yesterday, as President Bush, on a visit here, made clear he will resist calls to change his Iraq policy and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice appeared to leave it to Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas to determine the next move in that peace process.

Mr. Bush used a meeting with Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki to lay down a marker ahead of the official release next week of a report by a bipartisan commission, headed by former Secretary of State James A. Baker III and former Democratic Rep. Lee Hamilton, that has been exploring new U.S. strategies for stabilizing a nation badly torn by sectarian violence and for bringing home U.S. troops.

The findings will call for the U.S. to begin gradually drawing down the approximately 140,000 American combat troops now in Iraq -- though without a specific timeline -- and to engage in direct negotiations with leaders in neighboring Iran and Syria, which are believed to be helping fuel the strife, said a member of the panel. (See related article on Page A8.) Details of the panel's recommendations were reported in the New York Times yesterday.

Asked when Mr. Bush would begin acting on the report, White House National Security Adviser Stephen Hadley told reporters on Air Force One returning from Jordan there was no timetable per se.

"It's really going to be when the president is comfortable in his own mind as to where he wants to go, and when we've been able to have the kind of discussion with the Iraqis so we can be sure that it is going to be a common plan between the Iraqi government and the United States government for success," he said.

White House officials have said the U.S. is open to considering negotiations with Tehran and Damascus if the two drop their support for Hezbollah and other militant groups. Despite a growing sense Mr. Bush might use the report from the Iraq Study Group as political cover for beginning a U.S. troop withdrawal, he said yesterday talk of an imminent drawdown "simply has no realism to it at all."

"I know there's a lot of speculation that these reports in Washington mean there's going to be some kind of a graceful exit out of Iraq," he said. "We're going to stay in Iraq to get the job done."

Meanwhile, Ms. Rice met briefly with Mr. Abbas in Jericho in the Palestinian territories before heading to Jerusalem for even shorter sessions with top Israeli officials. Though she publicly declared her desire to "accelerate our efforts and intensify our efforts" to bring about peace, little new appeared to be gained from the talks. She declined to cite concrete plans for what should come next in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, beyond trying to sustain this week's fragile cease-fire for the Gaza Strip, which has experienced months of bloodshed.

Mr. Abbas declared as all but dead talks aimed at replacing the Palestinian Authority's current Hamas-led government with a caretaker regime. The move, pushed by the U.S. for months, is seen as a precondition for almost any Palestinian progress. Washington cannot legally deal with or financially support a government led by Hamas, which is designated as a foreign terrorist organization under U.S. law.

But Ms. Rice told reporters last night that the Gaza cease-fire deal, along with an olive branch extended by Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert during a speech Monday, was "not a bad set of events to take place," during a short timeframe. She also said gaining progress in the moribund peace process "is the kind of thing that takes time."

In Jordan, Mr. Bush said the U.S. would step up efforts to give Mr. Maliki more control over Iraq's military and security forces and work to expand U.S. military training for them. For his part, Mr. Maliki said he believed Iraqi forces would be ready to take full control of security by June.

But while Messrs. Bush and Maliki both said it was necessary to speed the handover of security responsibility, senior U.S. military officials caution that big barriers remain to achieving this. The Iraqi Army and police forces remain rife with corruption, and embedded U.S. advisers regularly complain that because the U.S. doesn't control the Iraqi ministries, they can't get corrupt Army and police officers fired or replaced.

The availability of more advisers also is uncertain. U.S. military officials say they are committed to increasing the number of advisers working with Iraqi Army and police forces, but the Army and Marine Corps are already stretched thin. Moreover, some military officials say that adding more advisers without giving them the power to remove incompetent or corrupt officers won't lead to significantly better results.

Mr. Bush again rejected calls to divide Iraq into three semi-autonomous regions and said U.S. forces would remain in Iraq indefinitely. He also offered a strong endorsement to the embattled Mr. Maliki, hailing him as the "right guy for Iraq."

U.S. officials said the meetings between the two leaders went well, but the hastily planned summit produced few results. The two met just one day after Mr. Maliki abruptly canceled a planned three-way meeting Wednesday night with Mr. Bush and King Abdullah of Jordan. The move came after the disclosure in the New York Times of a memo written by Mr. Hadley asserting that the Iraqi premier was "either ignorant of what is going on, misrepresenting his intentions or that his capabilities are not yet sufficient to turn his good intentions into actions."

Mr. Bush went out of his way to praise Mr. Maliki, a clear attempt to soothe the Iraqi leader's feelings after the leak.; 

San Francisco -- GOV. ARNOLD Schwarzenegger took on infrastructure problems in California earlier this year. Now, he is turning to another challenge: health care in the Golden State.

Mr. Schwarzenegger has been huddling with advisers in the past few weeks to come up with a plan to provide health coverage to the state's 6.5 million uninsured and underinsured. Details of the strategy haven't been announced. He has signaled that in his annual State of the State address Jan. 9 he will make health care the top priority for 2007 and likely include a plan to cover the uninsured.

While people involved with the effort say details could take months to hammer out, the fact that Mr. Schwarzenegger plans to spotlight health care when his second term begins in January is likely to boost national attention on one of the most intractable policy dilemmas facing the entire country.

In an opinion piece in the Los Angeles Daily News on Monday, the governor said the problem of the uninsured is "devastating to our economy and working families," citing those reasons as why "fixing our broken health-care system is my number one priority for 2007."

Massachusetts this year passed legislation to provide nearly universal health-care coverage to state residents, but policy observers say that a measure in California -- where the number of uninsured roughly equals the Massachusetts population -- would have a more sweeping effect. California has been a leader in addressing national issues; earlier this year, a bill signed by Mr. Schwarzenegger set the toughest limits in the country on greenhouse gases linked to global warming.

"I think a successful health-care plan in California would begin to be the catalyst to change the country's health-care system," says Andrew Stern, president of the Service Employees International Union, which has 1.8 million members nationwide. "People look at California as almost its own country, with all the complexities any state could find."

The Schwarzenegger speech will come as Democrats, who plan to make expanding health-care coverage a priority, take over Congress. One of Mr. Schwarzenegger's fellow Republican governors, Mitt Romney of Massachusetts, is making his state's plan for expanding health-insurance coverage a centerpiece of his 2008 presidential bid.

Two factors driving the debate, nationally and in California, are the cost of health care and public concern about affordability. National expenditures on health care have doubled in the past decade, and are projected to double again in the next 10 years, according to federal estimates.

In July, Mr. Schwarzenegger convened a summit on health-care affordability in Los Angeles, where representatives from hospitals, labor unions, insurers and others debated how to contain costs of medical coverage. "The spiraling cost of health care is nearing the breaking point -- not just in California but across the nation," Mr. Schwarzenegger said at the time. "We must find ways to lower the cost of health care. We cannot continue as we have."

Others at the summit agreed on the need to streamline administrative costs by computerizing more medical records, says Kim Belshe, secretary of California's health and human-services agency. Many doctors and their assistants still rely on paper files. The governor signed an order over the summer calling for a program to improve the flow of information in the industry.

But there is disagreement in California, and across the U.S., over what else to do. One approach, favored by some labor unions and social advocacy groups, entails a "single payer" -- like the system in the United Kingdom and elsewhere. Under a "single payer" system, consumer medical bills are paid by a government agency, not by private health insurers or others. This year, the California Legislature passed a bill introduced by Democratic Sen. Sheila Kuehl that would have provided universal health-care coverage to state residents through such a system operated by the state. But Mr. Schwarzenegger vetoed the bill, saying "such a program would cost the state billions and lead to significant new taxes on individuals and businesses."

That stance could make it difficult for the governor to forge a bipartisan deal, as he did in getting a bond package passed on the ballot last month to finance rebuilding of state roads, bridges and other infrastructure. Already, the California Nurses Association -- an old foe of the governor from when he took on union interests in a series of failed ballot measures in 2005 -- has derided the coming plan in advance as "Schwarzencare."

"What his plan will probably consist of is to shift the cost of health care more onto individuals and leave no responsibility on corporations," says Rose Ann DeMoro, executive director of the nurses' union.

Mr. Schwarzenegger has said he is keeping an open mind as he shapes the effort. "Every idea is being debated: market-based solutions, employer mandates, individual mandates, new regulations, removing old regulations," he wrote in this week's opinion piece. Aides to the governor say he isn't inclined to use taxes to pay for universal health care.

Some of the governor's political opponents have pledged to work with him. Mr. Stern of the Service Employees International Union says he has agreed to provide input to Mr. Schwarzenegger despite the hostility some other union officials feel. "This is a problem that is so important to our country," Mr. Stern says. "If the governor looks to have a bipartisan approach, I think there are a lot of people who want to get this situation fixed."

Mr. Schwarzenegger also has some powerful allies in the Democratic-dominated legislature, including Don Perata, president of the state Senate. Mr. Perata, who was instrumental in helping the governor get his infrastructure measure through, has come up with a compromise approach that some observers say the governor might be able to build on. Mr. Perata earlier this month offered a plan under which employers and their employees would share the costs to provide coverage only to the state's working families.

Mr. Perata says the governor called afterward to thank him, but hasn't given specifics about his own plan. Still, the senator says he is confident a deal will be reached. "The fact that he understands that we will continue to work together or we won't work at all is a huge advantage," Mr. Perata says.;

</text>
