<text id="A36" category="" words="1992" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="GEORGIA 2006: ATTORNEY GENERAL Baker feels heat from McGuire'The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, October 27, 2006, Pg. 1D; 'MILITARY JUSTICE; Soldier tests free speech limits' The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, July 9, 2006, Pg. 1D;" Author="BILL RANKIN; REBECCA CARR;" PublicationDate="October 27, 2006; July 9, 2006;" SampledFrom="All;" WebAddress="Nexis UK">

When the vacancy opened in 1997, then-Gov. Zell Miller asked his trusted House floor leader, Thurbert Baker, to be Georgia's first black attorney general.

Baker agreed and during his nine years at the helm of the state's Law Department, he has distinguished himself by taking on Big Tobacco, fighting identity fraud and infuriating Gov. Sonny Perdue.

Baker angered the governor by defying Perdue's edict to drop an appeal of a redistricting case. His refusal created a constitutional showdown --- which Baker won --- and made him a target of the GOP, which wants to capture all statewide offices on the ballot this year.

As he seeks re-election, Baker finds himself in familiar territory --- facing a stiff challenge by a Republican opponent. In 1998 and in 2002, in his only election campaigns to keep his job, Baker defeated Republican opposition.

Douglasville lawyer Perry McGuire, a former state senator, entered the race against Baker last year after campaigning for secretary of state for a year as a candidate. He dropped out of the secretary of state race after the Republican primary field became crowded with high-profile opposition.

Additionally, McGuire said, the state GOP asked him to shift his focus to attorney general. "It seemed a natural fit and transition," McGuire, a former corporate counsel for Chick-fil-A, said earlier this week.

McGuire is sure to benefit from being a member of a Republican ticket led by a popular governor. But Baker has raised almost $3 million to finance his campaign and, at the end of September, had more than $1.8 million cash on hand for the final weeks of the campaign. McGuire had raised $776,000 and reported $526,000 left to spend.

McGuire is attacking Baker on the issues and has succeeded in putting the incumbent on the defensive. His TV ad claims that Baker's office bungled the appeal of a 1984 Houston County murder case --- which Baker claims was lost at the trial level, not because of the appeal. McGuire also has condemned Baker for not taking a more hands-on approach to his job.

"He's really been AWOL in his office, a benchwarmer," McGuire said. "He's never personally argued a case as attorney general. I think that's pretty indefensible."

Even though McGuire, as a private attorney, has never argued a case at the appellate level, he vows to do so if he wins on Election Day. "I feel very comfortable debating the issues," he said.

McGuire's platform includes initiatives to help local district attorneys prosecute death penalty cases and other defendants charged with violent crimes. He also wants to get state law enforcement more involved in enforcing federal immigration laws against illegal aliens, citing Cobb County's recent initiative to crack down on illegal immigrants as an example of what should be done.

If elected, McGuire said the AG's office will be "the very hand of God" to those who prey on the elderly with insurance and investment scams and to those who commit violent crime. "You cannot hide, you will not be coddled and you will not escape justice," McGuire said when announcing his campaign.

"If we have to build a hundred prisons to clean up our streets, I say let's do it."

McGuire said he will continue to wage an aggressive campaign. "I want to show the voters that he's had nine years to lead and he simply hasn't done it," he said.

Baker, current president of the National Association of Attorneys General, counters that he has accomplished a great deal. "I believe voters in this state recognize campaign rhetoric as opposed to fact," he said in a recent interview.

Baker said he deserves credit for including Georgia among the states suing the tobacco industry to recover the medical costs of smoking-related illnesses.

Georgia so far has collected more than $1 billion from a settlement of the case and is projected to receive much more. The state also saved tens of millions of dollars in attorneys fees because of his decision to use in-house lawyers instead of private attorneys, Baker said.

As attorney general, Baker said, he helped draft the nation's first residential mortgage fraud statute.

It has been a crime-fighting tool for local district attorneys and now is being used by the attorney general's office to prosecute more than 20 people, including closing attorneys and real estate agents, in an alleged scam involving the Millford Hills subdivision in Clarke County.

The past year has been a busy one for the 106-lawyer AG's office.

Its lawyers successfully defended the state amendment banning gay marriage and now are litigating challenges to the state's voter ID and sex offender laws. Baker, whose office has a wealth of experienced lawyers, said he will continue to use them to defend laws passed by the state Legislature.

"My opponent may be more interested in grandstanding; I'm just interested in getting the job done," Baker said, noting that as a private attorney he personally argued numerous cases at the trial court and appellate levels.

"In the job I have now, it is important to keep in mind that putting experienced lawyers on the floor every day to handle those important issues is more important than whose face shows up on the 6 o'clock news."; 


Washington --- Ehren Watada is a soldier who doesn't want to fight in Iraq.

Watada, 28, an Army first lieutenant based at Fort Lewis, Wash., insists that he is not a conscientious objector. He has even offered to fight in Afghanistan. But he contends that agreeing to fight in Iraq would violate his oath as a soldier to resist "unlawful orders."

At a June 7 news conference, Watada denounced the war and accused the Bush administration of lying in order to start it. As a result, the Army formally charged Watada last week with publicly declaring the war "illegal," criticizing the president and refusing to deploy to Iraq with his unit last month.

Watada's case, his attorney says, raises important questions about the First Amendment rights of soldiers and what punishment they should face for questioning the actions and orders of superiors.

The Army, and some legal experts, say Watada does not have the right to openly criticize the war in a way that would be contemptuous toward a superior officer, including the commander in chief. He also does not have the right to disobey an order to fight, they say.

Watada, wearing civilian clothes at his news conference at a Tacoma, Wash., church, told reporters that he had researched the evidence for going to war in Iraq and concluded that the country entered the war under false pretenses.

"The war in Iraq violates our democratic system of checks and balances," he said, according to military charging documents released by the Army. "The wholesale slaughter and mistreatment of the Iraqi people is not only a terrible moral injustice, but a contradiction to the Army's own law of land warfare. My participation would make me party to war crimes."

In addition, Watada said he became "ashamed of wearing the uniform" after reading about "the level of deception the Bush administration used to initiate . . . this war."

The next day, Watada's superior officer told him that those statements could be considered "unbecoming of an officer and a gentleman" and "contemptuous" against a superior officer --- both violations of the Uniform Code of Military Justice, according to Eric Seitz, Watada's lawyer.

Now that Watada has been charged, the next step is for an Army officer to conduct a pretrial inquiry known as an Article 32 investigation, which is similar to a grand jury investigation in civilian criminal courts.

The officer will review the charges and hold a hearing on evidence. If the officer agrees with the charges, he will order a court martial.

If Watada is convicted, he could face seven years in a military prison, forfeiture of all pay and a dishonorable discharge.

"You can't decide afterward that it's unlawful," said Sheldon Smith, an Army spokesman at the Pentagon. Commissioned officers are expected to weigh their personal feelings against the well-being of the troops they are appointed to command, he said.

Watada's words and refusal to deploy could cause other soldiers to think negatively about the war, Smith said. "What message does it send? They are putting their lives on the line to do what is honorable, and the man who is supposed to be in charge of them is backing out?" 

Legal experts say that a soldier's right to free speech is a gray area, and cases involving it are rarely prosecuted in a military court. The last time a soldier was prosecuted for making contemptuous statements about a superior officer was in 1965, when an officer took part in a Vietnam war protest.

A late conversion

In 1974, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the military code trumps free speech rights for certain kinds of expression. While military personnel are not excluded from First Amendment protection, the court found that there may be occasion to restrict speech to ensure discipline in the ranks.

"It may seem ironic that some of the very constitutional rights that soldiers swear an oath to defend are not always or fully available to the soldiers themselves," said Paul K. McMasters, ombudsman at the First Amendment Center, a nonprofit educational organization based in Virginia. "But the military deems that condition essential to its mission."

The military can restrict service personnel from displaying political bumper stickers, wearing religious garments and criticizing the president in public, said Jonathan Turley, a professor of law at George Washington University who specializes in constitutional issues.

But enforcement is not always consistent, Turley said. Usually the military will ask soldiers to tone down their speech or remind them to be apolitical rather than prosecute them, he said.

What constitutes disrespectful language is vague and subject to interpretation, said Seitz.

"You do not surrender your First Amendment rights when you become a soldier," he said.

The "Nuremberg principles" that evolved from an international inquiry into the atrocities of World War II dictate that an officer has an obligation to reject orders he or she considers illegal, Seitz said.

Carolyn Ho, Watada's mother, said her son believed that he had a duty to disobey illegal orders.

"He is sending that message to all the armed forces, the message that they need to examine carefully the war they are choosing to fight," Ho said.

Watada says he joined the Army in a patriotic fervor the summer after he graduated from Hawaii-Pacific University in the summer of 2003. His view about the war did not change until January of this year, when his commanding officer told him to research Iraq because he would soon be sent there, according to Ho.

As Watada researched the roots of the war, he realized that the Iraqi weapons of mass destruction cited as a rationale did not exist, his mother said.

"He weighed the circumstances and felt that he had no choice but to say no," said Ho.

An uphill struggle

So Watada told his commander that he could not support the war. He tried to resign his commission, but by March of this year, it became clear that his superiors were not going to accept his resignation. He hired Seitz, a well-known military defense lawyer, and began negotiations behind the scenes.

When those negotiations sputtered, Seitz said Watada decided to go public with his views on the war. He has stopped talking to the media until the investigation is over.

Most legal experts and peace groups say that Watada has a difficult road ahead to avoid punishment for criticizing the war and refusing to deploy.

"I think he's trying to break new ground, but I think he's going to dull his pickax in the process," said Eugene Fidell, a Washington lawyer who specializes in military legal issues.;
The question is whether the government will prosecute him for disloyalty or for the more straightforward violation of refusing to deploy with his unit.

</text>
