<text id="A39" category="" words="1996" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Down The Stretch' Tampa Tribune (Florida), November 29, 2006, Pg. 2; '1 Man's Selfless Service' Tampa Tribune (Florida), November 28, 2006, Pg. 1; 'Pentagon Clears Socom General Of Alleged Impropriety' Tampa Tribune (Florida), September 2, 2006, Pg. 1;" Author="SCOTT CARTER; TOM JACKSON; RICHARD LARDNER; " PublicationDate="November 29, 2006; November 28, 2006; September 2, 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning; " WebAddress="Nexis UK ">

Russell Baze rests on Mondays. No workouts, no runs up and down the carpeted stairs in his house, and no riding horses. That's his day to do nothing other than maybe spend time with his four kids or take his wife, Tami, to dinner and a movie.

As for the other six days of the week, Baze can be found at a racetrack, where an afternoon rarely goes by that Baze doesn't visit his favorite place of all, the winner's circle. Since winning his first race aboard a horse named Oregon Warrior on Oct. 28, 1974, Baze has made 9,528 trips to the winner's circle, more than any other rider in history except one, three-time Belmont Stakes winner Laffit Pincay Jr.

But Baze's place in history could change as soon as today at Bay Meadows Racecourse, a short drive across the Golden Gate Bridge from San Francisco. Baze has six mounts on the card, and needs only two wins to tie Pincay's all-time record of 9,530 wins.

If the number seems astronomical, well, in some ways it is, especially when you consider the longevity a rider must produce in what is arguably the most dangerous job in professional sports. When asked during a conference call last week to shed perspective on the record's meaning in sports, Baze referred to someone who displayed similar discipline and tunnel-vision work habits.

"I was really impressed with Cal Ripken's record," Baze said. "I mean, he worked sometimes when he was injured, when he wasn't feeling good. He went out there and worked anyway. That kind of desire and strong will, you know, that kind of thing impresses me."

Considering Baze's career choice, the fact he can pull his 48-year-old battered body out of bed and onto a horse several times a day is remarkable. While Ripken undoubtedly played hurt during stretches of his all-time record 2,632 consecutive games played streak, he never had to overcome a string of injuries like Baze on his way to making history.

"I've had five compression fractures in my back, a torn disc in my lower back, a broken vertebrae in my back, a broken bone in my neck, three broken collarbones, a host of cracked ribs and broken ribs," Baze said. "I broke my pelvis, cracked my wrist, broke a bone in my hand, and had lots of sprains and bruises. I've also had concussions."

Somehow, Baze says that the only lingering pain he has most mornings is an ankle he has sprained over the years more times than he can count.

Baze grew up in a horse racing family - his father Joe was a longtime trainer on the West Coast - so becoming a jockey was not a far leap. But the idea of winning more races than any other rider in history never crossed his mind.

"When I first started out, I was just happy to be doing this, and tickled to death that somebody was actually paying me to do it," Baze said. "I've never been a great one for setting goals."

Missing from Baze's resume is a victory in a Triple Crown race. He has spent most of his career competing at smaller tracks in Northern California, far from the spotlight. He finished 13th aboard Cause to Believe in this year's Kentucky Derby, and has a slew of major stakes wins.

Pincay, who surpassed Bill Shoemaker's all-time wins record in 1999 at Hollywood Park with the late Shoemaker watching, will be at Bay Meadows today to see if Baze can pass him.

While some consider Pincay's career more prestigious because much of his success came on a larger stage, Pincay scoffs at the notion.

"He shows up every day and he rides good horses and bad horses just the same, and that's the way I used to be," Pincay said. "I would have been very proud whether I won the title [of all-time winningest rider] in Panama or riding camels over there in Iraq.

"This is something that Russell should be very proud of."

Baze has been trainer Jerry Hollendorfer's first-call rider for many years. The California-based Hollendorfer, who had his first string of horses at Tampa Bay Downs last season, said there is no secret to Baze's success.

"I've always believed that people who work hard get what they deserve, and Russell is as hard a working rider as there ever was," Hollendorfer said. "He also has the talent to back up his work ethic, and that's the difference between him being a journeyman and the Hall of Famer he is."

Whether Baze breaks Pincay's record today or later this week, he has no plans of slowing down.

"Hopefully, I'll be able to set [the record] at 10,000 and maybe a little farther," he said. "I'm healthy and I'm enjoying what I'm doing, so I don't see any end in the near future."; 

WESLEY CHAPEL - The thing about Bob Williams is, if he hadn't been born and reared to be the man he became, God would have had to invent him. The Almighty would have taken iron and flint and formed it around a perpetual motion machine; then he'd have taken a ladle of warm pudding, sweet and humble, and dropped it in for a heart.

At a month shy of 60, but with the physique, energy and buzz cut of a petty officer half his age, Williams is the personification of John F. Kennedy's 1961 inaugural speech in which, in foggy puffs, he reminded his countrymen, "Here on Earth, God's work must truly be our own."

Williams was a kid then, a high school sophomore. Three years later, the inspirational president assassinated, trouble rising in the east, the kid joined the Navy, where he hoped to make a home. For most of three years, he fueled fighter jets that launched from the deck of the USS Independence, a flattop that saw duty off Vietnam, Cuba and in the Mediterranean.

But it wasn't until he was blown from the flight deck to the catwalk below by an F-4's unexpected turn that Williams saw the world, being shipped from one naval hospital to another in search of an orthopedic surgeon up to the task of repairing both knees. After that, he rehabbed and mustered out of This Man's Navy, taking his honorable discharge into private life and the building of a niche industry - sifters for industrial bakers such as Nabisco - all the while longing for the life he'd left behind.

"I would go back in the blink of an eye if I could," Williams says.

Instead, he does the next best thing, living on military time and a military schedule, rising at "oh-dark-thirty" and going double time past sunset in support of U.S. military personnel stationed in the world's hot spots half a planet away.

Where The Focus Belongs

"This should not be about me," Williams says as he leads a tour of the 1-acre warehouse that doubles as headquarters for the companies he's turned over to his sons, and the staging area for a massive undertaking: the packing and shipping of boxes destined for Iraq, Kuwait, Afghanistan and Kyrgyzstan under the imprimatur of Support Our Troops ( www.ourtroopsonline.com).

Indeed, Williams and his ever-turning cast of volunteers - Girl Scouts one week, USF's ROTC members the next - represent only the neck of an hourglass, the pinched center through which all manner of goods, stuff and merchandise pass from private donors to be disbursed to distant U.S. bases where Williams' e-mail correspondents have made their needs known.

Nurses shivering in their tents want flannel pajamas. A sergeant setting up a recreation hall wants a television, a DVD player and movies. Socks are good, as are foil-wrapped packs of air-activated hand warmers. Stuck in boots, gloves, the helmet and on the back of the neck, they make midnight patrol in Lord-Knows-Where, Kyrgyzstan, practically tolerable.

Twenty-cup coffee makers are always popular, as are hot sauce, chips and bean dip.

Says Williams, "You don't want to be in one of their tents the night this stuff arrives."

Support Our Troops contributors, including large corporations, small businesses and individuals, have sent popcorn, stuffed toys, specialized rifle sights and rechargeable spotlights.

What Can We Do?

Are Williams and Support Our Troops making a difference where it matters, on the ill-defined front where terror experts weave their deadly fabric?

Ask the six Marines on patrol in Fallujah, Iraq, who wrote to tell of the little girl who sat, unmoving, in the middle of a dirt road as their patrol neared.

Some of the men recognized her as one of the children they recently had given plush toys and candy. As they dismounted from their Humvee and approached, the little girl sat tight, the letter said. When they drew near, she threw up a hand - Stop! - then pointed to the ground beside her.

The Marines instantly recognized the work of insurgents, who had buried a landmine in their path. The little girl's subtle, courageous and unlikely gesture had saved their lives.

"I'll send a whole crate of Beanie Babies over there if it keeps six Marines alive," Williams says.

This is where we come in. Moving a 69-pound, 20-inch cube of a box from here to there costs a tidy $27.05, putting Support Our Troops' postage bill at about $6,000 monthly. Your check, written simply to "Postmaster" - "I don't want to handle money," Williams says - in any denomination helps start a package on its two-week journey. Send it to Support Our Troops, P.O. Box 7560, Wesley Chapel FL 33544-0110.

These are the folks, Williams says, defending freedom's doorstep. No matter where you come down on the policy, Support Our Troops turns rhetoric and ribbons into reality.

Let's get busy.; 

TAMPA - The top general at U.S. Special Operations Command did not use his position for personal gain or to advance the interests of friends and former colleagues, the Defense Department inspector general concluded after a nearly 10-month investigation.
In a 21-page report, the inspector general's office said it could not substantiate allegations made in an Oct. 19 anonymous letter claiming Army Gen. Bryan "Doug" Brown had behaved improperly and perhaps illegally by manipulating the command's contracting process.
"The result of the investigation is exactly what we expected," Army Col. Sam Taylor, Socom's top spokesman, said Friday. "The allegations in the anonymous letter defied logic from the beginning."
The inspector general's report, dated Aug. 25, has not been publicly released. The Tampa Tribune reviewed a copy of the report's executive summary.
Taylor said the findings definitively clear Brown of any impropriety, but several of the letter's claims were not addressed in the executive summary. It's not clear why.
Gary Comerford, a spokesman for the inspector general, said the allegations "were found to be unsubstantiated" and "there is nothing further to say regarding this issue."
Letter Very Detailed
The authors of the four-page letter have not been identified. Socom officials concluded the letter is so detailed it only could have come from current or former command personnel.
Taylor said the letter surfaced at the same time that former defense contractor William Burke pleaded guilty to a federal bribery charge and retired Army Col. Tom Spellissy was about to be indicted as Burke's co-conspirator. Spellissy, who was convicted of conspiracy, and Burke both used to work at Socom.
"I believe the intent of whoever wrote the letter was to take the focus off the criminal behavior of those two individuals," Taylor said.
Spellissy and his attorney, Pat Doherty, did not return calls. Burke could not be reached for comment.
One of the many claims in the October letter was that Brown formed a special office at Socom as a favor to his predecessor, retired Air Force Gen. Charles Holland.
After leaving military service, Holland went to work for AeroVironment, a California company that builds unmanned aerial vehicles. The office would steer contracts to Holland, described in the anonymous letter as Brown's "buddy.";

</text>
