<text id="A41" category="" words="1987" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Music Country duo kisses, makes good' The Arkansas Democrat Gazette, 30 July 2006, p. 18; 'Patience, candor key to TV audition Thousands likely to try out in Conway for NBC show, Deal or No Deal.' The Arkansas Democrat Gazette, 25 July 2006, p. 9; 'Ex-art" Author="MATT SPENCE; DEBRA HALE-SHELTON; DEBRA HALE-SHELTON " PublicationDate="30 July 2006; 25 July 2006; 3 July 2006 " SampledFrom="All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

It was kind of silly. Waiting for the kiss, some public display of affection. You often wonder how celebrity couples would act in public. And depending on the kiss, it could just cement the notion that this celebrity marriage is actually working.
But the kiss would have to wait.
Country and western music supercouple Faith Hill and Tim McGraw had work to do, and they invited their guests at Alltel Arena to "celebrate with them in their house" Friday night.
The show opened with Hill rising from under the stage, which was in the center of the arena and in the shape of a cross stretching up to the stands on the sides.
With a vibrant, powerful voice, Hill proved from the opening lines of her current duet with McGraw, "Like We've Never Loved At All," she is like few others.
The crowd of 13,301 at the Soul2Soul II tour stop roared with appreciation and got louder when McGraw emerged from under the stage for his opening lines, and it didn't stop for the next two hours except to catch an occasional breath.
After the opening number, McGraw disappeared (ladies first), and Hill began her half of the show.
Hill focused mostly on the music, tuning out the crowd during her songs, opening with "Mississippi Girl," mega hit "The Way You Love Me," and "Sunshine And Summertime," which, in addition to her first number, is on her most-recent album Fireflies and benefited from a lively percussion arrangement.
The design of the stage gave many an up-close look at the performers. Band members, as well as the headliners, came out to the edge of the stage and played to the crowd like they, not McGraw and Hill, were the reason the tickets were sold. And the crowd loved it.
From sweet songs like "Fireflies" and "Stolen Kisses" to powerful ballads "Let Me Let Go" and "Cry" and more jaunty songs like "This Kiss," Hill showed range in her voice from touching to belting, hitting the high notes like few can.
She closed her solo set with a raucous version of Janis Joplin's "Piece of My Heart," which she covered on her 1993 debut album Take Me As I Am.
McGraw rejoined his spouse on the stage and they sang "Angry All the Time" and "Let's Make Love" before Hill disappeared and McGraw took over.
The country crier (because he often sings with a cry in his voice) opened his set with "Real Good Man" and "Where The Green Grass Grows," before offering the crowd his first No. 1 hit, "Don't Take the Girl," which the audience accepted with open arms and bellowing voices.
McGraw was every bit into the crowd. And sometimes literally. Often he stopped and let the crowd sing, and when songs were over, he sometimes spread his arms wide and let the deafening noise wash over him, occasionally inspiring the audience to get louder.
After his smash hit "Live Like You Were Dying" and a particularly audacious ovation, McGraw said, "That's exactly why we do this. Thank you for making this possible." He continued, "I turned 39 the other day (actually, May 1), and this is my 17th year on the road. And I'll do it another 17 if you guys let me. Or until I can't get into these jeans, whichever comes first. But they're gettin' kinda tight." McGraw ended his 15-song set with his 11-year-old hit "I Like It I Love It" while going down into the crowd, shaking hands, giving fists and letting some in the audience sing into the microphone.
While McGraw had worked up a sweat in his black leather cowboy hat and bluejeans, Hill had changed into a black halter dress and sandals and rejoined him onstage for three more songs, including music chart success "It's Your Love" and Bob Marley's "No Woman No Cry," for an interesting country twist on a reggae song.
The finale explained the Soul2Soul theme. The couple disappeared, then came back up through the stage, sitting face-toface, very close with a microphone between them. With their hands resting on each other's thighs, they sang "I Need You" and finished with a passionate kiss to thunderous cheers.
Looks like this marriage will last.


CONWAY - Here's the deal for the thousands of wannabe millionaires who have downloaded an Internet application form to audition here Saturday for a spot on the NBC television hit Deal or No Deal.
Complete the form - revealing name, address and other less-vital statistics such as "the most outrageous thing you've ever done." Show up on time, between 10 a.m. and 1 p.m., at the University of Central Arkansas' Farris Center.
Be prepared to wait as long as 10 hours for the 30-second videotaped audition.
... and, remember, Katie Couric didn't get where she is today by being cranky.
"You do have to be likable," said Greg Fieser, a casting associate for Lock and Key, the program's Los Angeles production company. "America has to like you and to want to see you do well." As of Sunday night, KARKTV, Channel 4, the NBC affiliate in Little Rock, had recorded 8,907 downloads of the application form on its Web site, said Tim Whitley, director of operations at KARK. Sister station KNWA in Fayetteville also has an online application. Updated numbers from that station were unavailable Monday afternoon, but Whitley said KNWA has had at least 2,500 downloads.
Still, no one knows exactly how many applicants to expect. Rob Thomas, creative director for KARK, explained Monday that each download doesn't neatly equate to one applicant. A would-be applicant might have downloaded a form, made a mistake and downloaded another copy. Or someone else might have checked the form solely out of curiosity.
"It doesn't necessarily translate into big numbers" actually showing up, he said.
Fieser, interviewed by telephone, said it's hard to tell but he figured maybe half the downloads will translate into applicants. Some people back out, he said, and "some give it to friends as a get-to-know-you type thing." Fieser, who will be at Farris Center, said similar auditions for the game show in St. Louis and New York drew about 5,000 entries, while one in Las Vegas attracted about 7,000. Another 2,800 turned out in Tulsa, said Fieser, who will be the first in the production company to go through Conway's videotaped auditions.
Applicants turn in their forms at Farris Center, which seats 5,000, and must be in the building by 1 p.m., when the doors will be closed.
"If people are in the door at 1 o'clock, they will get videotaped," Thomas said. "When they will get videotaped is a good question. ... We may not have them on camera until 8 o'clock that night." Deal or No Deal is a game of chance hosted by Howie Mandel and featuring an array of sexy female models. Contestants choose a briefcase and can stick with it or make a deal to accept a cash offer in exchange for the unknown dollar amount in their chosen briefcase. As the game progresses, they select other briefcases, each numbered and held by a model, and the dollar amounts from those cases are revealed. The contestants hope the lower-valued briefcases are revealed, because that improves the odds that they have a highvalue briefcase and also sweetens the cash offer.
Contestants on Deal or No Deal can leave with anywhere from a penny to $1 million, though the most anyone has taken home yet was $464,000, according to Fieser.
The application form for the program is one page, accompanied by a participation agreement.
Prospective guests are asked such innocuous questions as "What is the most interesting job you have ever had?" to "Can you roller blade?" They're also asked to confess "an embarrassing story" about themselves and to be a bit introspective: "What is the most interesting thing about you that strangers can't tell just by looking at you?" Fieser offered a few tips to auditioners. "My advice is to really be yourself," he said. "What we're looking for is personality. ... I look for people who are talkative and fun ... someone you want to be buddies with." Don't try pretending to be likable. "I write those people off immediately," Fieser said.
Shorts and tank tops are OK, but Fieser said people should avoid an unkempt appearance - no torn T-shirts or uncombed hair. "That says a lot about your personality. If they're going to be on a television show, they should look like they care to be on a TV show." He also advised against gimmick costumes and signs, saying such props distract from a person's personality.
"We have a lot of people who show up and do crazy stuff," Fieser said. "Sometimes that's their personality; sometimes it's not." Fieser said he's impressed by people "who can tell a great story, a funny story especially, and also show a sense of humor, humility about themselves." He said it could be two weeks to eight months before auditioners hear from the production company.
UCA spokesman Tommy Jackson said the university has notified Conway's police and fire departments of the event. UCA police also will be out in force.
Jackson said he expects some auditioners to camp out Friday night so that they can get spots at the front of the line Saturday. One who won't be trying out is UCA President Lu Hardin even though he's a fan of the program, Jackson said.

"The little white-gloved ladies who stand around and show the quilt - they love to bend the quilt over so people can see the back. Of course, those people go and get their friends so they can see the back," Harris said.
Gatling isn't above self-deprecating humor, either. He picks up a small quilted wall hanging he made; it's a self-portrait. On one side, it says, "How I See Myself" and shows a tan, muscular, macho guy. The other side, titled "How Others See Me," shows a balding, fat guy with prickly hairs all over and a quilt in one hand.
The family theme shows up in one of two Gatling creations on display in the Arkansas Quilters Show, "Pieces of Our Lives," at the Cox Creative Center in Little Rock's River Market area through July 22.
"Mama's Cookie Quilt" is what's known as a scrap quilt, with each block a different size. Designed on the computer using a cross-stitch program, it features five of his mother's cookie recipes in her own handwriting. It also includes a picture of his parents and a fringe of miniature cooking utensils, cookie cutters and toys.
Gatling, who is divorced and the father of one adult son, shares his home with Lucas, a feisty Shih Tzu, whose ferocity is more than a little exaggerated on the "Beware of Dog" sign on the wrought-iron gate outside.
The ranch-style house is home to far more than quilts. Gatling is an avid collector, too. He hoards some items for fun, others for quilt embellishments and some for sentimental reasons. He even has two dining tables; one came from a friend and one was his grandfather's.
In his studio, a visitor can look up to a wall shelf bedecked with a collection of light-reflecting colored bottles. Nearby, hang watercolors Gatling has painted. Open a bedroom closet door for a glimpse of the fabric dolls he's created, 25 of them.
"I have a nun doll, an aerobics doll, and I have a blind ballerina" who wears dark glasses.
Open another closet to find costumes, bow ties destined for use in a quilt, handkerchiefs, antique jewelry and gloves - "I have hundreds of gloves," he said.
Peek behind a bathroom door to find framed stamps of celebrities from Elvis Presley to Judy Garland. His Great Aunt Bea's washstand is there, too, along with the alligator shoes once worn by his mother and grandmother, and an alligator purse a friend gave him.

</text>
