<text id="A42" category="" words="1996" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'KATIE COURIC takes over today at &quot;CBS Evening News&quot; - and millions will be listening, watching and logging on / A DEBUT TIMES THREE' Houston Chronicle, 5 September 2006, p. 1; 'Letterman, CBS reportedly agree on new deal' Houston Chronicle, 8 September 2" Author="JEANNIE KEVER & MIKE MCDANIEL; N/A; LANA BERKOWITZ" PublicationDate="5 September 2006; 8 September 2006; 29 September 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

Millions of people will check out Katie Couric's debut today as the first woman to anchor a network newscast on her own, but the real change will take place at your desk and, depending on where you live, in your car.
The "CBS Evening News," broadcast home of such TV icons as Edward R. Murrow, Walter Cronkite and Dan Rather, is going high-tech, broadcasting on the Internet and radio stations around the country at the same time as it airs on TV. That's designed to create a younger audience for a program often considered the province of these viewers' parents and grandparents.
"It's an attempt to become multimedia in a world where most people get their news via the Internet or talk radio before they even get home," said Matthew Felling of the Washington, D.C.-based Center for Media and Public Affairs.
Both ABC and NBC have expanded their own Web offerings, as well - "NBC Nightly News' " Brian Williams has a blog and an afternoon Webcast precedes the evening news program - but CBS' latest moves are the biggest yet.
Still, Couric knows that much of the attention won't be on the program's content, or even its high-tech delivery options. Instead, some will focus on her hair, her wardrobe and whether her megawatt smile is suited to the traditionally serious, and male, job of presenting the day's news. Other critics will be searching for signs of "liberal bias," a charge that has dogged her for years.
"I think there are many more important things to write about," she told TV critics when the question of her personal style arose during a recent teleconference. "It's not something I'm really thinking about that much. It's about number 57 on my to-do list."
Breaking boundaries
Couric, 49, was named to succeed Dan Rather as CBS anchor in April, more than a year after Bob Schieffer took over as a temporary replacement. Schieffer will return to his old job as CBS' chief Washington correspondent, while Couric also will file stories for "60 Minutes," beginning with a story about 9/11 set to air Sunday.
She will be not only the first woman to serve as solo anchor of a network newscast - years after cable news broke that barrier - but the highest-paid, at $15 million a year. For that, after 15 years at NBC's early morning "Today" show, she is expected to do no less than save network news.
Viewership for the networks' evening news shows has been dropping for decades, with CBS long in third place. Schieffer pulled up the ratings, but CBS still lags behind NBC and ABC.
Publicly, Couric shrugs off the pressure.
"I'm just really interested in ... a quality newscast," she said. "I don't expect a huge ratings surge, and I'm honestly not focused on that."
Nevertheless, she has toured the country on a six-city "listening tour" to meet with viewers and given scores of interviews in anticipation of today's launch, talking with newspaper reporters and kibitzing with 50 of her counterparts at local affiliates around the country. She introduced a video tribute to Schieffer during his final show.
She even survived a mini brouhaha when CBS acknowledged last week that its publicity department had employed some computer sleight-of- hand to make Couric appear considerably slimmer in a photo that appeared in a magazine published by the network.
All, perhaps, good practice for the scrutiny that lies ahead.
Since 1980, evening news viewership has fallen about 48 percent, according to the Project for Excellence in Journalism. But that leaves about 25 million people still watching on an average evening, more than all cable news channels combined.
"I would love to be in decline like the network newscasts are," Felling said. "Are they slipping? Sure. But they're still the big kids in town."
Media evolution
The question is, will that last?
"We live in a different world," said Paul Levinson, chairman of the communications department at Fordham University in New York City. People often aren't home for the network news shows, 5:30 p.m. in the central time zone, 6:30 p.m. on the East and West Coasts.
"Media evolution takes time," he said. "That's why we still see 25 million (viewers). But the trajectory is going down."
Couric alone can't change that. But Levinson and others said that her skills, combined with CBS' technological juggernaut, might.
"Her experience is deep. She has amazing instincts," said Pat Mitchell, president and CEO of the Museum of Television &amp; Radio, and former CEO of the PublicBroadcasting Service. "She connects with the audience in a very special way."
Helping navigate
Tonight's show will have new theme music and a new set, among other things.
How different it will be depends, in part, on how you define that.
"Of course it will look different, because it will have Katie there instead of Bob Schieffer," Mitchell said. "Will it be different? Not in big and bold and shocking ways, but I believe Katie is going to bring her own sensibilities and set of interests to it."
Rome Hartman, executive producer of the "Evening News," uses the word "storytelling" a lot to describe the new show.
"It's still going to be the "CBS Evening News," he said. "It's not going to be a headline service, although there will be some stories we just touch on briefly."
Couric will "help viewers navigate stories," Hartman said, both by asking follow-up questions of reporters and by doing some interviews herself.
"She's a terrific interviewer. That's not a talent you waste," he said.
Levinson predicts that Couric's influence will be seen in "the peripheral stories. We're going to see more human-interest stories."
The more lasting change, he said, will be the ability to hear the program regardless of where you are. "If you're in the office, I think, sure, people will look at it. It brings a certain live edge that the Internet often doesn't have."
Luring younger viewers
The Web simulcast will be one change. Radio - airing the program live over a radio station's broadcast signal - will be another. Hartman said he did not know how many radio stations will initially carry the show. (WCBS, an all-news radio station in New York City, will.
In Houston, CNN 650 simulcasts KHOU-TV's local broadcast at 5 p.m. but won't carry "The CBS Evening News," although it will offer several Couric-related Internet postings on its Web site, www.kikk.com .)
The goal, Hartman said, "is to get our work in front of more people, at more times, in more ways, on more devices. ... If someone watches a great Lara Logan story from Afghanistan on the Web site or hears it on a radio simulcast, that's fabulous. It's not an end in itself."
The Web site can provide a alternative to the limitations of a 30- minute newscast.
"If Katie does an interview with King Abdullah, and three minutes appear on the Evening News, the rest will be on the Web," Hartman said.
The point is to attract younger viewers, who don't necessarily think of the TV networks as a place to turn for news.
"If you want to lure a younger demographic, you must go multiplatform," Felling said. "Radio, TV, Internet, podcast. Anything to keep yourself in front of people."


NEW YORK - David Letterman is planning to outlast Jay Leno in late-night television.
CBS Corp. and Letterman have agreed to a four-year contract extension that will keep the comic on the Late Show through the 2009- 10 television season, according to two executives familiar with the negotiations who spoke on condition of anonymity Thursday because the deal wasn't fully done.
That would keep Letterman, 59, on the air past NBC's planned 2009 hand-off of the Tonight Show job from Leno to Conan O'Brien.
Financial details of the new deal were not known, but the Hollywood Reporter, citing unnamed sources, said the new deal should keep Letterman in the same salary territory as his 2002 contract, which was for about $31.5 million per year.
Leno and Letterman have been competing in late-night since 1993, after NBC chose Leno for Tonight and Letterman jumped to CBS.
For most of that time, Leno has had the upper hand in the ratings. For the past year, Leno has averaged 5.71 million viewers each night to Letterman's 4.16, according to Nielsen Media Research.
That gap is more than 200,000 viewers wider than the previous year, mostly due to Letterman's audience shrinking, Nielsen said.
Letterman has suffered through health problems in recent years that has led to some speculation that he might not want to do the job much longer. Heart surgery in 2000 and a case of shingles in 2003 kept Letterman off the air for brief periods.



Who's your gold buddy?
When Christopher Alley of Vineyard Haven, Mass., found out he was a finalist for the $100,000 pop-culture trivia competition in Houston, he shot a message to a fellow "Gold Rush'' fan in Somerville, Mass., asking if Mark Behnke would be his gold buddy.
"I told him: `Sorry, I can't. I'm going to be your competitor,' " Behnke recalls. Alley and Behnke had to find other gold buddies, contacts whom gamers are allowed to call for help during the competition - like a mobile shout-out on "Cash Cab'' or a lifeline on "Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?''
Alley, Behnke and David Gholson of Knoxville, Tenn., were fourth- round winners of "Survivor'' producer Mark Burnett's Internet game. Tuesday they were at Space Center Houston at 5:30 a.m. to compete in three challenges. And Wednesday morning, winner Alley was fielding media interviews. The 21-year-old chef was talking about using the money to get a fresh start and move from the only home he has ever known. He also wants to buy a new car for his mother and himself.
Today you can see the competition at aol.com/goldrush.
Alley says he was drawn to "Gold Rush'' because you don't have to eat any bugs, knock out anybody, compete in the boardroom or get fired. "You just use your seemingly useless pop-culture knowledge," he said.
The six-week contest, which began Sept. 13, challenges online players to answer trivia questions that get progressively harder. Winners of each round will compete for $1 million.
"Gold Rush'' does cross-promotion with its sponsors and often uses CBS television series as fodder for the game. For example, the answer to a rebus puzzle was "CSI: Miami,'' and the tribal names of this season's "Survivor: Cook Island'' have come into play.
Online players looking for assistance have started their own Web sites. Alley and Behnke met through groups.myspace.com/ goldrushgroup, which gives clues and support, but no answers. Every time Alley finished a round, he would post his time at myspace.com and offer to help others.
Behnke, 46, suspects there will be more interest in the group when gamers find out that two members came in first and second in the Houston challenge. Gholson, 48, who came in third, doesn't play with buddy groups.
All three finalists agree that experience helps, and they get better with each round. Watching aol.com's recaps also helps players figure out some strategies. For example, all the questions at Space Center Houston were sci-fi related. Answers pertained to "Star Trek,'' "The Jetsons,'' "Star Wars,'' "The X-Files'' and "Men in Black.'' The game's next stop is New Orleans on Saturday.
It's a whirlwind production involving films crews, moving sets, setting up new games concocted by the Survivor gurus and scheduling for host Mark Steines and field correspondent Tracy Metro.
"I forget about time. I know I have a wife and two kids somewhere," said Steines of "Entertainment Tonight.''
Steines had to leave at 2 p.m. Tuesday to catch a plane for an "ET'' appointment with Teri Hatcher in Los Angeles. Then it was off to Toronto to interview John Travolta before heading to New Orleans for Round 5.
Winner Alley was just thinking about getting home after making this morning's appearance on CBS' "The Early Show.''

</text>
