<text id="A43" category="" words="1998" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Reprieve for no-show Rezko: Gov's pal gets extra week to face charges -- but will he show?' Chicago Sun Times, October 14, 2006, Pg. 03; 'Don't get caught up in Christ-mess' Chicago Sun Times, December 1, 2006, Pg. 20; 'Wish granted: Burned soldier to se" Author="Natasha Korecki and Chris Fusco; Neil Steinberg; Shamus Toomey; " PublicationDate="October 14, 2006 ; December 1, 2006 Friday; November 5, 2006; " SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning; " WebAddress="Nexis UK">

He's facing foreclosure on his Wilmette mansion, he's behind on his property taxes and his pizza business is in ruins.

So why would Antoin "Tony" Rezko return to this country to answer public corruption charges?

"We don't think Tony's coming back," said an associate of Rezko's, speaking on condition of anonymity. "Why would he?"

That was the question on the minds of federal prosecutors, too, when Rezko -- a top fund-raiser for Gov. Blagojevich -- failed to show up for court hearings before two judges on Friday.

Rezko's lawyer, Joseph Duffy, insisted his client was not on the lam, but just tending to business overseas. Duffy wouldn't specify Rezko's location.

Though Duffy arranged new court dates for next week, prosecutors were skeptical.

"We don't necessarily take the word of Mr. Rezko that he is returning," Assistant U.S. Attorney Christopher Niewoehner said.

Niewoehner told U.S. District Judge Amy St. Eve that Rezko's absence "raises concerns" that the Syrian-born businessman cares little about appearing in court on his indictment. "It does suggest that Mr. Rezko had other priorities other than this court case," Niewoehner said.

St. Eve let an arrest warrant for Rezko, 51, stand and asked for Rezko's travel itinerary. The warrant calls for detaining Rezko without bond.

There was no public indication the government attempted to freeze Rezko's assets. And it was unclear Friday just how much is left to seize.

Rezko, a onetime millionaire, appeared to be burdened with debt, liens and civil legal actions.

$30,000 A MONTH MORTGAGE

On Tuesday, LaSalle Bank National Association
filed a foreclosure lawsuit on Rezko's Wilmette mansion. The suit alleges Rezko and his wife, Rita, haven't made their $30,000-a-month-plus mortgage payment since August and owe more than $5 million in principal, $96,108 in interest and at least $3,290 in late fees.

Also, $25,000 in taxes on Rezko's mansion are more than a month late.

Besides that, civil litigation against Rezko is mounting. A friend and business associate, Semir D. Sirazi, sued him Thursday alleging Rezko bilked him out of millions of dollars in a loan arrangement.

And Papa John's International,
a pizza chain that helped Rezko build his fortune, has accused him in a civil racketeering lawsuit of defrauding the company.

Given Rezko's financial troubles, some investigators long have theorized that Rezko wouldn't return from overseas, sources said.

But the Rezko family's roots are in the north suburbs, including three children, some of whom are enrolled in school. Another restaurant chain with which Rezko is involved, Panda Express, remains successful. And Rezko is expected to make a fortune on a lucrative overseas venture: building a power plant in Iraq.

Beyond that, Rezko going on the lam could embarrass his friend Blagojevich, who is up for re-election Nov. 7.

Duffy said there's nothing unusual about Rezko's travels and that Rezko left the country without knowing of the impending charges.

"I spoke with him this morning, and he said he's aware of his obligations as a citizen, and he's prepared to meet that obligation," Duffy said. "Mr. Rezko feels strongly about these charges in that they're baseless."

MUST APPEAR NEXT THURSDAY

U.S. District Judge James Zagel gave Rezko until next Thursday to appear for an arraignment, while St. Eve gave him until Friday.

Duffy wouldn't specify his client's location, saying outside of court: "I reported what I knew."

Rezko, Duffy added, had been in contact with the feds since 2004 and offered to talk to them. "They never took up the offer," nor did they warn him of the charges, Duffy said.

U.S. Attorney Patrick Fitzgerald announced charges against Rezko on Wednesday, saying Rezko took part in a "pay-to-play scheme on steroids."

In a 24-count indictment, Rezko is accused of demanding kickbacks from firms wanting to do business with the state. Rezko used his clout with high-ranking state officials to work many of the deals, and in one scheme demanded $1.5 million in campaign donations for Blagojevich, according to charges. That case is before St. Eve.

Blagojevich has denied any knowledge of Rezko's actions.

In the case before Zagel, Rezko is accused of falsely obtaining $10 million in loans for his pizza businesses.; 

Let's connect the dots, shall we?

Those imagining a "War Against Christmas," those claiming nativity scenes belong on government land, or condemning the phrase "Season's Greetings'' for not adequately conveying the idea that the holiday season is all about Jesus Christ, Your Personal Lord and Savior, who are they, exactly?

Why, they are the very same people who try all year long to make this nation even more of a one-faith theocracy than it already is.

Therein lies the issue. A lot of folk would be less anxious about religious trappings in December were the other 11 months of the year not spent grimly fending off the advances of faith, battling whether the school science curriculum should be shredded in the name of Christianity, or women stripped of the right to control their own bodies, or a particular form of prayer be thrust back into the public schools.

Holidays are a time of joy, but not abandon. Those who insist this is about honoring a holiday are like the creepy relative saying, "C'mon, give your old Uncle Pete a hug!" to his cringing nieces who know that it is not just a hug he's after, but a pat and a squeeze and a lick in the ear, too.

Bottom line: There's plenty of Christmas without the government underwriting the holiday. "Save it for church" might sound harsh at this festive season, and were it not required as a year-round mantra, we wouldn't need it so much now. But we do.

ELABORATION

Arggghhh. . . .

Permit me a visceral groan of frustration. And again.

Double arggghhhh. . . .

I'm a word guy. Or try to be. I believe words are important, attempt to choose the proper word for a particular circumstance. Right tool for the job.

At least a dozen readers, including my mother, pointed out that I referred to the light-admitting plastic roofs of UPS trucks as "opaque." Some were polite. Others not. One scolded me in verse. Another found deepest significance in the blunder.

"Just more evidence that we are witnessing the collapse of Western Civilization," wrote Fritz Plous.

I hadn't looked the word up. Thought I knew it. Thought "opaque" expressed a certain quality of milkiness, one -- if I may defend an error -- indeed present in the definition of "opaque" in my New Oxford American Dictionary: "not able to be seen through; not transparent: the windows were opaque with steam."

That is not the end of the story, however. The complaining readers cleaved to a more stringent standard, such as the one in my Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary: "blocking the passage of radiant energy and esp. light."

"Impenetrable by light; neither transparent nor translucent," says the American Heritage Dictionary definition sent in by yet another reader.

"The word you should have used is 'translucent,' " said my mother.

Right again, Mom. The Sun-Times regrets the infelicitous word choice.

IT'LL HAPPEN EVENTUALLY . . .

Sometime along the way, American leadership became the art of finding out exactly what most people want and then spoon-feeding it back to them.

Thus the unpopular changes that should get done, that must get done, instead never get done. And the years roll by.

Take the copper penny and the paper dollar. Pennies are a bother -- nobody wants them, they gather in dusty bowls, collect in coffee cans. The cost in time lost, fumbling for pennies, nationwide has to be in the big bucks.

If the government announced tomorrow we were phasing pennies out -- say in 2009, the centennial of the Lincoln cent -- the same 500 people who are against every change would howl and the other 300 million would heave a sigh of relief and round prices to the nearest nickel.

It makes sense. Yet our lack of political leadership is such that, for the sake of the 500 complainers, nothing gets done.

The paper dollar is worse. Canada doesn't have a paper dollar. Britain doesn't have a paper pound note.

They use coins instead -- they last longer, save money and, face it, a dollar isn't that much money anymore.

Why could they do it, but we can't?

A judge last week even said that dollar bills discriminate against the blind.

A perfect time to ditch them. It's the only way those presidential dollars the mint is rolling out will be of interest to more than just collectors.

A perfect time to change. . . . And I know just the man to do it, to lead:

Sen. Barack Obama.

Sure, people project all sorts of superhuman powers upon the junior senator from Illinois. He will bind up our country. He will unleash the better angels of our nature. He will make us happy, make us whole.

Obama seems to lean toward big ideas -- how to begin to clear up the mess in Iraq, for instance.

Maybe he will, eventually. In the meantime, why not start small? There are pennies to be pitched and dollar bills to be shredded. Is it beneath his globe-spanning attention? Why should it be? Dumping pennies and paper dollars will be money-saving, worthwhile, easy, and not even politically risky. Nobody will ever miss them.

We need to be a nation that acts, that is capable of handling problems. If we cannot get rid of the penny and the dollar bill, we can't do anything. If Barack Obama isn't willing to do this important, tiny, timely bit of governmental business, really, what is it he's willing to do?

TODAY'S CHUCKLE:

In honor of Charlie Trotter's announcing that he will open a new restaurant, a restaurant joke:

After a delicious lunch in an Italian restaurant, the well-traveled businesswoman called the chef over to compliment him.

"Your lasagna was better than one I ate in Milan Tuesday," she told the blushing chef.

"It is not surprising," said the chef, proudly. "They use domestic cheese, while here we use imported."; 

Two weeks ago while patrolling Iraq's Al Anbar province, Lance Cpl. Jon Green's truck hit a roadside bomb.

The 22-year-old Marine from Palatine suffered second- and third-degree burns to his face. Four buddies in the truck were also wounded, some far more severely. They've all been recovering in a Texas hospital.

Just before Jon came back Friday to Palatine on a 30-day leave from the hospital, his parents, Rick and Kim, were asked by a state official what he needed.

"We didn't talk about a whole heck of a lot of things that he would like to do on his 30-day leave, but the one thing he did say was, 'I've never been to Soldier Field. I've never seen the Bears,' " his father said. "Everybody in Iraq has become instant Bear fans because they're 7-0. He said, 'I would love to see the Bears play.' "

Consider it a wish fulfilled.

Rick Green returned the call to the state official -- Lt. Gov. Pat Quinn's senior policy adviser Eric Schuller -- and set the wheels in motion. Soon, WLS-AM (890) morning host Eileen Byrne was telling her listeners about Jon. They began flooding the phones with ticket offers. Calls came in to the Bears as well.

A SKYBOX SEAT AND CASH

Finally, the perfect opportunity came -- a skybox seat that would keep Jon out of the chilly weather. Someone else dropped off some Bears sweatshirts and spending money. Another guy offered a limo (the Greens turned that down).

Jon and his father will be in that skybox today, soaking up the Bears and a lot of love from Chicagoans.

"It brings tears to our eyes that there are people who are so supportive of the troops over there," Rick said.

Said Jon: "Some people will tell you 'You're appreciated,' and some don't care. It's good to hear about all the people who appreciate what they guys are still doing over there.";

</text>
