<text id="B06" category="" words="1995" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Beer? Hot Dogs? Steroids?' The Washington Post, 2 June 2006, A19; 'Chicks and Balances.' The Washington Post, 2 June 2006, A19; 'In Search Of a New New Deal; How Will the Good Jobs Of the Future Be Created?' The Washington Post, 13 June 2006, A21" Author="Charles Krauthammer; Eugene Robinson; E. J. Dionne Jr. " PublicationDate="2 June 2006; 2 June 2006; 13 June 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

Leave it to the good people of Philadelphia, whose football fans once famously booed and threw snowballs at Santa Claus, to come up with the perfect takedown of the most inflated (in more ways than one) superstar in contemporary sport. With the visiting Barry Bonds at the plate and needing just two home runs to tie Babe Ruth's iconic 714 lifetime homers, the banner was raised: "Ruth did it on hot dogs &amp; beer." 
The target of this concise discourse on the roots of greatness has been booed lustily in every major league city he's played in outside his home town of San Francisco. The fans' displeasure lies in Bonds's alleged use of steroids. The use of "alleged" here, though mandatory, is forced and legalistic. After all, Bonds has admitted that he used "the clear" and "the cream," substances he claims he thought were flaxseed oil and some kind of emollient, only later to discover that they were actually steroids. 
The idea that an athlete of Bonds's stature, for whom the body is both temple and bank vault, would be mistakenly ingesting substances is implausible, made all the more so by the evidence dredged up by two San Francisco sportswriters detailing Bonds's (alleged) gargantuan consumption of every performance-enhancing drug from steroids to human growth hormone. 
But why should we care? What is really wrong with performance enhancement? We say we are against it because it diminishes striving, devalues achievement, produces a shortcut to greatness, etc. But in many endeavors we don't really care about any of that. Medical residents at hospitals have been known to take Ritalin to keep themselves alert on overnight shifts. If it enhances their thinking in the emergency room, what's the objection? 
Many public speakers, performers and even some surgeons take beta-blockers to literally still their hearts and steady their hands. I've never seen a banner at the opera complaining: "Pavarotti does it on pasta." And what about the military, which pioneered some of these performance-enhancing studies to see how they could help soldiers survive the most extreme stresses? Isn't that an unqualified good? 
Performance enhancement turns out to be disturbing only in the narrow context of competition, most commonly in sports. And the objection is not cheating nature but cheating competitors. It's basically a fairness issue. 
When everyone has access to technological improvements (graphite tennis rackets, titanium drivers, more tightly wound baseballs) the sport may be transformed, but the playing field remains level. When technology is enhancing the equipment, fans become quickly reconciled to the transformation. (And it can be radical: The transition from bamboo to fiberglass totally changed the pole vault.) But when technology enhances the physiology of the athlete, we tend to recoil. 
Interestingly, however, not always. What about Lasik surgery? Tiger Woods had it and said it made his game stronger than ever. I have yet to see a banner at the Masters saying: "Nicklaus did it by squinting." 
Vision enhancement is even more helpful to baseball players trying to follow the flight of a ball approaching at 90 mph. Hitting requires hand-eye coordination. Bonds turns his arms into tree trunks, and boos rain down. Change the physiology of the other part of the equation -- the eye -- and no one cares. 
Why? Because Lasik is legal, common and available to all. Steroids are not. True, baseball had no steroid ban until 2005 (an informal policy began in 2002), and management looked the other way. But since 1990 use without a prescription has been illegal in the United States. Most players didn't use steroids. Many considered it cheating. 
So is Bonds a villain? No more than the other highly pumped sluggers such as Mark McGwire and Sammy Sosa who only yesterday were the toast of the nation. Bonds's sin appears to be that he did it better and longer than others and did not break down physically as early from the side effects. 
But that's only part of it. No one cared terribly, no nasty banners were hung, when he surpassed contemporaries such as McGwire. The deep distaste that arises now is that he is challenging two sacred figures of the past: the great Ruth and the elegant, pioneering Hank Aaron. When the competitor is historical, playing in a totally different technological era, the playing field is decidedly unlevel. 
Bonds (allegedly) used artificial enhancers. They were internal and physiological. And they were taken clandestinely and illegally. 
Three strikes. 
Put an asterisk beside his records? No. A home run is a home run and not one was challenged at the time. In any case, asterisks are removable. Bonds's records carry a taint that will long endure. 

The music business can be so arbitrarily cruel that any artist whose new album debuts at the top of the charts has earned the right to gloat, at least a little. So that means the Dixie Chicks, to whom the country music industry has been deliberately cruel, deserve to gloat a lot. Since Natalie Maines, Emily Robison and Martie Maguire are being excessively polite about their sweet vindication, I'll do a little gloating for them. 
"Taking the Long Way," the Chicks' new album, opened at No. 1 on the Billboard charts last week, with 525,829 copies sold. That would be remarkable under any circumstances -- the Chicks, by some measures, have become the most successful female group in history -- but it's downright astounding given that many country stations are refusing to play the album's first single, "Not Ready to Make Nice." 
In fact, a lot of country stations have refused to play any of the Dixie Chicks' songs since March 10, 2003. By then it was clear that nothing would deter George W. Bush from launching his elective war in Iraq, and the Chicks were giving a concert in London, where popular opinion generally saw the impending invasion as pure madness. Maines committed the crime of speaking her mind. "Just so you know," the golden-haired, golden-voiced Texan told the audience, "we're ashamed that the president of the United States is from Texas." 
Back home, the Chicks were denounced as traitors on right-wing talk radio. Country music deejays, apparently seeing jingoism as a good career move, not only denounced the Chicks but refused to play their music. Some said they were just responding to listeners who threatened to boycott stations that dared to broadcast the Dixie Chicks' sweet harmonies. 
The following month, after the war had begun -- but long before we knew how the administration had contrived its rationale for the invasion or how it had failed to plan for the bloody, grinding occupation that continues to this day -- Tom Brokaw raised the Dixie Chicks controversy in an interview with the president, asking if he would invite them to the White House. President Bush never gave a yes or a no, but he did have something to say: 
"I mean, the Dixie Chicks are free to speak their mind. They can say what they want to say. And just because -- they shouldn't have their feelings hurt just because some people don't want to buy their records when they speak out. You know, freedom is a two-way street." 
That sounds to me like a pretty clear presidential endorsement of a boycott of the Chicks. In fairness to Bush, though, I'm sure he wouldn't approve of all that followed -- frequent harassment and even death threats. 
Standard procedure would have been for the Chicks to grovel and beg forgiveness. Instead, they responded by posing for the cover of Entertainment Weekly in the nude, their bodies covered with graffiti -- "Saddam's Angels," "Proud Americans," "Boycott," "Free Speech," "Shut Up," "Peace." At one point, Maines issued a modified, limited, half-hearted apology, which she quickly retracted. Her position was that all she had done was speak her mind. 
Robison and Maguire never faltered in backing her up, although they did tell "60 Minutes" that during one concert, after a particularly chilling threat that Maines would be shot dead on stage, they might have stood a little farther away from their lead singer than usual. 
"I didn't know we lived in a time when just speaking your mind would bring out this much wrath," Robison said Wednesday night in an interview on "Larry King Live." For the past few weeks, the Chicks have been pretty much inescapable with around-the-clock television appearances. They even graced the cover of Time magazine (fully clothed). 
It's not yet clear whether the new album is being bought by country music fans who are ignoring the industry's party line because they like the music or by non-fans who are using their credit cards in support of free speech. It is clear, though, that both Bush and his war have become unpopular, even in communities where, as the joke goes, they like both kinds of music: country and western. 
Are the Chicks just milking their notoriety to sell CDs and downloads? I doubt it, since they already had two No. 1 albums to their credit when all this started. I think that what you see is what you get -- three women who are musicians, not activists, but who decided they aren't going to be pushed around by a bunch of bullies. 
The controversy "turned my whole world around," Maines sings on the new single, "and I kind of like it." 

The decline of good auto-industry jobs is a particularly dramatic example of a larger problem. In the June 10 issue of National Journal, staff correspondent Bruce Stokes argues that "the global economy's job machine may be breaking down, again." 
Citing data from the Economic Policy Institute, Stokes notes that employment growth in the current recovery is much slower than in earlier upturns -- "the slowest in any recovery since the Kennedy administration," he writes. 
Stokes is not making a partisan point about the Bush administration alone, since he notes a long-term trend toward slower job growth. But the job numbers help explain why the polls are recording so much economic discontent in the middle of an expansion. 
For the past 15 years, progressive free-market politicians have offered an appealing mantra about how to save the middle class: What's needed, they've said, is heavy investment in education and job training to allow people to make the transition from the "old" economy -- those auto jobs -- to the new. "What you earn depends upon what you can learn," President Bill Clinton said over and over. 
There's certainly some truth to that still, but in the global economy, competition is fierce even for high-end jobs requiring great skill and education. To think otherwise is to deny the obvious: that the people of India and China, to pick just the two obvious examples, are gifted, energetic, ambitious -- and numerous. 
That's why Alan Blinder, a Princeton economist and former vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, was right to warn us about how many jobs are in danger of being moved abroad. In an article in Foreign Affairs this year, he wrote that "we have so far barely seen the tip of the offshoring iceberg, the eventual dimensions of which may be staggering." 
Blinder is no protectionist, but he insisted that "the governments and societies of the developed world must face up to the massive, complex, and multifaceted challenges that offshoring will bring." The UAW's Gettelfinger would be the first to say: Amen. 
Gettelfinger, Stokes and Blinder all point to the greatest challenge facing the American center-left. It's large enough that it should swamp all the silly arguments about whether Democrats need some sort of program for the 2006 elections. That is a tactical question -- of great importance to political strategists, but far less critical than whether progressives can, over the long run, keep their core promise to expand opportunities for the middle class and the poor. 
Historically, voters turn away from conservative free-market politicians after they conclude that capitalism needs help in living up to its commitment to create widely shared abundance.

</text>
