<text id="B07" category="" words="1994" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="America's Army on the Edge.' The New York Times, 1 October 2006, 9; 'Whose Court Is It Anyway?' The New York Times, 2 October 2006, p. 18; 'The age of impunity.' The New York Times, 12 October 2006, p. 28; 'The Promise of Eliot Spitzer.' The New York Time" Author="N/A" PublicationDate="1 October 2006; 2 October 2006; 12 October 2006; 22 October 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; End" WebAddress="Factiva">

Even if there were a case for staying the current course in Iraq, America's badly overstretched Army cannot sustain present force levels much longer without long-term damage. And that could undermine the credibility of American foreign policy for years to come. 
The Army has been kept on short rations of troops and equipment for years by a Pentagon more intent on stockpiling futuristic weapons than fighting today's wars. Now it is pushing up against the limits of hard arithmetic. Senior generals are warning that the Bush administration may have to break its word and again use National Guard units to plug the gap, but no one in Washington is paying serious attention. That was clear last week when Congress recklessly decided to funnel extra money to the Air Force's irrelevant F-22 stealth fighter. 
As early as the fall of 2003, the Congressional Budget Office warned that maintaining substantial force levels in Iraq for more than another six months would be difficult without resorting to damaging short-term expedients. The Pentagon then had about 150,000 troops in Iraq. Three years later, those numbers have not fallen appreciably. For much of that time, the Pentagon has plugged the gap by extending tours of duty, recycling soldiers back more quickly into combat, diverting National Guard units from homeland security and misusing the Marine Corps as a long-term occupation force. 
These emergency measures have taken a heavy toll on combat readiness and training, on the quality of new recruits, and on the career decisions of some of the Army's most promising young officers. They cannot be continued indefinitely. 
Now, with the security situation worsening in both Iraq and Afghanistan, the Pentagon concedes that no large withdrawals from either country are likely for the foreseeable future. As a result, even more drastic and expensive steps could soon be needed. The most straightforward would be to greatly increase the overall number of Army combat brigades. That would require recruiting, training and equipping the tens of thousands of additional soldiers needed to fill them. 
Yet the Pentagon and Congress remain in an advanced state of denial. While the overall Defense Department budget keeps rising, pushed along by unneeded gadgetry, next year's spending plan fails to adequately address the Army's pressing personnel needs. Things have gotten so badly out of line that in August the Army chief of staff held up a required 2008 budget document, protesting that the Army simply could not keep doing its job without a sizable increase in spending. 
A bigger army does not fit into Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld's version of a technologically transformed military. And Congress prefers lavishing billions on Lockheed Martin to build stealth fighters, which are great for fighting Russian MIG's and Chinese F-8's but not for securing Baghdad. Army grunts are not as glamorous as fighter pilots and are a lot less profitable to equip. Yet we live in an age in which fighting on the ground to rescue failed states and isolate terrorists has become the Pentagon's most urgent and vital military mission. 
America's credibility in that fight depends on the quality, quantity and readiness of our ground forces. If we go on demanding more and more from them while denying the resources they so desperately need, we could end up paying a terrible price. 

The Roberts court officially began last year, but the term that starts this week should give the first clear picture of what kind of court it will be. The docket includes major cases involving abortion, affirmative action and the environment. 
The justices in the Supreme Court's now solidly conservative majority will be given a chance to prove what sort of conservatives they intend to be: those who issue rulings to match their personal ideology, or those who want to keep the court on a steady path by respecting precedent. 
The cases that have so far attracted the most attention are a pair of challenges to a federal law that criminalizes so-called partial birth abortions. The law, passed by Congress in 2003, does not have an exception for procedures necessary to protect the health of a pregnant woman. The court struck down a nearly identical ban in 2000 by the State of Nebraska. That ruling was 5 to 4, and Justice Sandra Day O'Connor -- the court's perennial swing vote before she retired -- sided with the majority. 
The ''partial birth'' cases should reveal a lot about the views of Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Samuel Alito. If they are as hostile to abortion rights as many court watchers believe, there may now be five votes in favor of the ban, which could outlaw many second-trimester abortions and endanger the lives of women. 
But if they are true to the statements they made at their confirmation hearings about respecting precedent, they should not want to reverse a decision the court made on this subject as recently as 2000. 
The court has also agreed to hear a pair of challenges to admissions policies at K-12 public schools in Seattle and Louisville, Ky., that take race into account to promote diversity. These cases revisit many issues the court considered in 2003, when it upheld the University of Michigan's use of race in law school admissions. That was another 5-to-4 decision with Justice O'Connor casting the deciding vote. That ruling was right to say that schools should be able to take race into account, and the court should not change its stance now -- opening the door to even more challenges to affirmative action. 
Among the other important cases the court will hear is one about global warming. A group of states and environmental organizations have sued the Environmental Protection Agency for failing to do its duty under the Clean Air Act to regulate new cars' emission of carbon dioxide and other pollutants. The court can and should prod the Bush administration to do more to protect the earth from the buildup of greenhouse gases, by requiring it to enforce the law that Congress passed. 
If Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Alito turn out to be conservatives with a deep respect for precedent, the court is likely to remain fairly centrist. But the biggest factor is likely to be Justice Anthony Kennedy, who began last term to fill Justice O'Connor's role as a voice of moderation. We hope he continues to do so. 

Sudan's leaders sent out a letter last week warning governments against volunteering their troops for a United Nations peacekeeping force for Darfur. Khartoum was obviously feeling cocky. But why shouldn't it? The Security Council -- or more to the point, the big powers that run the Security Council -- made clear that it won't send in troops to stop the genocide unless Sudan first agrees. 
Then there's Iran, which is still defiantly enriching uranium. And the North Koreans, who blew off the rest of the world when they blew off what they said was a nuclear weapon this week. 
Welcome to the new age of impunity. 
It wasn't supposed to be this way. The Iraq war and President Bush's with-us-or-against-us war on terrorism was supposed to frighten the bad guys so much that they wouldn't dare cross the United States. But the opposite has happened. President Bush has squandered so much of America's moral authority -- not to mention our military resources -- that efforts to shame or bully the right behavior from adversaries (and allies) sound hollow. 
There is plenty of blame to go around when it comes to empowering rogue states. The Chinese have been shielding Sudan and North Korea. The Russians have been shielding Iran. Were it not for Iraq and Mr. Bush's other troubles, there would be ways to shame or bypass those roadblocks. When the Russians blocked U.N. action in Kosovo, President Clinton got NATO to stop the killing. 
Mr. Bush appears to care deeply about Darfur. But the United States is so overstretched in Iraq that no one in this White House is even talking about sending NATO to stop ethnic cleansing that has already left more than 200,000 dead and displaced more than two million. 
Closing our eyes for another two years isn't an answer. Washington needs to assert its leadership, no matter how tattered, on all these fronts. 
We suspect that cargo inspections and a cutoff of military and luxury trade will not be enough to get North Korea to back down. But having started there, Mr. Bush now needs to tell China and Russia that all future relations will be judged on how they hold the North to account. 
Beijing and Moscow would find it harder to say no if Mr. Bush made a clear pledge -- no caveats and no fingers crossed behind his back -- that he would not try to overthrow North Korea's government if it abandoned its nuclear weapons. Mr. Bush needs to make the same unambiguous offer to Iran. As for Darfur, Khartoum might feel less cocky if Mr. Bush announced that he was taking the lead on soliciting troops for a peacekeeping force while asking NATO to start drawing up plans for a possible forced entry should the United Nations fail to act. 
In his news conference yesterday, Mr. Bush said that the abuses at Abu Ghraib ''hurt us internationally. It kind of eased us off the moral high ground.'' He quickly added that the world had seen the perpetrators held to account. 
We fear it will take a lot more than the trials of a few low-level prison guards to repair the damage, whether from Abu Ghraib, Guantanamo, the secret prisons or the whole mismanaged Iraq war. There can be no impunity at home either. 

The new governor must propose his first state budget almost immediately after taking office. Already Mr. Spitzer has sent some of the right signals in his pre-election statements that he will not be pressured by the usual special interests in Albany: the lobbyists for corporations or labor who have been scandalously invited into secret budget negotiations in recent years. 
If voters elect Mr. Spitzer with the kind of mandate the polls are predicting, he will have the political influence to press for priorities he has been stressing throughout the campaign -- improving access to health care, reforming Medicaid and expanding education financing. He must offer hope for more job creation upstate and spur development at ground zero and other sites in the city. He should make sure that the court system is finally revamped and consolidated, if necessary through a constitutional amendment. 
But of all the promises on Mr. Spitzer's long and impressive list, the reforms of the political system and the state bureaucracy are among the most critical. He has said he wants to ban contributions to state candidates and gifts to state employees from those who do business with the state. And in a speech earlier this year, he sent a chill through the legislative crowd by promising to end what he called ''lifetime appointments to the State Legislature'' that are created through gerrymandered Assembly and Senate districts. Drastically revamping the system for financing state campaigns and creating an independent redistricting commission are two changes that should stay at the top of Mr. Spitzer's priority list. If he can really force Albany's entrenched legislators to make these changes -- even by the end of Year 4 -- that could stand as a major monument to his administration. 
Despite our respect for Mr. Faso's worthy race, this is an easy choice. We not only endorse Mr. Spitzer, we also hope his victory is big enough to use as a cudgel in the State Capitol. As attorney general, he has been fearless and dogged in his pursuit of justice. We are eager to see what happens when he applies those attributes to Albany's immobile Legislature, which has a long, sad history in wearing would-be reformers down, waiting them out. Imposing change will take the kind of herculean effort New Yorkers have come to expect from Eliot Spitzer.

</text>
