<text id="B09" category="" words="2004" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Congress, police thyself.' The Christian Science Monitor, 3 October 2006, p. 08; 'Gauging education bang for tuition buck.' The Christian Science Monitor, 28 September 2006, p. 08; 'Iraqi fighters: beat 'em or forgive 'em? ; An offer of amnesty has as muc" Author="N/A" PublicationDate="3 October 2006; 28 September 2006; 27 July 2006; 30 June 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; End" WebAddress="Factiva">

When Mark Foley resigned his US House seat Friday, it was because ABC News questioned the Florida Republican about his sexually explicit communications with former House pages. That it was the media and not House investigators at work points again to the failure of Congress to police itself. 
"Again," because Congress has failed multiple times this year to clean up its act. In January, mega-lobbyist Jack Abramoff pleaded guilty to corruption charges relating to influence peddling on the Hill. Both the Senate and House got all exercised about this and promised serious lobbying reform. They drew up two bills. After the outrage died, so did the bills. 
The self-serving, pay-to-play relations between lobbyists and lawmakers is a breach of trust between voters and their representatives. And in this age of terrorism, so is the fact that two years after the 9/11 commission warned Congress to reform its scattered committee structure and streamline oversight of terror- related issues, there's been little follow-through. A lawmaker's patch of committee turf, it seems, is still more important than the rest of America. 
Now it looks as if Congress has fallen into the self-interest trap again. When it came to light months ago that Mr. Foley in 2005 sent an "overfriendly" e-mail to a 16-year-old boy who was a former House page, or messenger, Republicans handled the boy's complaint internally and quietly. The House clerk and the GOP congressman in charge of the House Page Board instructed Foley to cease the communication. Neither the bipartisan Page Board nor the Ethics Committee was informed. Unbelievably Foley stayed on as co-chair of the Congressional Missing and Exploited Children's Caucus. 
House leaders say they didn't know about earlier sexually explicit Internet and cellphone communications to former pages until last week. Now, after a request from GOP House Speaker Dennis Hastert of Illinois on Sunday, the FBI is investigating. 
But why didn't alarm bells go off, even from an "overfriendly" e- mail? Internet sexual solicitation is a huge concern of parents. Those who send their high schoolers to the selective page program don't expect them to become sexual targets for lawmakers. A little digging would have turned up the earlier e-mails, which circulated among former pages. 
Over the years, sexual scandal has tarred elected officials in both parties, and so has financial impropriety. Yet this year's been a doozy for Republicans, with three ethics- related House resignations so far. Last month, the House could only muster a very weak rule change aimed at pork-barrel spending. The Senate has yet to adopt a bill allowing for easily viewed and promptly disclosed campaign donations. Last month, however, the president did sign a law to make public a database of federal grants, contracts, and loans. 
A few months ago, Speaker Hastert complained that an FBI raid on a Democrat's office (after cash was found in his home freezer) violated congressional independence. Now he's encouraging the FBI to look at lawmakers who may have known about the Foley communications. Has he just woken up to what's clear to the nation - that Congress seems incapable of reforming itself?

The world's most-admired system of higher education can't get enough respect to be left alone. The latest assault on American colleges and universities comes from the US education secretary and a panel she appointed. Their demand: Show us results. 
In essence, what Secretary Margaret Spellings and her 19-member Commission on the Future of Higher Education have recently proposed (among other recommendations) is that colleges receiving various types of federal money be held accountable for the quality of learning they provide. 
They're asking for a sort of "no college student left behind" law, similar to the 2001 one that imposed standardized testing for lower grades in public schools. Only in this case, the idea is to provide incentives for colleges to test students and find out how they are performing against academic goals, and then post this information on a federal website to help pre-college students better judge which institution to attend. 
Ms. Spellings likens the idea to buying a car: You go online and compare the data about the performance and price of different vehicles. She wants a database with similar transparency and ease for those shopping for colleges. 
Right now, the yearly ranking of colleges by U.S. News and World Report magazine provides some help. But that survey mainly looks at inputs, such as money spent on education, and also relies on reputation. Regional bodies that accredit schools of higher learning act in similar ways. 
In recent years, two surveys - the National Survey of Student Engagement and the Collegiate Learning Assessment - have tried to measure "outcomes," or what students actually get out of their costly education, such as experience in a community-based project related to a course. 
It is that new focus on results - or measuring the education bang for the tuition buck - that now has been picked up by federal government. 
Hold on, say the powerful lobbies for colleges in Washington. While they would very much like more federal money for higher education, such as research funds, they say higher education is too diverse to impose national standards. How do you measure such abilities as civic activism, ethical reasoning, creativity, or joy for lifelong learning? 
Public sentiment, however, has drifted toward seeing a college education largely as a career launcher. And resentment is mounting against tuitions that rise faster than inflation and family income, creating public pressure to demand more of colleges. 
One way out of this impasse is for government to be flexible in defining the standards for performance. Many schools already gauge the results of their education. These internal assessments, as well as the national surveys measuring "student outcomes," can be made public, and then collated in a federal website. Government could hold schools accountable for their education based on their individual missions. 
There are dangers to imposing "one size fits all" criteria on colleges. At the same time, colleges might find common criteria among themselves in how to measure success. Spellings and college leaders can surely work together to find a consumer-friendly, performance database.

It's quite understandable for Iraq watchers to focus on security, especially when killings reach 100 a day. But with the war now mainly a fight for Baghdad between Arab Sunnis and Shiites, another focus should be on a new plan to reconcile the two sides with an amnesty. 
An offer of forgiveness was made last month by Iraq's new prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki. On Saturday, an Iraqi national commission on reconciliation, made up of leaders of various political and religious stripes, met for the first time - although some Sunni leaders did not attend. They say the amnesty didn't go far enough to include insurgents who have killed Iraqis or foreign troops. 
Final details of the plan will be as critical for peace as the number of US and Iraqi troops in the capital. Amnesty is one more step in an attempt to unify Iraq through political compromise - which will be far more effective than the use of force. Bullets don't win hearts. But openheartedness can. 
A big step toward reconciliation was achieved only this year with a balanced, elected government under a popular constitution. Compromise is still needed on remaining Sunni demands, such as fair distribution of Iraq's oil wealth. A final step in ending the insurgency and disbanding local militias will be amnesty. Next month, the Arab League will help sponsor a conference to reconcile the religious and ethnic groups in Iraq. 
Other nations that have gone through civil conflict can provide different blueprints for Iraq in balancing a demand for justice with a need for reconciliation. Post-conflict amnesty, such as that granted to losing soldiers after the American Civil War or World War II, is much easier than forgiveness during a conflict. 
Iraq will need to tread carefully in choosing which insurgents should be punished or forgiven. Right now the offer is extended only to "those who have not taken part in criminal and terrorist acts and war crimes and crimes against humanity." That may exclude many insurgents but not the thousands of supporters working behind the scenes. The government claims seven Sunni military groups have asked for more details. That's a breakthrough not only for the Sunnis but for the dominant Shiite powerbrokers who have refused to talk to the militants. 
At the least, such openings provide more information to the government on the types and numbers of insurgents. Shiite militias, too, will need to step forward and ask for amnesty, a step that Shiite Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, as Iraq's most powerful figure, should encourage. 
It seems impossible right now that many militants will give up their arms anytime soon. Just look at the slow pace of disarmament in Northern Ireland. But as Prime Minister Maliki said, an amnesty is "the only bridge and crossing point through which we can reach the safe shore that unites the sons of the Iraqi people, ends the violent situation, provides stability and puts an end to all discriminatory ideas, whether of sect, political party, or race." 
Strange as it may sound in the midst of ongoing vendettas that are bordering on civil war, Mr. Maliki has asked Iraqis to unite their splintered nation with "brotherhood and love." For Arab Sunnis and Shiites to see their own futures tied together is a leap of faith. Having an amnesty "bridge" may help them do it.

One classic claim has been that teachers favor boys because they tend to raise their hands more. By the 1990s, as schools began to cater more to girls, that debate swung back in favor of arguments that boys were the victims in schools, partly because of attempts to feminize them out of certain "boy habits." Both sides cited data to support their claims, with each calling for either "girl-friendly" or "boy-friendly" classrooms. 
The latest salvo in this gender war came last week with a study by the progressive think-tank Educator Sector. Researcher Sara Mead looked at national education data and concluded that boys are not doing worse than girls, but girls are simply doing better. "With few exceptions, American boys are scoring higher and achieving more than they ever have before," she writes. Her analysis, going back to 1971, is based on test scores and other academic data in the federally funded National Assessment of Educational Progress. 
What's more, she contends that the boy-vs.-girl debate distracts attention from practical ways to help both boys and girls, especially the many black and Hispanic children who are really the groups falling behind. 
Single-sex public schools had all but disappeared by the 1980s, but they have slowly returned, with about 44 in the US this past school year. With many schools expected to adopt the idea, a constitutional challenge is likely over whether girls and boys can be offered similar opportunities for education when separated, and perhaps taught differently. 
The larger issue, though, is whether such schools can provide better educational benefits. The research on that must be carefully tracked. 
Many public schools simply try a variety of new ways to tailor teaching to each gender. More fathers, for instance, are being asked to read to sons at home. Such techniques begin to acknowledge that each student needs her or his own learning focus, based on the idea that both sexes can express masculine and feminine qualities in unique ways. 
Grown-up expectations of children - such as young boys are hyperactive, or teen girls are mean-tongued - may tend to stigmatize children, limiting their potential. Such narrowing expectations are becoming stronger because of recent scientific research on the child brain that claims certain behaviors are "hard-wired." Such research should be used cautiously. 
Single-sex schools, too, should be approached cautiously. Most of the time, children are just children, and that greater, shared experience of wonder and joy should be encouraged. Such schools may not be right for every child. And the ultimate goal of reducing all types of learning disparities should not be lost.

</text>
