<text id="B15" category="" words="2038" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'TRANSPORTATION For traffic relief, look past roads' The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, November 1, 2006, Pg. 19A; 'Thinking Right Book a loving look at South that's gone' The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, November 6, 2006, Pg. 0; 'Political endorsements m" Author="WAYNE SHACKELFORD; JIM WOOTEN;ANGELA TUCK;  " PublicationDate="November 1, 2006; November 6, 2006; November 4, 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning; " WebAddress="Nexis UK">

According to the Atlanta Regional Commission and the Transportation Research Board, the 20-county metro Atlanta population will reach 7 million by 2030, with Gwinnett County adding 400,000 people, Fulton County adding 330,000 and Henry County adding 250,000. Fulton County will add the most jobs (16,000), for a 2030 total of almost 1.14 million.

Translation: Because road construction cannot keep pace with this level of growth, the traffic congestion the region is experiencing will almost certainly worsen.

Georgia needs to implement every form of alternative transportation available, and we need to do it right now. Commuter rail, including the Atlanta-Lovejoy line and the Atlanta-Athens line (also dubbed the "Brain Train"), the Peachtree Streetcar, the Beltline, bus rapid transit and others must all be implemented in a cohesive way.

Otherwise, 20 years from now, we are not going to like the places we live, work and play. Congestion has grown particularly worse outside of I-285 and along Ga. 316. Morning and afternoon peaks are becoming longer in duration and greater in volume.

Plans for alternative transportation, including commuter rail, have been on the Georgia Department of Transportation's long-range plan for nearly two decades. If the metro Atlanta population does nearly double by 2030, as the ARC has forecasted, our quality of life and our economic vitality will suffer.

Current average daily commute times for metro Atlantans now clock in at more than 31 minutes each way. With Henry County, Gwinnett County and Fulton County leading the way in population and job growth, we might reasonably expect average commute times to double sooner than our population does.

How then does Georgia expect to compete for industry and jobs against cities such as Miami, Charlotte, Nashville, Dallas, Denver, and Orlando, whose transportation alternatives are more than a decade ahead of Georgia's? Commuter rail just started operating in Nashville.

The Miami region's commuter rail initiative (operated on CSX right of way) is successful. Denver, Dallas and Portland have light rail in operation, while Charlotte is in the advanced stages of comprehensive regional alternative transportation planning.

Unless we tap every drop of every transit alternative to its fullest, the extraordinary economic growth the state has enjoyed will grind to a halt. Commuter rail, given existing rights of way, economies of scale and increasing willingness of railroad operators to work with commuter rail in the interest of good public policy, is an opportunity we cannot ignore to remove thousands of automobiles from our gridlocked roads.

What can we do?

First, the city of Atlanta and the state of Georgia can get together to settle ownership of the Atlanta multimodal terminal so that demolition can begin and we can build the hub of the wheel that holds all of the spokes together. GDOT has earmarked $2 million for the demolition of the building on the site. With multiple needs for this facility, including a new permanent home for the Greyhound bus station, the Peachtree Streetcar terminus, Lovejoy line terminus and Brain Train terminus, responsible parties need to move forward.

Second, the Georgia DOT board and state Legislature can move forward on the Atlanta- Lovejoy commuter rail service.

Third, the Georgia DOT and state Legislature can begin supporting development of the second spoke to Athens (the Brain Train). 

Fourth, the heads of Atlanta's regional transit and development organizations must develop a cohesive, educated, actionable plan and leadership structure to effectively and equitably address our transportation needs on a regional and statewide basis. I am encouraged with efforts under way in this regard.

Fifth, the same regional development organizations, chambers of commerce, transit agencies and members of the state Legislature can learn about the benefits of every viable transportation alternative, including commuter rail, and actively support those providing sensible, cost-effective solutions.

Sixth, get educated. When a round trip in your private automobile actually costs you more than 50 cents per mile (a very conservative number), does it really matter whether the cost of a rail ticket between Atlanta and Athens is $5, $6 or $7? That same trip costs you around $35 one-way in your car.

We need the best efforts of state transportation and legislative leaders to protect the quality of life and economic strength of our region. Our state as a whole depends upon a healthy Atlanta region.

We need much more than there is room to list here, but we have waited almost 20 years to deal with traffic congestion in the region. Do we really have to wait until the population doubles again and we spend twice as much time in our cars as we do now before we act?

Wayne Shackelford is senior vice president of Gresham, Smith &amp; Partners architecture and engineering firm, chairman of the Gwinnett Chamber of Commerce and a former commissioner of the Georgia Department of Transportation.;

In a world that bulldozes its history and has an attention span that likely could be measured in milliseconds, a most remarkable reminder that the pleasures of time and place are to be savored has just come to life in an ambitious book called "The Paper Boy."

Its author is Smyrna native and City Councilman Pete Wood, who with Lillie, his wife of 46 years, has undertaken a project so ambitious and unique that it's a wonder anybody ever had the time or discipline to take it on. 

The book's appeal is, in the larger sense, limited to families whose roots are in a city where, as a young boy, he delivered The Atlanta Constitution, starting during World War II.

What Wood's done in "The Paper Boy" is mentally walk the streets he traveled as a boy and talk about the lives of the people who occupied the houses he passed. As he talks, reflecting first on a boy's memories and then on the lives and the directions he came to know over the next six decades, we are introduced to the mosaic of lives and relationships that gives meaning to time and place.

The result is a book that is of historical and genealogical interest first. But in the detail, and in the interconnection of lives, Wood presents a different and fuller picture of a Georgia that was one that I suspect Atlantans and even Southerners of this generation will never know.

It is so rare in metro Atlanta, or increasingly anywhere in the South, that people stay put in one place long enough to know their neighbors well, much less to know the lives of their parents and children, that it simply boggles the mind to imagine that somebody could do this for a whole town.

Wood focuses primarily on families who lived in Smyrna between 1938, his earliest memory of people and place, and 1951, when he graduated from high school. The 1940 census put its population at 1,440, about the current size of the farming communities of Rochelle, Broxton or Tennile, and half the size of the city of Adairsville. Smyrna's 2005 population was 45,755.

Researchers at the Atlanta Regional Commission have gathered data from census reports that provide a glimpse of our mobility. Among a 2000 population of 38,266 in Smyrna, 24,850 had lived in a different house five years earlier --- 13,960 in a different county in Georgia and 8,565 in a different state. It's the same throughout metro Atlanta.

As the region changes, the center moves and so does our orientation, so that we come to think of place as teams and brands. Mobility engenders rootlessness, family lives as snapshots with no beginning or end.

That is a real change for the South, a region where families were attached to land and neighbors were each other's family historians because their lives and families were woven together over generations. It was nothing, therefore, to talk of the living and the dead as part of the same story, and to fix the events in their lives to houses, seasons, work or to the landscape, creeks, rivers or other distinguishing landmarks.

That world is mostly gone everywhere. Atlanta, and the small communities around it, were once such a place. Now, however, most of the reference-point places, like the one-room schoolhouses in rural Georgia that have gone back to nature, are given over to change, to skyscrapers and condos and Wal-Marts. The paperboys, too, see homes but not people --- and when they see people, they make no connections to families or place.

Every community and every passing generation should have the opportunity to see itself, as Wood saw and writes about, one tiny sliver of metro Atlanta. He saw it as a paperboy learning people and the skills necessary to succeed in life.

Over the decades, as a banker, as a founding trustee of the hospital authority that built Cobb General and as a founding trustee of what is now WellStar Health Systems, and as a city councilman and member of First Baptist Church of Smyrna for more than 70 years, he saw the same families through joys and hardships, through wars and good times. From those vantage points, paperboy to community leader, he saw the richness and the detail of a people and place that one day will exist as high-rises and mini-mansions, with the new designed to look old.

The old place has gone, but Wood has kept their stories.

The first house on the north side of Bank Street? Oh, that was occupied by Mr. and Mrs. Talmadge Pharr Westbrook. Let me tell you where they came from, what happened in their lives and what happened to their children. The paperboy knows.; 

The lukewarm endorsement of Lt. Gov. Mark Taylor by The Atlanta Journal-Constitution's

editorial board prompted some readers to ask why the board bothered to endorse anyone in the race for Georgia's governor.

Some readers took it even further, questioning whether people even need or want the board's opinion.

While far from perfect, editorial endorsements offer readers another source of information leading up to decision day. That's probably less necessary in high-profile races such as the contest between Taylor and Gov. Sonny Perdue, where voters have ample information. But it's more difficult for voters to figure out the intricacies of proposed constitutional amendments or to decide on races that get little public attention and draw candidates with no track record.

The more obscure the race, in other words, the more important it is for editorial boards to interview candidates, examine their records and offer a convincing argument on behalf of a particular candidate. 

Only a few of the more than 100 candidates invited to meet with the editorial board this fall declined the invitation --- a signal that the candidates themselves see endorsements as having value. For the general election, the board offered endorsements in all statewide races, as well as contests for the U.S. House of Representatives and state House and Senate and county commission seats in the metro area. It also endorsed in school board races that the editorial board considered particularly important.

Endorsement interviews are "an opportunity to get a sense of how [candidates] approach issues, how they make decisions and, to some extent, to plumb the depths of their knowledge about an issue and try to gauge whether they will be successful," explained associate editorial page editor Jim Wooten.

If people saw the process, they'd have confidence in its value, he said.

"The important thing about the way we approach endorsements that's contrary to that of special-interest groups, especially on the local level, is that we don't have a litmus test. We're not trying to get candidates committed to a course of action that is consistent with our editorial positions. We're just trying to elevate the quality of the public bodies that are making decisions about our lives."

In Wooten's opinion, AJC endorsements were more useful when there were competing editorial voices, offered by The Atlanta Journal and The Atlanta Constitution before the boards merged in 2001.

"If you knew the Journal was conservative, as it was, and that we were recommending this candidate, we were saying that based on our values, our philosophy and our examination of the record, this is the candidate most likely to take the state and nation in the direction our philosophy believes is best," said Wooten, who was the Journal's editorial page editor. ;

</text>
