<text id="B20" category="" words="2000" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Wal-Mart's A Diversion; On any list of the nations major concerns, the giant retailer would not rank in the first 50. So why are Dems spending so much time talking about it?' Newsweek, 4 September 2006, p. 39; 'Cavemen, Chimps And Us; What can we learn fr" Author="Robert J. Samuelson; Jerry Adler; Anna Quindlen" PublicationDate="4 September 2006; 31 July 2006; 1 May 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

It's not surprising that, as The New York Times reports, leading Democratic politicians have latched onto bashing Wal-Mart as a "new rallying cry" that "could prove powerful in the midterm elections and in 2008." America's political culture routinely demands at least one hideous corporate villain. In recent decades that role has fallen to General Motors, IBM, ExxonMobil and Microsoft; now Wal-Mart has assumed the mantle. But these wishy-washy politicians have missed the obvious solution to the Wal-Mart problem: nationalization.
Congress should just buy the company and then legislate good behavior. Wal-Mart executives "talk about paying them [workers] $10 an hour," Sen. Joseph Biden told a rally in Iowa, according to the Times. "How can you live a middle-class life on that?"
Well, if $10 is too little, the government could order the Department of Wal-Mart to pay more. How about $15 or $20? Similarly, if Wal-Mart's health insurance is inadequate, Congress could command more coverage. (I asked Wal-Mart for coverage figures, which it declined to provide. All a spokesperson said is that more than half its 1.3 million U.S. employees are full time, enjoying higher coverage rates, and that 75 percent of all workers have some coverage through the company, the government or spouses' plans.)
OK, I jest. Congress isn't going to buy Wal-Mart--which would cost roughly $183 billion at its current stock price of about $44 a share--and I don't think it should. Still, pretending to nationalize Wal-Mart is a useful thought exercise. It shows why Wal-Mart as a government agency would actually provide fewer public benefits than as a grubby, profit-seeking colossus. The company's incentives would shift. Instead of trying to lower costs, improve efficiency and raise profits, it would focus on pleasing its political patrons and complying with their demands.
These would doubtlessly burgeon beyond wages and benefits. Politicians would find unending opportunities for grandstanding and meddling. Does Wal-Mart import too much from China? Order it to cut back. Does it treat suppliers brutally? Require it to be nicer. Are its stores ugly? Appoint architectural advisers.
Wal-Mart would deliver more political benefits to favored constituencies--workers, suppliers, competitors--and fewer to the public. Retail prices would be the biggest casualty. Scholarly studies show Wal-Mart's price reductions to be sizable. Economist Emek Basker of the University of Missouri found long-term reductions of 7 percent to 13 percent on items such as toothpaste, shampoo and detergent. Other companies are forced to reduce their prices. On food, Wal-Mart produces consumer savings that average 20 percent, estimate Jerry Hausman of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Ephraim Leibtag of the Department of Agriculture.
All told, these cuts have significantly raised living standards. How much is unclear. A study by the economic-consulting firm Global Insight found that from 1985 to 2004, Wal-Mart's expansion lowered the consumer price index by a cumulative 3.1 percent from what it would have been. That produced savings of $263 billion in 2004, equal to $2,329 for each U.S. household. Because Wal-Mart financed this study, its results have been criticized as too high. But even if price savings are only half as much ($132 billion and $1,165 per household), they'd dwarf the benefits of most government programs.
A collateral benefit is less understood. By restraining inflation, intense competition of the sort that Wal-Mart provides eases pressure on the Federal Reserve to do the job with tight credit and higher interest rates. Note the paradox: at one level, intense competition destroys jobs, as some companies can't compete, but the larger effect is to increase total job creation by fostering favorable economic conditions.
No company should be above public scrutiny. But much of the political criticism of Wal-Mart is shallow and, if followed, undesirable. Wal-Mart doesn't pay high wages and benefits mainly because it's in an industry (retailing) where those are rare. In 2005, average hourly wages were $10.85 for food stores, $10.63 for clothing stores and $10.84 for department stores. As General Motors and Ford are now discovering, companies that pay above-market labor costs ultimately shrink and destroy jobs. The efforts of some local governments--notably the Maryland Legislature and Chicago city council--to mandate higher labor costs on Wal-Mart are shortsighted.
There may even be political pitfalls to this crusade. By Wal-Mart's estimate, 85 percent of Americans shop during the year at the chain; in opinion polls it generally receives high ratings. People are voting with their pocketbooks. On any list of major national concerns, the "Wal-Mart problem" would not rank in the first 50. Why, then, are some leading Democratic politicians spending so much time talking about it? People who ask that question may conclude that Wal-Mart, though a tempting target as a political symbol, is mostly a diversion from weightier issues where what politicians think and do really matters.

It is the holy grail of human paleontology, a window on a crucial moment in our evolution. Last week scientists at the Max Planck Institute in Germany announced they would attempt to sequence the Neanderthal genome--the complete DNA of the closest known relative to modern humans, a species that disappeared from the Earth about 30,000 years ago. It is the next best thing to having a living Neanderthal for comparison--and, in theory, if you know all the genes, you could create living Neanderthals. Not that anyone has any plans to do that.
What would they be like? From their skeletons, we know they would be robust and barrel-chested, with a heavy jaw and brow; from their caves it appears they could use primitive tools and buried their dead. But they seem to have lacked modern humans' capacity for abstract thought; although they spread overland through the Middle East and Europe, they apparently never crossed a body of water they couldn't see across. Anthropologists are divided on whether they had language, and although they presumably were able to breed with Homo sapiens, there's no clear evidence they ever did. Even bringing them back to life wouldn't necessarily clear up the mystery of how and why, having lived in Europe for some 200,000 years, they failed to survive contact with modern humans, who began spreading into Europe 50,000 years ago. The most widely held theory is that our ancestors killed them off.
In fact, we will probably learn as much about Homo sapiens from the effort as we will about Neanderthals, says Svante Paabo, the Swedish-born anthropologist who heads the project. Until now, the closest species with which humans could compare their DNA was the chimpanzee, whose genome is estimated to be 99 percent identical with ours. But that 1 percent still encompasses about 35 million indi-vidual chemical changes, accumulated over the 5 million to 7 million years during which the two species have been evolving apart. Humans and Neanderthals, though, shared a common ancestor in Africa only about 400,000 years ago, and Paabo estimates that their DNA will be as much as 99.96 percent identical. Somewhere in that 0.04 percent difference presumably lies the crucial molecular changes that led from stone axes to the cave paintings of Lascaux--and the cathedral at Chartres. The genes of interest include those involved in language, brain size and metabolism, says Edward M. Rubin, chief of genetics at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, which has its own ongoing study of Neanderthal DNA. Once you identify them you could put them in a mouse to see what they do--and understand exactly what it is that makes us human.
Apart from its benefits, the project is a technological tour de force, coming just three years after the first complete sequencing of the DNA of a living human being. That effort took 13 years and several billion dollars. Paabo's project should take two years, using new technology that has cut the cost to $500,000. (That's for a liv-ing human; using degraded and contaminated DNA from a 30,000-year-old fossil will be many times harder.) The machine is made by a Connecticut company called 454 Life Sciences, whose founder, biotech pioneer Jonathan Rothberg, said he'd hoped to use it to sequence DNA from a T. Rex, but getting usable genetic material from a fossil buried for 70 million years turned out to be impossible.
At least for now. Not that anyone is thinking of doing that.

"Then you will see how we really live," he says, delighted.
It is actually not so difficult to abandon the display Beijing for the authentic everyday. Around the corner from the world's largest KFC is a street of shops filled with imitation jade and factory-made ceremonial robes, offering the retail equivalent of a street mugging: "Hello! Hello? Very nice things for you! Come in! Very nice!" But only a block away the insistent English-language spiel disappears. There is only the dissonant music of Mandarin voices in a traditional hutong, one of the old alleyways, narrower than the shoulder of a turnpike, that once made up the labyrinthine heart of the central city. The men selling fresh dumplings from stalls equipped with two-burner cooktops there don't call out to tourists; they assume the real China will not entice.
Their leaders obviously agree. Around another corner is a vacant lot, strewn with old brick and some of the beautiful crenelated tiles that make up the roofs of hutong houses. Demolition is the greatest constant in the capital today. In the Planning Exhibition Hall an enormous room contains a model of the city, including Lucite structures that mark buildings under construction. There is lots and lots of Lucite.
One important reason for the frantic rebuilding can be found in numerology. The steps in the Temple of Heaven can all be counted out in nines, once the number reserved for the emperor's household. But eight, a homophone for "get rich" in Cantonese, currently holds sway. Aug. 8, 2008, is when the Olympic Games open in Beijing, and when they do, officials will ensure they take place in an ultramodern high-rise city, not the low smoky hutongs of the past, in a city that has, at least in some quarters, traded Mao suits and bicycles for designerwear and the luxury car.
If this suggests that China is happy to simply mimic America wholesale, think again. President Hu is not accustomed to the kind of treatment he got on the White House lawn, where a member of the Fulan Gong, an outlawed religious sect, managed to disrupt his official remarks. In his country, journalists are monitored and arrested, protesters shot and killed. Official concern over Internet content has resulted in firewalls that block what the ruling powers don't like, including the site for Human Rights Watch, which has kept a close eye on abuses in the country. Population control through the one-child policy was implemented by fines, harassment and forced abortions. There are persistent reports that the booming market in transplants is a function of organs harvested from executed criminals without their consent.
One advantage for the Chinese in managing international outrage about all this is that the average American pays little attention. Our own national autobiography has been entwined with that of most European countries, but China had very little intercourse with the West until the late 19th century. Many Americans came to know it only vaguely, as a nation to which Christian churches sent missionaries to supplant its ancient religions with a more modern one.
But the Chinese have a peculiar relationship with their own past, too--what a dissident once termed "forgetting history." Mao Zedong may have presided over the killings of millions who were considered counterrevolutionary, but long lines of citizens gather every day to see the last emperor under glass in his mausoleum, and a respectful hush falls as they approach the body--or a wax effigy, if you believe the rumors. Outside in Tiananmen Square, where not even two decades ago hundreds were killed during student democracy protests, soldiers in the same People's Liberation Army that once strafed the crowd stand beneath an enormous clock ticking down the seconds until the Beijing Olympics begin. The message couldn't be clearer if it were digitized on the clock face: all is forgiven.

</text>
