<text id="C01" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'MIXED BLESSING - The highs, lows, and limits of Modernism - and private collections' The Boston Globe, 29 December 2006, Page D4; A SEASON OF GRIEF, The Boston Globe, 24 December 2006, Page N1." Author="Ken Johnson; Louise Kennedy" PublicationDate="29 December 2006; 26 December 2006" SampledFrom="All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

Who is Scott M. Black and why is a dreary exhibition of works from his art collection on view at the Museum of Fine Arts? Black is a wealthy financier who runs Delphi Management, a Boston-based investment advisory company, and he is, as a wall text introducing "The Romance of Modernism: Paintings and Sculpture From the Scott M. Black Collection" announces, "a true friend of the museum."
Black has loaned works from his collection to the MFA, has funded an annual lecture series, and is an honorary MFA overseer. He is, in other words, someone with whom the MFA wants to stay on friendly terms.
So, rather than tell him that many of the paintings and sculptures in his collection would be prime candidates for deaccessioning if ever they were bequeathed to the MFA, the museum is giving him a nice, ego-boosting kiss of gratitude in the form of this depressingly uneven, mixed bag of an exhibition.
Fortunately, there are a fair number of keepers in the show, including a soberly realistic 1869 portrait of a woman in a lacy black dress by Renoir, a thinly painted view of reflective water and rural scenery by Monet that shows how intensely responsive to visual reality the great Impressionist could be at his best, and a verdant landscape painted in 1874 by Cezanne when he was spending a lot of time in the company of Camille Pissarro.
Edgar Degas's murky double portrait "Pagans and Degas's Father" has an enigmatic psychological tension, and the picture's unstable composition of tipped-forward furniture and off-center figures facing in opposite directions looks forward to the dynamic flux of Cubism.
One of the gems of the show is a small, bird's-eye view of a bridge over the Seine made in 1900 by Henri Matisse. Its intense colors, stark contrasts of light and dark, and thick, sensuous strokes of paint anticipate the artist's history-changing breakthrough into Fauvism.
Also historically momentous is a small picture of geometrically simplified trees and houses painted in greens and browns by Georges Braque. Made under the influence of Cezanne and Picasso in 1908, it belongs to that heady moment when Cubism was being born, and though it is small and drably colored, it still vibrates with the feeling of revolutionary discovery.
In a small Cubist composition of tubular forms by Fernand Leger from 1917, you can also feel the excitement of an artist alive to new possibilities.
If the exhibition consisted only of these and a few other works, it could have been a fine small show, a conservative but still eye- and mind-engaging Modernist sampler. But there are many exceedingly undistinguished things diluting the general impact.
There are vapid pastel portraits by Renoir; other, mediocre Monets; a group of small, posthumously cast bronze nudes by Rodin that resemble gift-shop reproductions; and garish Pointillist paintings by Theodore van Rysselberghe, Maximilien Luce, and Henri Edmond Cross that almost look as if they were made by paint-by- numbers kits.
There is an especially gaudy painting by Georges Seurat's most accomplished associate, Paul Signac, created in 1916, decades after Pointillism had been superseded by other Modernist movements. Made of little patches of paint, the image of sailboats on a peaceful sea with explosive pink clouds in a turquoise sky might recall a decorative mosaic for a Mediterranean restaurant, were it not for the German gunboats skulking in from the right.
Other works that bring down the overall quality of the show include paintings by Leger from the late '20s that could have been made by assistants; bland, table-top size bronzes modeled by Henry Moore in his trademark semiabstract figurative style; efforts by the Surrealists Magritte, Miro, and Yves Tanguy that look like imitations by other, less talented artists; and a watercolor from the 1960s by Marc Chagall depicting a clown and a pink, nude woman arm-in-arm called "Tenderness" that epitomizes the treacly sentimentality to which he was prone in his later years. The deterioration of Modernism into kitsch is well illustrated by this exhibition.
In an interview in the show's catalog with MFA curator George Shackelford, Black acknowledges that his acquisitions are often determined by economics. He can't afford to buy great works by top- tier artists, so he looks for lesser and cheaper works by famous artists and good works by lesser artists. Instead of a prime piece from the teens by the Italian metaphysical painter Giorgio de Chirico, he gets one of the artist's late rehashes - this one from 1954 - of his early, more celebrated works. Instead of Seurat, he gets Signac.
This approach can work if you have excellent or interestingly personal taste, and there are a few notable curiosities in the show, like a small, sketchy portrait by Pierre Bonnard of a young woman named Renee Monchaty, a disappointed lover of his who committed suicide in 1924.
A 1923 painting by Edouard Vuillard of two women in a room, one nude and the other helping her to dress, is another intriguing oddity. And a 1934 stripe-patterned portrait by Picasso of his lover Marie-Therese Walter is arresting for its boldly colored abstraction, even if it is not among his best works of the period.
One of the exhibition's weirdest items is a large, dreamlike painting by the Surrealist Paul Delvaux, in which a man tips his bowler hat to a half-nude woman in a Renaissance-style plaza. Delvaux was not a great artist, but his painting's slightly twisted eroticism is exciting to see in this otherwise blandly decorous exhibition.
For the most part Black's taste looks generic and tame - the product more of an amateurish reverence for standardized art history than of any distinctively personal imagination. He's not a connoisseur, he's a bargain hunter who sometimes gets lucky.


It is a calm October evening in New Haven, and a thunderously rainy night in Hell. The Yale Rep is staging "Eurydice," Sarah Ruhl's extraordinary reimagining of the Orpheus myth.
The production brims with lovely, memorable images: tiled walls that give Hell the feeling of an abandoned swimming pool, an elevator that rains on its occupants, glowing letters mailed between the living and the dead. And, of course, there's the familiar heartbreak of the story itself. Orpheus, distraught over the death of his bride, Eurydice, breaches the gates of Hades to reclaim her. He is permitted to lead her out with his songs, on the condition that he never look back - then loses her forever because, in fact, he couldn't resist that backward glance.
All this is powerfully created in Ruhl's simple, strong language and Les Waters's sensitive and imaginative staging. Ruhl also makes an interesting power shift; her Eurydice is not a passive rescued damsel, but a conflicted woman who makes a noise to attract Orpheus's gaze because she's not entirely sure she wants to leave.
It's a fascinating night in the theater, and I scribble excited notes for the review I plan to write the next day. There's a lot to think about, a lot to write about, and that fills me with energy and delight.
Then it's over, and I walk to my car. I get in, put the key in the ignition, and break down into heaving, racking sobs. All I can think about is the image of Eurydice's father, who in this version has preceded her to the underworld and is there to ease her early confusion at being suddenly dead.
He has painstakingly reconstructed his own memory from scraps of language, but she at first remembers nothing - including him. He takes care of her anyway, lovingly constructing a "room" by outlining a block of air with a single long piece of string. And then they sit together, and he tells her stories, and slowly he brings her back to herself.
This is why she doesn't want to leave, and it's also why I can't stop crying. I saw this play Oct. 3; my father had died Sept. 7. Ours was a complicated relationship - whose isn't? - and though I had gone through the rituals of mourning I had been troubled by finding myself unable to cry more than about five tears at a time.
But now, picturing this imaginary father spinning a web of love around his imaginary child, I feel all the sorrow and guilt and confusion and anger and loss that I have been refusing to let in. I cry for a long time. And then, feeling just as cleansed and purified and exhausted as we were promised by all those theories of catharsis in freshman English, I drive the two hours back home.
The next day, after begging my editors for an extra 24 hours to process the whole experience, I set about my usual juggling routine: baking a birthday cake for my son, getting ready to go out that night to another play. Late that afternoon, my brother-in-law calls to say that my mother, whose cancer has so far caused few symptoms, has taken a sudden turn. A few frantic decisions later, a colleague is reviewing that night's play, and I'm serving a rushed birthday cake and then driving to New Hampshire.
My mother dies that night.
Obviously, I never wrote my review of "Eurydice." (Unless this counts.) But the play, more than most I have seen this year, continues to haunt me. And what it leads me to think about now, as I look back on my tumultuous entry into the role of full-time critic, is how complicated it can be to sort out the many elements that compose our response to a play: not just the play itself and the particular production of it, but what's going on in our own lives and, more broadly, the life of the culture around us.
For example, I saw "Eurydice" not just in the mournful personal context of the death of my parents, but as one of several plays this year that seemed unusually willing to grapple with death in complex, theatrically vivid, and nuanced ways. "Rabbit Hole," at the Huntington, trod a delicate line between unbearable pain and bleak humor as it explored the aftermath of a child's death. Company One's "After Ashley" tipped more toward the darkly comic side in its tale of a publicity-mad widower and his appalled son, but it also found the grief among the gags. And "Wings of Desire" at the American Repertory Theatre presented an indelible image of time, eternity, and the line between them: a streaming column of sand.
As for "Eurydice," it was only one of three retellings of the Orpheus myth on nearby stages this year. At the ART, Robert Woodruff and Rinde Eckert collaborated on the hypnotic "Orpheus X," which also placed more power in Eurydice's hands - and made her a poet in her own right and a stranger to Orpheus, a rock star who mourns her only because his cab happened to run her down. Meanwhile, Chen Shi- Zheng's "Orfeo" mixed the myths of many cultures, first at London's English National Opera and then with the Handel &amp; Haydn Society here.
I missed that production because of my father's death. And I vividly remember "Orpheus X" because I interviewed Woodruff about it for a preview story in March - from the emergency room, where my father had just arrived after the catastrophic fall that began his last downward spiral.
So, for me, these Orpheus stories are inextricably entwined with my own losses. But what is it about this musician's doomed mission to Hades that seems to be speaking so insistently to many others, too?
Well, it's hard not to see the shadow of the Twin Towers. Particularly in "Orpheus X," the resonance of public mourning for the deaths of strangers was impossible to ignore. And the complicated struggle in these retellings between remembrance and forgetting, between turning back and moving on, also seems to connect to a uniquely American ambivalence. We build memorials to everything, even as we declare that today is the first day of the rest of our lives.

</text>
