<text id="C10" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Ill-Fated Expeditions Venture To the Arctic and to the Stage' The New York Times, 18 October 2006, Page 5; 'Feisty Bohemia of Tunes and Teddy Bears' The New York Times, 23 September 2006, Page 10; 'She's Back With a Brogue From Way Back When' The New York" Author="ANNE MIDGETTE; CHARLES ISHERWOOD; JOHN ROCKWELL" PublicationDate="18 October 2006; 23 September 2006; 13 June 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All" WebAddress="Factiva">

Forget contemporary relevance. We're in a room with three trapped explorers who have been sealed up in the Arctic ice for seven years. No, wait, scratch that. We're in a theater with three youngish, struggling actors, sealed up together to create a new play. Where are we, anyway? We're in a play within a play, and we're definitely trapped.
''The Voyage of the Carcass,'' by Dan O'Brien, which opened on Monday at the SoHo Playhouse, appears to be primarily a vehicle for Dan Fogler, who won a Tony in 2005 for his performance in ''The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee.'' He is a positively vaudevillian performer: a large but light-footed man with a rubbery face, now declaiming in a roar, now mugging in a mischievous stage whisper.

To signal the kind of character he is, the play kits him out in a clown nose and oversized, padded derriere for the Arctic part of the story, in which he plays Bane Barrington, the leader of the ill-fated expedition.
But then the play, in an embarrassing nose dive from which it never really recovers, abruptly abandons the wacky slapstick of the Arctic episode to reveal the characters as young actors tediously, sometimes squirm-inducingly, debating their work in progress. Mr. Fogler is actually Bill, a frustrated 30-something actor, whose wife and formercollege sweetheart, Helen (Kelly Hutchinson), has rented out a theater and enlisted the services of another old college pal, Dan (Noah Bean), to write this play for him.
Much of Dan's play seems to be based on Bill's real life (a family inheritance supporting a misguided venture), and it is easy to assume that some of Mr. O'Brien's play is based on Mr. Fogler's. (The three actors all went to Boston University, and Mr. Fogler's mother is an associate producer of the play.)
So ''The Voyage of the Carcass'' becomes a kind of manifesto about theater. As Bane and what's left of his crew (Helen becomes Kane, the ship's chaplain, who is really Bane's fiancee in disguise; Dan plays the silent role of Israel, the Canadian porter) struggle with boredom and the dismemberment of their frozen shipmates, Bill, Helen and Dan argue about their relationships, Bill and Helen's marriage, and whether their venture is really worth it.
One climax is a dramatic monologue for Bill that opens with a denunciation of Broadway, using a familiar expletive, and continues through a litany of what seems like every single person or entity even remotely involved in theater, from tourists to the ''gay mafia,'' applying the same word to each. It's a measure of Mr. Fogler's talent that he can make this achingly trite, rather inarticulate speech compelling.
But enjoyable as he is, he can't save the evening. Supporting him, Ms. Hutchinson is a sweet and distinctive presence as Helen; Mr. Bean, evoking the young Christopher Reeve, is slightly wooden in the awkward role of Dan. All are hampered by a play whose main weakness is giving us more information than we want about any of its characters.
There's a kind of palpable relief each time the action re-enters the increasingly unreal space of the Arctic, and gives Mr. Fogler's zany side free rein. The message seems to be that theater is a treacherous illusion, but the piece undermines itself by creating a cartoon-y illusion that is far preferable to its simulacrum of reality.
''The Voyage of the Carcass'' continues through Nov. 12 at the SoHo Playhouse, 15 Vandam Street, South Village, (212) 691-1555.

Berlin has a deserved reputation as a, or the, new world center for all things young and hip. Anyone wishing to test that proposition need look no further than Dance Theater Workshop, where on Thursday a piece called ''Back to the Present,'' by the Berlin-based group Constanza Macras/Dorky Park, was happily ensconced. Theater Heute, a leading German theater magazine, wrote that the piece reflected ''exactly the scene of Berlin bohemia.'' That seems about right.
Ms. Macras comes from Buenos Aires and was trained, among other places, in New York. In 1995 she gravitated to Berlin, like the 12 dancers in her wildly international company. That company, named to recall Gorky Park (the Moscow park and/or rock band) but also to sound dorky, was founded in 2003. Before that she had another group, Tamagotchi Y2K, and she has worked extensively with the various Berlin theaters that subsidize dance.

Dorky Park's first show was a nearly four-hour version of ''Back to the Present,'' performed in a rambling, derelict Berlin department store. The piece was retooled for the stage in 2004 and lasts two and a half hours (with one intermission) at Dance Theater Workshop. The three performances here are part of the citywide European Dream festival.
At first glance this might seem like another of those endlessly proliferating post-Pina Bausch exercises in random vignettes, some dance and some theater (and here, some video) performed by a personable young cast. This kind of work can seem charming but also inconclusive.
What distinguishes ''Back to the Present,'' apart from a particularly personable, sexy cast, is the manic good humor of the entire enterprise. The piece ends with a crazed free-for-all, with everyone stripping (or being stripped) naked and hundreds of stuffed animals and other detritus hurled around the set. It's just exhilarating.
Everything before that leads up to the end. At the outset a woman intones a mantra: ''We dance and we love; we love and we dance.'' And they do dance, intermittently, with considerable skill. But there are also all manner of vignettes, often sexy or sexual or barely clothed.
There are personal stories, charmingly delivered in native or lightly accented English (the lingua franca of Berlin bohemia). There are songs, performed very well indeed by the Dorky Park Ensemble, which consists of the dancers and sounds sometimes like a pretty good rock band and sometimes like a fractured society band, with all manner of bizarre instruments, played well and (deliberately) ineptly.
There are many stuffed animals, sometimes cuddled, sometimes thrown, occasionally disemboweled. (One video shows a beautiful girl in minimal underwear being assaulted by stuffed animals.) There are videos of the dancers in naked orgies, sniffing cocaine. All, it should be reiterated, with terrific, almost childlike sweetness.
In this kind of dance a viewer seeks themes binding the sketches together, some overall shape that lifts the performance above its isolated moments. In interviews Ms. Macras has spoken of memory and ''storage,'' yet at times you had to wonder where she was heading with all this material.
But the animals and the props and the songs and, above all, the cast, which emerged more and more into strongly defined individual personalities, made the whole apparatus cohere. That, and nice self-satire. (''I can't believe this is where the city of Berlin puts its money.'') And, above all, the unstoppable charm, ''La Boheme'' without the tuberculosis.
I myself know ''bohemians'' in Berlin who are sad or impoverished or disappointed or embittered. Ms. Macras does too. But ''Back to the Present'' sees life there among its young and lively through rose-colored glasses, and makes a convincing case for what it sees. No wonder it's been so popular at home. And here, as well: Dance Theater Workshop was packed on Thursday, and erupted with cheers.
The performers all deserve mention: Knut Berger, Diane Busuttil, Joris Camelin, Nir De-Volff, Jill Emerson, Claus Erbskorn, Jared Gradinger, Ayelen Liberona, Maike Moller, Rahel Savoldelli, Yeri Anarika Vargas Sanchez and Thomas Witte.
Constanza Macras/Dorky Park's ''Back to the Present'' continues through tonight at Dance Theater Workshop, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea; (212) 924-0077 or dtw.org.

MILLBURN, N.J., June 10 -- Dolly, we hardly knew ye.
The feathered hats and headdresses look familiar; the sweeping skirts and corseted bodices too. Business cards still flutter like confetti from that tapestry bag, and her big entrance still involves a beaded gown and a goddesslike descent of a near-legendary staircase. But when the meddling matchmaker opens her mouth in the Paper Mill Playhouse's new production of ''Hello, Dolly!'' here, out leaps a leprechaun.


Seeking to avoid invidious comparisons with Carol Channing, her most celebrated -- and most possessive -- predecessor in the role, the enterprising Tovah Feldshuh has traced the roots of Dolly Gallagher Levi back to an imagined homeland in Ireland, locating the character's feisty spirit in an early life of want in the days of the potato famine. Speaking -- and even singing -- in a brogue as thick as the shtick it must serve, Ms. Feldshuh places her own stamp on one of the musical theater's most celebrated female roles. As they say in old Eire, you go, girl!
Dolly, the one-woman dating service whose most assiduous client is her widowed self, has been played by innumerable actresses since this Jerry Herman musical first opened on Broadway in 1964. But for the Tony-winning creator of the role, Ms. Channing, it became a trademark vehicle to be trotted out at regular intervals over the course of an amazing four decades. Ms. Channing last brought it to Broadway in 1995.
As a result, Ms. Channing's gangly grace, her baritonal rasp of a voice and her megawatt grin have become indelibly associated with Dolly, despite Barbra Streisand's co-opting the role in the bloated but largely faithful movie version. Ms. Channing knew from branding, long before the term was invented.
Ms. Feldshuh's smile may be less resplendently toothy than Ms. Channing's, which sometimes gives the unsettling impression that if you step too close, you might lose a limb. But it is more than sufficient to signal Dolly's embracing spirit. And while she has not appeared on Broadway in a musical since 1979 (in ''Sarava,'' a quick-flop adaptation of ''Dona Flor and Her Two Husbands''), her singing is vibrant and assured, a few tricky register shifts notwithstanding. Petite and svelte, she dances persuasively too, ornamenting the introduction to ''Dancing'' with a little jig, of course.
But it's the accent that first disorients, then beguiles and ultimately delights. By the second act of this efficient, pretty production, Ms. Feldshuh had me convinced that I could hear wistful traces of ''Danny Boy'' in the bridge to the show's famous title tune. Since it is one of those aggressively catchy anthems able to inculcate an allergic reaction to show tunes, who wouldn't be grateful to hear the song given a fresh spin?
It should be made clear that Ms. Feldshuh is not merely working a gimmick. A studious and skilled actress best known for her recent turn on Broadway as Golda Meir, a determined woman asserting her prerogatives on a stage even grander than Dolly's, Ms. Feldshuh may be using an accent to reorient our perceptions of a character, but she is not distorting that character to serve her own ends. In fact, in giving Dolly a new voice, Ms. Feldshuh helps restore to her some of the simple humanity lost under accretions of stardust. (Why not lose, in that case, the silly, star-driven accouterments, like the worship-me belaboring of the title tune, or the curtain-call gown?)
Unfortunately, this persuasively human Dolly throws into unhappy relief the flimsy nature of the other characters in this confectionary musical, with its book by Michael Stewart, which might have been written in creamed corn and marzipan.
The Paper Mill production, directed faithfully by Mark S. Hoebee on airy sets by Michael Anania, features a likable, vocally strong cast led by Walter Charles, who sings with particular grace as Dolly's cranky prey, Horace Vandergelder. Among the three sets of young lovebirds, Brian Sears in particular shines out as a buoyantly charming Barnaby Tucker. But the characters have the depth of antique paper dolls, despite the actors' spirited handling of Mr. Herman's warm, tuneful score.
A musical that traded on nostalgia when it was new, ''Hello, Dolly!'' now must rely on nostalgia for nostalgia to win us over. In our unsentimental age, audiences are likely to dismiss its sweet-spirited exhortations to join the grand parade of life as, in the words of Dolly Gallagher Levi, so much blarney.

</text>
