<text id="C13" category="" words="1991" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Long Walk to Freedom; Two new looks at the titan who led South Africa from apartheid to democracy.' The Washington Post, 24 December 2006, p. T03; 'The Plotters Against America; Two new books disagree sharply about how big a threat Osama bin Laden and hi" Author="Glenn Frankel; Michael Scheuer " PublicationDate="24 December 2006; 26 November 2006" SampledFrom="All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

"A leader is like a shepherd," Nelson Mandela proclaimed more than a decade ago in his autobiography. "There are times when a leader must move out ahead of his flock, go off in a new direction, confident that he is leading his people in the right way." 
It's an arrogant statement -- could any other democratically elected politician get away with equating his constituents with sheep? -- and yet supremely apt. For Mandela is arguably the greatest political leader of our time, the one person worthy of mention alongside FDR, Churchill and Gandhi. Mandela led the political and moral crusade for majority rule in South Africa against a white supremacist police state, risking his life, surrendering his personal freedom and his family's well-being. He spent 27 years in prison only to emerge as a wise, dynamic and conciliatory figure binding black and white together as father of his nation and inspiration for the world. 
The danger, of course, is that in extolling Mandela's virtues, it's all too easy to turn him into a saint -- worshipped and untouchable and therefore of no practical value as a guide for our own behavior -- and to lose track of the flawed, flesh-and-blood human being whom we can learn from and seek to emulate. As George Orwell once warned, "Saints should always be judged guilty until they are proved innocent." 
Tom Lodge's Mandela: A Critical Life is an attempt to rescue the real man -- virtues and blemishes alike -- from the frozen wasteland of sainthood. Lodge is a political scientist who has spent his professional life rigorously and fearlessly charting the complex and treacherous crosscurrents of South African political life, from the apartheid era to the age of black rule. While he is a white liberal with enormous personal sympathy for the cause of black liberation, he has never hesitated to write critically and analytically about black politics and politicians. 
This is a dry, brisk and authoritative account that always seeks to place Mandela's decisions in their political context. Lodge emphasizes how Mandela's values were shaped by a childhood in rural Transkei, where he learned Victorian principles of self-control, etiquette, chivalry and independence at Methodist-run schools and developed a lifelong respect for British laws and principles. His upbringing in royal Transkeian society shielded the child from humiliating encounters with whites, allowing the adult to be less scarred and more magnanimous. Lodge draws a clear line connecting the young, colorful and impetuous Mandela, who was a sharp dresser and a handsome ladies' man, with the older prison veteran. "There are no sudden turning points," Lodge insists. 
From the beginning of his career, Mandela has conducted himself as a public figure, has sought celebrity and has used his personal charisma as a political tool. Lodge focuses on Mandela's self-consciously theatrical approach to politics, arguing that he was one of South Africa's first media politicians -- always aware of the camera and the audience, constructing his own myth and acting out a narrative of messianic leadership. When he stood before the judge at his trial for sabotage in 1963, under the shadow of the hangman, Mandela did not flinch from the role that he had written for himself. He delivered a four-hour speech from the dock that was at once defiant and conciliatory, declaring that he was opposed to either white or black domination and championed equality: "It is an ideal which I hope to live for and achieve. But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die." 
Lodge is following in the footsteps of three major Mandela biographies, including the former president's own Long Walk to Freedom, co-written with Richard Stengel of Time magazine. Each of the three -- the others are by Anthony Sampson and Martin Meredith -- is as thick as a doorstop, written in a magisterial style, with a tendency to salute certain myths about the man and his mission. Lodge's writing style is more pedestrian, sometimes bordering on the seriously academic, but his analysis is often deeper and tougher. 
Ultimately, writes Lodge, Mandela's adherence to simple virtues -- social obligations, manners and proper behavior -- produced "a politics of grace and honor that, notwithstanding its conservatism, was probably the only politics that could have enabled South Africa's relatively peaceful transition to democracy." In that long march, there was no bloodbath, no last stand by white militants, no Armageddon. No one deserves more credit for this than Nelson Mandela. 
At first glance, the other book under review, Mandela: The Authorized Portrait, looks like pure, unembarrassed hagiography, the kind of coffee table tome that opens with encomiums from former president Bill Clinton and Archbishop Desmond Tutu and goes on to a series of celebrity guest appearances from the likes of Prince Bandar bin Sultan, Tony Blair, Sidney Poitier and Bono. But that first impression is misleading because the narrative text by Mike Nicol is rich and nuanced, the historical documents revealing and the photographs thrilling and evocative. The overhead shot of black South Africans crowding outside the Johannesburg Drill Hall in 1956 for a glimpse of Mandela and other defendants in the original mass Treason Trial is itself worth the price of admission, as is a photo of the open graves for the 69 victims of the 1960 Sharpeville massacre. These images, interspersed among intimate portraits of Mandela, are a reminder that the man and the nation are forever entwined. * 

We should strike the term "terrorist group" from the lexicon of those charged with beating Osama bin Laden, al-Qaeda and its allies. The term defeats thought, understanding and imagination, and it allows leaders in both parties to argue a politically correct absurdity: that al-Qaeda threatens U.S. national security but that our attackers are a limited number of criminal magicians who have hijacked the faith of millions of Muslims and will "be brought to justice one man at a time." 
Although "insurgent" is not a perfect fit either, the term far better describes al-Qaeda and the other Islamists attacking America. These zealous groups are large, multi-functional, media-savvy, well-funded, superbly led and religiously motivated. Their focus is on winning, not strutting on the world stage. Numerous No. 2, No. 3 and No. 4 leaders of al-Qaeda are gone, but the organization's threat remains. Most important, al-Qaeda and its ilk -- unlike traditional terrorist and insurgent groups -- have no return address; they are not confined to one state or reliant upon its patronage. Islamist groups can hit America with impunity and high confidence that U.S. military forces cannot annihilate them in response. Al-Qaeda is many things, including a proliferating ideology and a unique, multi-ethnic insurgent organization. It is also a growing threat to U.S. security, in part because our leaders do not accept these realities. 
Abdel Bari Atwan fully grasps the foregoing in his excellent, very personal book, The Secret History of al Qaeda. As editor-in-chief of the best Arabic-language daily newspaper, Al-Quds al-Arabi, Atwan "got it" from the moment bin Laden appeared on the scene. Atwan saw that the threat bin Laden posed far exceeded any the West had faced from a terrorist group. He also knew that "the notion that Muslims hate the American people or Western civilization is dangerous and erroneous. What many do hate is American foreign policy." This timeless truth remains inaudible for U.S. leaders, who will leap on any explanation for Muslim anti-Americanism except our invasion of Iraq, unqualified support for Israel and protection for tyrannies that rule Muslims across the Islamic world. 
Atwan's 1996 interview with bin Laden in his Afghanistan redoubt was one of the first and remains one of the best. He describes the trip to meet bin Laden in detail and frankly admits he hesitated to run the risks. We are in Atwan's debt that his nerve held: The interview came soon after bin Laden's initial declaration of war on America and gave the world its first close look at that talented, ruthless and pious warrior. "After meeting bin Laden," Atwan writes, "I realized that this was no ordinary man, and fully expected that he would play a significant role in the history of his homeland, Saudi Arabia, and the Muslim world in general." 
Atwan reminds the West that "no serious study of bin Laden and al Qaeda can ignore the Islamic background from which they have emerged. . . . Without Islam there would be no al Qaeda." Bin Laden fits neatly into Islamic history's continuum; from the Prophet Muhammad to Saladin to bin Laden (as the al-Qaeda leader sees it), Muslim leaders have waged defensive jihads against infidels attacking Islam's lands, creed and followers. Atwan's concise discussions of Islamic history, jihad and politics should silence the oft-used inanity that bin Laden has "hijacked" Islam. Moreover, Atwan's conclusion should deeply unsettle U.S. leaders: "Bin Laden is the latest in a line of figureheads, for many, in keeping with Muslim tradition." As the ideological leader of a popular global insurgency, he embodies "the political aspirations of a significant proportion of the Muslim nation, aspirations which are inextricably bound up with their faith." 
Here, Atwan's blend of memoir and journalism far outshines an academic's work. One can only hope that Louise Richardson's What Terrorists Want will prove the last shriek from the academy's antiquated terrorism experts, who are reluctant to admit that al-Qaeda poses a unique menace. Richardson, the executive dean of the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, lustily sings the "nothing is new under the terrorism sun" song; her book leads readers on an erudite if irrelevant tour of the histories of the 1st-century Jewish millenarian sect called the Zealots, the 7th-century Hindu Thug cult, the 12th-century Shiite Muslim sect known as the Assassins, the fin-de-siecle Russian anarchists, and such 20th-century terrorist groups as the IRA, the Red Brigades and Shining Path, among others. 
But none of these posed a national security threat to the United States; none is remotely comparable to al-Qaeda and its allies. Traditional terrorist groups have limited agendas, allure and bloodlust; groups such as the IRA, whose deadliest attacks left just dozens dead, are a lethal nuisance. On the other hand, al-Qaeda -- with its potent ideology, its divine sanction for unlimited murder, its operational sophistication and its ambition to create a regional caliphate -- is a genuine strategic threat. Compare a fertilizer-based bomb in Belfast to a nuclear bomb in Houston. 
Richardson's academic objectivity also fails her in these pages. Her review of U.S. counterterrorism policy correctly criticizes George W. Bush, Ronald Reagan, Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld, but the book's index has no entry for Bill Clinton, Madeleine Albright, Al Gore, George Tenet or Sandy Berger. In an era when the leaders of both political parties have been monumental failures in the fight against al-Qaeda, that oversight can only be seen as partisan. 
Worse, Richardson also claims that we do not understand al-Qaeda's strength, appeal and goals. "If we don't even know what our enemies are fighting for," she writes, "we cannot hope to counter them effectively." But Richardson seems to have missed a decade of al-Qaeda studies -- including Atwan's -- that provide exactly that data. The careful works of Bruce Hoffman, Peter L. Bergen, Daniel Byman, Paul Pillar and Daniel Benjamin irrefutably demonstrate that al-Qaeda is no mere terrorist group -- in terms of its size, organizational ingenuity, operational sophistication, geographical reach, educated membership, leadership skills and determination to defeat its foe rather than just use random violence to signal anger. Al-Qaeda is a worldwide insurgency against which the old law-enforcement-based counterterrorism doctrine is nearly useless; indeed, relying on the old tactics ensures defeat. The new breed of al-Qaeda scholars also suggests that bin Laden has emerged as a leader whose charisma, words and deeds are harnessing what history shows to be the extraordinary mobilizing and motivating power of Islam at times when Muslims believe -- as many do today -- that they and their faith are under infidel attack.

</text>
