<text id="C14" category="" words="2018" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'THIS WESTERN IS SPUR-IOUS.' New York Daily News, 5 May 2006, p. 56; ''RACHAEL' IS A RAY OF HOPE, BUT MULLALLY LACKS GRACE.' New York Daily News, 19 September 2006, p. 82; 'MORE HIGH-POWERED DRAMA 'Heroes' keeps getting better.' New York Daily News, 16 Oc" Author="Jack Mathews; David Bianculli; David Bianculli; Jack Mathews; Jack Mathews" PublicationDate="5 May 2006; 19 September 2006; 16 October 2006; 27 December 2006; 16 June 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

If you're in the mood for a good Western, you're reading the wrong review. That would be John Hillcoat's "The Proposition," reviewed below.
Writer-director David Jacobson's "Down in the Valley" merely wants to be a Western - wants it so badly that it injects Old West movie cliches into a contemporary drama set in L.A.'s San Fernando Valley.
Many of the old studio Westerns that Jacobson reveres were shot in the San Fernando Valley before urban sprawl filled it with the tract houses and asphalt roads where this, this - I don't know what to call it - takes place.
"Valley" stars Edward Norton as Harlan, a delusional drifter who dresses like the Ringo Kid, practices quick-draw from a two-gun holster in his motel room, carries a lariat over his shoulder in public and occasionally "borrows" a horse from a private corral and roams the still barren hills rimming the valley.
When Tobe (Evan Rachel Wood), the teenage daughter of a sheriff's deputy (David Morse), meets him in a filling station and invites him to join her and her friends for a day at the beach, an unwise romance is launched that leads to tragic consequences.
The first two-thirds of "Valley," in which this oddball charmer befriends Tobe's shy brother (Rory Culkin) and tries to sell his sincerity to her outraged father, is superb. Norton is so convincing, you're inclined to root for him even though you know he's a disaster on the hoof, and as his infatuated lover, Wood is the vulnerable daughter of every father's nightmare.
Then, in a way that will have you asking the proverbial question "what were they thinking?", the movie turns into something strange and annoying, an attempted blend of a suburban thriller with an Old West shoot-'em-up.
In the film's weirdest scene, Harlan walks into the middle of a movie set where a remake of John Ford's "My Darling Clementine" is underway. A moment later, he's holding a gun on the actor playing Wyatt Earp, then turning it on the real cops who've come to arrest him.
Whatever Jacobson hoped to accomplish with "Valley's" ambitious, overlong finale, it doesn't work. Not as a Western, not as a drama, and not as a fable.


Two women from different areas of TV yesterday tried to stake their claims as daytime syndicated talk-show hosts and had two different results.
Rachael Ray, who comes from the Food Network, was fair. Megan Mullally, fresh from NBC's "Will &amp; Grace," was foul.
"Rachael Ray" (10 a.m., WABC/Ch. 7) has the muscle of Oprah Winfrey, who is today's guest. That alone makes the show an odds-on favorite to succeed. She also has a giant, workable set - full kitchen, comfy sitting areas, even a working elevator from which she descended to make her entrance.
"This is my first show with people," Ray said, referring to the irrepressibly amped studio audience. "For five years, I've been on the Food Network talking to vegetables."
Yes, Ray can talk, incessantly. And when she gets into one of her sing-song cadences, listing things while bobbing her head and grinning widely, she looks and sounds alarmingly like Gilda Radner' Roseanne Roseannadanna. But once her guest Diane Sawyer came on, Ray fell into a more natural conversational tone.
In her new one-hour show, Ray, known for her series "30 Minute Meals," settled on even more stringent time constraints: a 60- second snack and a seven-minute meal. In both cases, she beat the clock - but she didn't have one.
When you're spending this sort of money launching a new show, with a fully practical kitchen set, wouldn't it have been equally practical to include a kitchen clock?
A remote segment on skydiving with a fan didn't exactly soar, and a Webcam two-way chat with a fan was useless, since Ray didn't interact with her once while focusing on cooking her seven-minute meal. Teasers for upcoming segments, though, suggest that there's enough in "Rachael Ray" to give it time to develop and grow.
"The Megan Mullally Show" (3 p.m., WNBC-Ch. 4), on the other hand, was dead on arrival. An opening production number had Mullally singing new lyrics to songs from "Hair" (no kidding: "'This is the dawning of 'The Megan Mullally Show'").
Her first guest, Will Ferrell, turned out to be a personal friend, so they swapped stories about their vacation together, and how he can't change a tire. Then he sang "Wind Beneath My Wings" to her, supposedly in homage to the way Bette Midler once serenaded Johnny Carson - but without changing the lyrics.
Making Ferrell seem unfunny is bad enough. Coming off less amusing than Jenny McCarthy, her other guest yesterday, is both unbelievable and unforgivable. At the end, she asked her mother, who sat in the audience, to review the show. Mom loved it. That's unconditional love, people. When the audience asks better questions than the host - when McCarthy went into the crowd, that's precisely what happened - there's little or no hope for improvement. At least "The Chevy Chase Show" featured a telegenic fish tank.


One of the biggest compliments a TV critic can pay to a weekly series - especially a show in its freshman season - is to add it to the already bloated list of must-watch programs. This year, the most surprising entrant on that elite list (earning a Season Pass on my TiVo DVR) is NBC's "Heroes."
What can I say? Based on the first three episodes (the last of which, with its killer autopsy-table cliffhanger, was televised last Monday), I gave "Heroes" a very supportive and enthusiastic three- star ranking. At the time, I thought I was going out on a limb, perhaps getting swept away by a show that hits all the right buttons of a former Marvel Comics-reading kid who loves unpredictable and unusual television.
To my shock and delight, "Heroes" is one of the few serialized dramas embraced, rather than rejected, by the American public this season. Not only does "Heroes" improve substantially on its "Deal or No Deal" lead-in,
but after three weeks on the air, it has emerged as the top- rated new series in the all-important 18-49 age group. Last week, in that same category, it made the top 10 overall - not just against new series, but against all of them.
With "Smith" already pulled by CBS, and "Vanished" and "Kidnapped" banished to less competitive nights by Fox and NBC, respectively, the breakout success of "Heroes" is even more impressive. In one way, though, it makes sense. "Vanished" and "Kidnapped" sound like the same show (and were, essentially, though "Kidnapped" is far superior). And while NBC may have two shows about the making of a late-night sketch series, no one but NBC has a show this year about a bunch of ordinary people who find themselves suddenly endowed with extraordinary powers.
NBC has provided the next two shows for preview: tonight's "Chapter Four" (at 9), and next week's "Chapter Five." They're good enough to warrant a second review, with an extra half-star added. It's not too late to hop aboard this series, but if you wait any longer, you'll be missing out on a wild ride. (Each week, NBC makes the latest episode available free on its Web site,www.nbc.com ).
The characters in "Heroes" still are coming to grips with the extent of their powers and how to use them. It's part of what makes them human, and a lot of what makes this show interesting. We know already, thanks to visions by two of the characters, that a nuclear blast is due to hit New York just after Election Day. But who's behind it? And how can our "Heroes" find each other in time, much less agree on the combined mission to prevent the disaster?
Sometimes they're tempted to use their new abilities for less than heroic ends, as when time-warping Hiro (Masi Oka) visits Las Vegas and manipulates the roulette wheel, or when cheerleader Claire (Hayden Panettiere), the girl with the astounding healing powers who found herself on the autopsy table last week, takes revenge on her attacker by taking him on the kind of drive usually reserved for crash-test dummies. Other times they're drawn, like animals in migration, to the same general direction.
"Heroes" contains too many enjoyable surprises to spoil any of them - but the paths of these people keep crossing, in much more entertaining a fashion than on, say, "Six Degrees." And yes, those cliffhanger endings are clear signatures now. Watch for them, wait for them, and enjoy them. Just like the rest of the show.



Twenty years after its publication, German author Patrick Suskind's allegorical novel "Perfume: The Story of a Murderer" is reborn as a $60 million movie, and it is worth every "scent."
Directed by fellow German Tom Tykwer ("Run, Lola, Run"), this is a crazy, gorgeous, disturbing, darkly comic horror story about an early-18th-century Frenchman born in a Paris fish market without any odor of his own but with a sense of smell that would make a pack of bloodhounds wail with envy.
Jean-Baptiste Grenouille (Ben Whishaw) can smell you as you read this review, and knows what you had for breakfast. I'm telling you, the guy is good.
But he is also a monster, a serial killer who distills the scent of dead virgins with the hope of creating a perfume of such erotic power that he will become master of all who inhale it.
We follow Jean-Baptiste from his birth under a fishmonger's table through his years at a Dickensian orphanage, his slave labor at a foul tannery, his apprenticeship with an Italian perfume maker (a fragrantly over-the-top Dustin Hoffman) and his reign of terror in the perfume capital of Grasse.
It is in Grasse where he learns the art of enfleurage, a method of distilling the aromatic oils in flowers that he will apply to the bodies of his virgin prey. As Jean-Baptiste works his way toward the magic number of 13 victims, the townspeople become as hysterical as the torch-bearing mob that drove Frankenstein's monster to a toasty death in a windmill.
In fact, Grenouille - skeletally thin, his flesh stained with tanning oils, his nostrils constantly flaring - is one of the most vividly imagined monsters since the days of Mary Shelley and Bram Stoker.
Adapting a novel about smells is a daunting task for a filmmaker, and there are moments near the end of "Perfume" that may inspire more you've-got-to-be-kidding-me laughter than awe. But the movie does tease and torment the olfactory nerve in ways Este Lauder never dreamed of.
It certainly evokes the odors of lower Paris, of the rougey salons above and of the gardens of wealthy merchant Antoine Richis (Alan Rickman), whose beautiful daughter Laura (Rachel Hurd-Wood) figures prominently in Jean-Baptiste's plans.
But we are long past the days when anyone thought Smell-O-Vision was a good idea, let alone pined for it. In the case of "Perfume," which assumes a supernatural sense of smell - and a most generous suspension of disbelief - imagination is of the essence.


You may withhold some judgment of Sedgwick's Emily, not because her behavior is neurotically possessive and protective - traits most young mothers feel at some level - but because this Emily is psychotic. She's the horror-movie mother from hell.
"Loverboy" is very strangely directed, with creepily stylized flashbacks that depict Emily's parents (Bacon, Marisa Tomei) as cartoonish, self-absorbed and ultimately self-destructive hippies, and her adored neighbor (Sandra Bullock) as a kind of gossamer, man- hating guardian angel.
But the real trouble is at its core, with an over-the-top performance from Sedgwick that borders on Baby Jane campiness.
In the early scenes, Emily is an anti-social nymphomaniac, on the prowl for zipless encounters with strangers who, as a collective sperm donor, will yield her a perfect, fatherless child.
When her son is born, she names him Paul after a conventioneer (Campbell Scott) who seduces her in a hotel. But to the boy's dismay, as he grows older and insists on being around other children, she will only call him Loverboy.

</text>
