<text id="C15" category="" words="1991" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Good' grief: Keillor picks the poems; we world-weary folks sit back and enjoy' The Chicago Sun-Times, 31 December 2006, page B9; 'Lookingglass' 'Curiosity' a wonder to behold' The Chicago Sun-Times, 8 May 2006, page 49; 'Young audiences get 'Perks' of sm" Author="Amy Newman; Hedy Weiss; David Jakubiak" PublicationDate="31 December 2006; 8 May 2006; 3 November 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

Garrison Keillor's Good Poems for Hard Times is promoted as "a heart-lifting new anthology to inspire the world-weary . . . guaranteed to raise flagging spirits or inspire those in need of a dose of wisdom or honesty." You may think these lines more suitable for an advertising campaign for vitamins or Prozac. Now, even poetry is packaged as a feel-good pick-me-up for troubling times. Should this bother me? Penguin Books knows more about marketing than I do.
That Keillor's "Prairie Home Companion" weekly radio show has become a brand enjoyed by more than 4 million listeners suggests -- along with his registered trademarks such as Powdermilk Biscuits -- that he has patented the formula for packaging sentiment with the occasional leap of grace. Perhaps even Keillor is bothered that, like the radio show's counterfeit promotions for ketchup by the Catchup Advisory Board, the sales pitch for this new anthology lauds poetry for its "mellowing agents." But maybe not.
Those who appreciate the Keillor brand especially admire such comfort, and it makes good sense that at times we would go to such words for quiet reflection. Yet, his introduction to Good Poems for Hard Times excludes all but this approach to poetry in the same homespun, castor-oil, good-sense tone Keillor uses when he performs on his radio show.
Read solely for "directness, clarity and truthfulness," a number of the poems in the anthology are so similarly wistful that reading them can feel like driving though a gated suburbia, house after house, comforting but also sedative in its repetitive murmur. Poet Denise Levertov said poetry could "awaken sleepers" -- like life, poetry embraces infinity, variety and doubt. Keillor's singular campaign for plain talk is a kind of pre-emptive strike against reading beyond a poem's placid surface for its intensity.
Many of these poems are sweet reads and offer a measure of the intensity readers deserve. Poems by Miller Williams ("A Poem for Emily") and Fleur Adcock ("For a Five-Year-Old") are comforting, musical. Robyn Sarah's "Riveted" conveys how we are "spellbound by our own imperfect lives/because they are our lives,/and because they are ours." In Galway Kinnell's "That Silent Evening," the use of "heaven" as a verb astounds us: "and the light doubles and shines/ through the dark the sparkling that heavens the earth."
But we never get too amazed here. In an echo of Keillor's radio show, classic and contemporary poems are interspersed with -- you could say sponsored by -- jingles from Burma Shave and Carnation Milk. Those jingles are fun, and they relieve us from the demands of life for a time.
In the introduction, Keillor recalls the cadence of his carpenter father's life as a metaphor for poetry: "When he took a chicken by the legs and laid its neck against the block and lifted the ax and chopped off its head, there was a cadence to that. I hear that whack in poetry." Yet when Keillor later writes, "What animates poetry is faith, the same faith that moves the builder and the butcher," I note the limits of his metaphor. Faith is less clear than chicken- whacking or carpentry, and the link between faith and earthly activities is often more awash in awe.
Poetry can increase the feel for life, and we need more of that. In a book that has the attention of the reading public, perhaps Keillor could have further introduced his Prairie Home companions to poetry's depth and breadth, to the way its music and landscape resonate even after the page has been turned. We can take it; we're a lively bunch. Keillor's assertion that "the meaning of poetry is to give courage" is limiting, a salvo fired from the ship of someone who knows better. It sounds as though all poems must offer false bravado, seeking to erase our fears. In many moving poems, I don't feel the strength of a thousand men when I read them. I feel the trembling of the spirit's acknowledgement of trouble and language rushing in to make a song of it.
The reader can find such trembling here, and a little yearning and wondering, if she's not reading for mellowing agents alone. In "When Death Comes," Mary Oliver writes, "When it's over, I want to say: all my life/I was a bride married to amazement/I was the bridegroom, taking the world into my arms." The depth of those lines is a wish, against a background darker than comfort allows.
Perhaps because of editorial choice, poem length or reprint restrictions, some poets you'd hope to find in an anthology titled Good Poems for Hard Times are absent -- Czeslaw Milosz and Joseph Brodsky, for example. And Anna Akhmatova. Her "Requiem" to the victims of the Stalinist regime is unflinching. At the poem's end I know I am not finished with it, and it is not done with me.


Watching Lookingglass Theatre Company's utterly beguiling new stage adaptation of Charles Dickens' "The Old Curiosity Shop" -- a show that arrives with the aptly formulated subtitle, "A Victorian Fairy Tale of Joy and Woe" -- it is impossible not to recall that Dickens himself adored the theater and was, by all accounts, a terrific actor. In fact, the story is told that once, after performing in a play by Ben Jonson, an old extra caught the novelist at the stage door and said: "Ah, what an actor you would have made, Mr. Dickens, if it just hadn't been for them books."
Of course, "them books" have been the source of countless theatrical renderings, from "A Christmas Carol" and "The Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby," to "Great Expectations," "David Copperfield" and Lookingglass' own unforgettable version of "Hard Times," first produced in 2001.
Filled to bursting with larger-than-life characters bearing the most inspired, personality-defining names -- all of whom are intricately fitted into the machinations of plots as dark and twisting as the streets of Victorian London -- Dickens' novels seem made for the stage. And the author's uncompromising look at the human toll that comes to those caught up in a society in which money is the great dictator of destinies, and love and kindness are sustained only through the greatest, odds-defying efforts, adds passion and gravitas to all the quirkiness.
"The Old Curiosity Shop" was conceived by Raymond Fox (who also plays The Single Gentleman, an Englishman who has returned to London after years in America and who serves as both narrator and participant in the tale). He adapted it seamlessly in collaboration with Laura Eason and Heidi Stillman. Director Tracy Walsh has devised the fluid, ingenious, almost balletic staging that makes every aspect of the storytelling come into focus with an instantly memorable clarity, speed and vividness.
The story is quintessential Dickens -- the tale of warped souls and warped bodies trying to survive in a society that can be immensely cruel and unforgiving to those whose fortunes have been lost or squandered, or are simply nonexistent. At its center are a Grandfather (a stormy and mysterious Troy West), who loves his almost saintly young granddaughter, Nell (Lorri Hamm, who manages to give this gentle creature some real spine), not wisely but too well. A compulsive gambler, he continually puts her at risk in his misguided attempts to amass a fortune that will secure her future. In the process, he becomes the victim of the ruthless and comically lascivious moneylender, Mr. Quilp (a brilliant, gargoylelike performance by the thread-thin Thomas J. Cox, who spends much of the show in a froglike position to conjure his character's crippled legs, and who must be nearly crippled himself by the end of the show). Grandfather and his Little Nell must flee the brutal city for the countryside, where they seek peace and charity, yet often come up short even there.
It is the gallery of rogues, eccentrics and rare gentle spirits that is far more crucial than the twisted journey itself here. There is special pleasure to be had in watching many of the actors assume multiple roles, often polar opposites in type. Consider Quilp's doll- like, timid, ferociously manipulated wife, Mrs. Quilp (played to marvelous, pitiful effect by Lisa Tejero), and then watch as Tejero does a fantastic about-face as Sally Brass, the angry dragon-lady sister and business partner of Quilp's fraudulent lawyer, Sampson Brass (a deceptively benign Andrew White). Pay attention, too, to the compassionate country schoolmaster who, as it turns out, is played by Cox in a complete about-face.
And who else but Dickens could conjure a character like Dick Swiveller (embodied to deliriously perfect effect by Lawrence E. DiStasi)? A feckless fellow whose permanently lapsed work ethic and misplaced sense of entitlement camouflage a good heart, he will end up saving and savoring the little housemaid he dubs The Marchioness (enchanting work by Elizabeth Ledo, who moves about like a little mouse before her transformation into a princess).
Meanwhile, on the road, Grandfather and Nell encounter a great many traveling performers, from a swindling vaudeville-style duo who run a Punch-and-Judy puppet show, to a waxworks museum owner, the good-hearted Mrs. Jarley (the wonderfully spirited Eve Breneman, who also is a hoot as Mrs. Quilp's opportunistic mother). The waxwork figures themselves are winningly brought to life by the actors.
Brian Sidney Bembridge's massive, jigsaw puzzle-like wooden set stretches against a long wall of the theater and serves both as the all-important city bridges and a warren of forbidding offices, shops, attics and cellars. T.J. Gerckens' painterly lighting tells a story all its own, with the characters periodically striking stunning silhouetted poses that suggest the hordes of London or the figures in a rural landscape.
Although a few questions remain unanswered when it's all over, the play's engaging epilogue, supplied by The Single Gentleman, provides a delightful "Where are they all now?" summing up. Some of them are dead. On this matter, too, Dickens is eloquent. Of course, all those immortalized by this writer need not worry. They live in the imagination and dance on in this wondrous "Curiosity Shop."

David Perez is fed up with the stereotypes in theater. And he has a theater company.
Saturday night at the EP Theatre, Perez's "Perks of Nudity" will become the first show offered by a new theater company dedicated to telling the stories of youth -- stories, he says, that are often ignored.
"A lot of times when you look at young characters on stage, they're being looked at through a reductive filter," he explains. "A lot of times, young people are not articulate, their vernacular is ridden with apathy. It's, for lack of a better term, dumbed-down language."
That language is often indicative of the characters as a whole, he continues.
"I see young people displaced and lost, not as active participants in their experience," Perez says. "A lot of times, we're not only stereotyped by interest but also by race. I mean, I'm a Hispanic gay man and I'm more into rock than any of my friends, but you don't see me [portrayed] in theater. It seems youth is [used as] a device rather than as [part of] a character with dimensions."
Enter the Pavement Group, the new theater company that is offering "Perks." Perez is its artistic director. Julia Dossett is the managing director, Brittany Barnes is the business manager and casting director, and Tim Schoen is the production manager and resident designer.
The group took shape last year when Perez, Dossett and Barnes were interns at Steppenwolf. Schoen, who was already working in Chicago, came to the group through mutual friends.
"We had skill sets that were very complementary -- some of us are directors, some of us are actors, we all have experience on the administrative side of things, so we were pretty confident that we could get going right away, be professional and do a good job," Dossett says.
"Our role is to make theater that people who don't always go to theater find compelling," she adds.

</text>
