<text id="D04" category="" words="1997" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Taxo's Martyrdom and the Role of the Nuntius in the Testament of Moses: Implications for Understanding the Role of Other Intermediary Figures" Author="kenneth atkinson" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Journal of Biblical Literature 125, no. 3" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=4&hid=10&sid=98716241-3bc1-4a5f-ba52-4b86dc42bf53%40sessionmgr11">

According to
the author of the Testament of Moses, Israel is in a vulnerable position just as it was
in the wilderness: the priests have transgressed Moses's commandments to such
an extent that they are no longer qualified to make atonement for the sins of the
people (T. Mos. 5:4). Something drastic must be done to remedy the nation's hopeless
situation in order to bring about the vengeance promised to Joshua (Deut
32:43; T. Mos. 9:7; 10:1). The only means available to accomplish this is through
a strict obedience to God's commandments as taught by Moses (T. Mos. 1:10, 14;
9:4 - 5; 12:10). Such observance of the Torah will enable God's "holy and sacred
spirit" (T. Mos. 11:16) to dwell with the people and save them from their enemies
as it did with Moses's successor, Joshua.

In ch. 9 of the Testament of Moses the author introduces an innocent Levite
named Taxo, who, like Moses, will seek to make atonement for his people's sins.54
Taxo encourages his sons to remain faithful by telling them that their strength
lies in their purity. Unlike the Levitical priests, who have forsaken their roles as intercessors for the people, or the Herodian kings, who the author states are not
from a priestly family, Taxo, lacking sin, is the perfect mediator between God and
the nation. Taxo resolves to fast for a three-day period with his sons and then to
go into a cave exhorting them, "Let us die rather than transgress the commandments
of the Lord of Lords, the God of our fathers. For if we do this, and die, our
blood will be avenged before the Lord" (T. Mos. 9:7). Although the text does not
describe Taxo's fate, the author's mention of "blood" suggests that Taxo expected
that he and his sons would die a violent death.

In contrast to the other members of the priesthood, who have forfeited their
right to be called priests (T. Mos. 5:4), Taxo and his sons constitute the faithful
and sinless remnant (T. Mos. 9:4). Jan Willem van Henten suggests that Taxo's
assertion that his family has never sinned or tempted God is an allusion to Moses's
blessing of Levi in Deut 33:8 - 11. This biblical passage paraphrases the episode
near the waters of Massah and Meriba during Israel's forty-year period in the
wilderness (Exod 17; Num 20). In this biblical blessing, Moses and Levi were
praised because they were tested yet remained faithful to the Lord. Taxo's claim to
hereditary innocence, in light of the writer's assertion that the priests have abused
the temple cult, suggests that only he and his sons have remained faithful to the
covenant. Because the Testament of Moses in ch. 4 apparently denies the cultic
validity of the Second Temple to remove the effects of sin, the author's community
presumably believed that they could not make atonement for their transgressions
within the sanctuary.57 Since Taxo and his sons believe that they are the only
priests who have observed the Law, they alone are qualified to act as intercessors
for the people by seeking atonement apart from the temple cult.

IV. The Role and Function of the Nuntius
Taxo's cry for vengeance is immediately followed by the appearance of the
eschaton and the arrival of God's messenger, the nuntius, who will seek vengeance for the deaths of Taxo and his sons (T. Mos. 10:3). Taxo's relationship to the
mysterious nuntius is the most debated topic in the Testament of Moses. It is not
necessary to assume that the word nuntius must refer to a human messenger simply
because the translator does not use the word angelus. The word nuntius refers
to angels in several fifth- and sixth-century c.e. Latin texts that are contemporary
with the date of the sole surviving Latin manuscript of the Testament of Moses.
The nuntius, like Taxo, is also a priest, since the author writes, "Then the hands of
the nuntius, who will be in heaven, will be filled, thereupon he will avenge them of
their enemies" (Tunc implebuntur manus nuntii qui est in summo constitutus, qui
protinus vindicavit illos ab inimicis eorum [10:2]). The idiom "to fill the hand" in
the Hebrew Bible is a technical term that refers to the consecration of the priests.
Because the nuntius is described as performing a priestly act in heaven, he must
be both an angel and a priest.

The identification of the nuntius as a priestly angel should not be considered
problematic, since many Jewish texts associate divine vengeance with a heavenly
figure who is sometimes portrayed as a priest. During the wilderness experience,
as recounted in Exodus 14 and 23, angels of the Lord fought with the armies of
Israel. In 1QM 10, the chief priest in the context of battle invokes Moses while
reciting a lengthy prayer concerning the halakic purity of the camps. The purpose
of this petition is to affirm that God will go forth with them to fight against
their enemies (1QM 10:8 - 12:9). The angels fight alongside humans in 1QM and
help to inflict great carnage on the unrighteous (1QM 1:10 - 11). Likewise, in
11QMelchizedek a heavenly priest seeks vengeance against Belial. Paul J. Kobelski
notes that in this text Michael plays a special role, similar to his function in Dan
12:1 - 3 and 1QM 17:5 - 8, in the final age by defeating Belial and that he functions
as a heavenly high priest. The nuntius in the Testament of Moses is similar
to these violent angelic figures, all of whom play active roles in eschatological
warfare.

In T. Mos. 10:2 the author describes the violent role of the nuntius and writes,
"then the hands of the messenger, when he will be in heaven, will be filled, and he
will then avenge them against their enemies." Tromp suggests that Taxo and his
sons must be the antecedent of "them," since it is their blood that will be vindicated
according to 9:7, to propose that it is the nuntius who is consecrated as a priest in
heaven. Although Moses is called "the great messenger" (magnus nuntius) in
11:17 and had an intercessory role in the past (T. Mos. 12:6), this does not mean
that he should be equated with the nuntius of 10:2. Although the Hebrew Bible
frequently describes Moses's intercession, it does not state that he will continue
his intercessory role after his death. Rather, Moses's intercession was limited to the
exodus and the wilderness period. During this time, Moses frequently interceded
for the nation to avert God's wrath, such as the time when the people had sinned
by making the golden calf. Moses's intercessory prayers provided food and water
for the people and saved them from their enemies.66 Without Moses's powers of
intercession, Joshua feared that the nation would be overcome by its adversaries
as punishment for its transgressions. For this reason, Moses assured the people
that leadership would continue under Joshua, who would take Moses's place on
earth as intercessor.

In the Testament of Moses, Moses tells Joshua that he had served as intercessor
not because of his own virtue or strength but because of God's mercy (12:7 - 8).
God's "holy and sacred spirit" (11:16), therefore, was not limited to Moses, and
Joshua was assured that he too would defeat Israel's enemies despite the nation's
sin (12:6 - 8). Tromp comments, "Whether Moses or Joshua prays for the people,
it is the Lord who has mercy on them (see again Exod 14:13 and Deut 8:16);
therefore, intercessory prayer will always be possible, with or without Moses (see
esp. As. Mos. 4:1)."  Because the Testament of Moses emphasizes that both Joshua
and Taxo are successors to Moses's intercessory role, intercession is possible apart
from Moses's physical presence. The author of the Testament, by expanding on
the wilderness event, portrays Taxo as an intercessory figure like Moses. Both
Taxo and Moses (Exod 2:1) were of priestly descent and, therefore, qualified to act
as mediators for the people and call for God's vengeance. Taxo, however, differs 
from Moses because he is the nation's final intercessor, whose cries for vengeance
are to be fulfilled through the final destruction of the wicked.

In ch. 10 the author describes the arrival of God's kingdom and the final
defeat of the "devil" (zabulus [10:1]). It is at this moment that the nuntius will
arrive and avenge the death of Taxo and his sons. In contrast to the devil, who
traditionally occupies a role in the heavenly court as a prosecutor, the nuntius
is apparently an advocate for Taxo and his sons.  Because Taxo expects that his
martyrdom will bring God's vengeance upon his enemies, he cites the Song of
Moses (Deut 32:43) to encourage his sons to become martyrs. In this biblical passage,
Moses asks God to "avenge the blood of his children, and take vengeance
upon his adversaries." Taxo also alludes to the Deuteronomic blessing of Levi, in
which God is asked to accept the righteous work of Levi's hands and to crush the
loins of his adversaries and those who hate him (Deut 33:11). In the Testament of
Moses, the nuntius intercedes on Taxo's behalf and presents his prayers for vengeance
(9:7) as an offering before God. God responds to the shedding of Taxo's
innocent blood by sending the nuntius to kill the wicked and avenge Taxo's death.
Because Taxo seeks the death and destruction of the unrighteous, he should not
be viewed as a quietist figure who suffers passive martyrdom. Rather, Taxo is a
militant individual who seeks his own death as a means to exterminate the wicked
for all time.

V. Conclusion

The Testament of Moses, in light of the historical background and texts cited
in this study, shows that some Jews during the first century b.c.e. and the early
first century c.e. believed that God required the shedding of innocent blood by
an intermediary figure to save humanity. In many of these texts, the wilderness
theme is used to emphasize Israel's vulnerability and to stress the importance of
strict adherence to Moses's words. For the author of the Testament of Moses, Israel
now stands somewhere in the wilderness between the period of Moses's past
redemption of the nation from Egypt and the fulfillment of God's eschatological
promises. Like the wilderness generation of Moses's day, the nation is now once
again in danger of committing apostasy and forfeiting their place in God's forthcoming
kingdom.

The author of the Testament of Moses introduces the figure of Taxo, who, like
Moses, is a priestly intercessor. Moreover, Taxo is Moses's ultimate successor, since
the writer believes that he is the final intercessor for Israel. While the Testament of
Moses does not affirm Taxo's divinity, it provides valuable insight into the historical
development of the belief that the martyrdom of a righteous person was necessary
to summon God's violent messenger and bring about the final destruction of
the wicked. The messiah of Psalm of Solomon 17, like Taxo, was also expected to
be "pure from sin" (17:36). Testament of Judah 21:1, which is likely a Christian
passage that may build upon prior Jewish tradition, says of the messiah, "no sin
whatever will be found in him." These parallels suggest that many Jews during
the Second Temple period believed that a righteous figure must be completely
pure and without sin in order to fulfill God's eschatological plan. This theological
doctrine found in the Testament of Moses, along with the belief in a sinless mediator,
the necessity of martyrdom, and the divine vengeance brought about by the
nuntius, would later be used by the nascent Christian community to explain the
necessity of Jesus's death. Both Taxo and Jesus are sinless, and their deaths serve as
a trigger for the eschaton; both are intercessors who offer themselves in sacrificial
deaths, and both associate the temple's destruction with innocent suffering and
divine vengeance. The Testament of Moses, once dated to the Herodian period,
provides a valuable, yet largely neglected, source for understanding these NT doctrines
as well as the roles of other intermediary figures during the Second Temple
period.

</text>
