<text id="D05" category="" words="1995" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Honor Thy Father and Thy Mother? Child Marriage and Parental Consent in Calvin's Geneva" Author="John Witte Jr" PublicationDate="October 1st, 2006" SampledFrom="Journal of Religion" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=4&hid=10&sid=0db3faa5-d9cc-4d3a-a856-a67a6012712f%40sessionmgr14">

Marriage, he insisted, depended in its essence on the mutual consent of both the man and the woman.
Absent proof of consent by a fit man and a fit woman who had the
freedom and capacity to marry, there could be no valid marriage. Calvin defended this principle repeatedly in his commentaries and sermons.
"While all contracts ought to be voluntary, freedom ought to
prevail especially in marriage, so that no one may pledge his faith
against his will." "God considers that compulsory and forced marriages
never come to a good end. . . . If the husband and the wife are not
in mutual agreement and do not love each other, this is a profanation
of marriage, and not a marriage at all, properly speaking. For the will
is the principal bond." When a woman wishes to marry, she must thus
not "be thrust into it reluctantly or compelled to marry against her
will, but left to her own free choice." "When a man is going to marry
and he takes a wife, let him take her of his own free will, knowing that
where there is not a true and pure love, there is nothing but disorder,
and one can expect no grace from God."

Also like the medieval canonists, Calvin distinguished between contracts
of engagement and contracts of marriage - or betrothals and espousals
as he called them, following the tradition. Engagements were
future promises to be married. Marriages were present promises to be
married. But, unlike the medieval canonists, Calvin removed the need
for the parties to use specific formulaic words: any clear indication of
a future or present intent to marry would do. He softened the distinction
and shortened the duration between engagements and marriages.
He also insisted that the engagement contract be announced through
public banns in the church and community and registered with the
civil authorities and that the marriage contract be celebrated in a mandatory
church wedding.

The 1546 Marriage Ordinance took pains to ensure the free and full
consent of both parties to the engagement and marriage contracts. It
required that both sets of promises be made "simply" and "honorably
in the fear of God."8 Engagements were to be initiated by "a sober
proposal" from the man, accepted by the woman, and witnessed by at
least two persons of "good reputation."9 Engagements made in secret,
qualified with onerous conditions, or procured by coercion were automatically
annulled - and the couple themselves, and any accomplices
in their wrongdoing, could face punishment. Engagements procured
through trickery or "surprise," or made "frivolously, as when merely
touching glasses when drinking together," could be annulled on petition by either party. Engagement promises extracted by or from children
below the age of consent were presumptively invalid, although
children could confirm them upon reaching majority. Engagements
involving a newcomer to the city were not valid until the parties produced
proof of the newcomer's integrity of character and eligibility for
marriage. Absent such proof, the couple had to wait a year before they
could marry.

Normally, a Genevan couple, once properly betrothed, had little
time to waste. Neither their publicly announced engagement nor the
civil registration of their marriage was sufficient to constitute a marriage.
A formal church wedding had to follow - within six weeks of
engagement. If the couple procrastinated in their wedding plans, they
would be reprimanded by the Consistory; if they persisted, they would
be "sent before the Council so that they may be compelled to celebrate
it."

Not only the mutual consent of the parties but also the consent of
their parents was critical to the validity of an engagement and marriage
contract. Calvin devoted no less than eight of the first ten articles of
his 1546 Marriage Ordinance to the doctrine of parental consent. In
the 1545 draft, Calvin had seemed so eager to maximize the rights of
parental consent that he set the age of majority unusually high: boys
had to be twenty-four, girls, twenty, before they could marry without
seeking their parents' consent. The 1546 Marriage Ordinance lowered
these ages of majority to twenty and eighteen for boys and girls,
respectively. This was closer to the Protestant norm but still a bit high,
and Calvin still advised that even fully emancipated children "always
be governed by the advice of their fathers."
The consent of the father was the most critical. The consent of the
mother controlled only when the father was absent and no other relatives
were present. If other relatives were at hand, the mother's views
had to concur with theirs. In his 1545 draft, Calvin had said that, in
the absence of the father, the mother needed to have the concurrence
only of the "closest and most important" relatives to consent to a marriage.
He dropped this qualification in the 1546 version. Now it read
that the mother's consent would count only if and until she had "con sulted one of the relatives if there are any" - without regard for their
"closeness" or "importance" to the family. In the absence of both parents,
guardians would give their consent to a child's engagement and
marriage, again with priority for the male voice.
The 1546 Marriage Ordinance made clear that this parental consent
was only a supplement to, not a substitute for, the consent of the couple
themselves. Parents were prohibited from coercing their children
into unwanted engagements or withholding their consent or payment
of dowry until the child chose a partner whom they favored. Parents
were further prevented from forcing youngsters into marriage before
they were mature enough to consent to and participate safely in the
institution. Children "observing a modest and reverend spirit" could
refuse to follow their parents' insistence on an unwanted fiance´(e) or
a premature engagement.  Other children, confronting a "negligent
or excessively strict" father, could "have him compelled to give a
dowry" in support of a marriage they contracted in spite of him. 
The main goal of these provisions was to stamp out the medieval
Catholic Church's toleration of what the 1546 Marriage Ordinance
called private or "clandestine promises" (promesse clandestine) - that is,
engagements and marriages contracted without parental consent.
The Ordinance made clear that secret engagement promises were
"void" (nulle). This did not necessarily prevent a secretly engaged couple
from going forward with their plans if they received their parents'
consent after the fact. But, absent this parental consent, if anyone challenged
this engagement because it had been secretly contracted, the
engagement would be annulled regardless of what the couple wished.
The Ordinance was not so clear about the legal status of secret marriage
promises - especially if they had been celebrated, consummated,
and yielded children. The crucial statutory language was in item 3 of
the 1546 Marriage Ordinance. There, Calvin provided: "If it happens
that two young people have contracted marriage by their own action,
through folly or recklessness, let them be punished and chastened and
such a marriage be dissolved at the request of those who have charge
of them." It was clear from this language that children who entered
such secret marriages would be punished. What was not clear was
whether their marriage would be annulled if challenged by their parents.
A plain reading of item 3 suggests that parents could seek annulment
of their children's secretly "contracted marriage." On this reading,
while secret engagements were automatically "void," secret marriages
were voidable. They would be voided only if and when the children's
parents or others "who have charge of them" brought an action of
annulment.

But this reading does not pick up the studied ambiguity in the language
of item 3. First, the opening phrase "two young people" might
well have meant only youngsters who were not only below the age of
majority but also below the age of consent. Read as such, item 3 was
only a statement of the familiar medieval impediment of infancy: that
infants and youth may not enter marriage contracts, and when they
do, their parents or guardians need to have those promises dissolved
or at least postponed until the children reached an age where they
could consent or dissent to them. This was, in fact, how that phrase
came to be read by the Genevan Consistory.

Second, the phrase "contracted marriage" (contracte mariage) could
mean either (1) "contracted to get married in the future" or (2) "had
already entered a marriage contract." If the phrase meant the former,
then item 3 would mean simply that parents had standing to bring an
action to annul their child's secret engagement promise. These standing
rights of the parents were not specified elsewhere in the statute. It
made good sense to stipulate them, particularly since in 1546 when
Calvin was drafting the Ordinance, the Consistory had no other rules
of civil procedure to guide them. Even if the phrase "contracted marriage"
meant the latter (that the children "had already entered a marriage
contract") the matter was still not resolved. For final validity of the marriage turned on whether the couple had celebrated their marriage

in a proper wedding liturgy in the church, not whether they had
entered a marriage contract. In Calvin's Geneva, marriage contracts
without church weddings were not valid - and those contracted secretly
or without ceremonies outside of Geneva would have to be recontracted
and celebrated in Geneva in order to be valid.

Third, the two subsequent phrases of item 3 were also ambiguous.
The phrase "by their own action" (de leur propre mouvement) was separated
by a comma from the next phrase, "through folly or recklessness"
(par follie ou legierte´ ). These two phrases could be read separately. This
reading would allow parents to seek annulment of the pending marriage
either (1) if it was contracted secretly by the couple ("by their
own action") or (2) if the marriage, even if done with the parent's
consent, proved to be "foolish" or "reckless." Alternatively, the two
phrases could be read interdependently - with the second phrase understood
as a qualification of the first. This reading would allow parents
to attack a secret marriage only if it could be shown that the
marriage itself was not only secretly contracted ("by their own action")
but also foolish or recklessly entered. This was not so easy a standard
to meet. Children who married secretly sometimes did so not with recklessness
but with elaborate plans to circumvent their parents. And
many times their marriages, while not necessarily well advised, were
hardly "foolish," especially if they were motivated by a desire to get
away from overbearing, abusive, or bickering parents.

All this close exegesis might seem like silly legal hairsplitting. But
Calvin, the jurist, may well have intended the language of the Ordinance
to be a bit open textured. For, the legal status of parental consent
and secret marriages was a divisive question at the time he was
drafting the Ordinance. The first generation of Protestant reformers
had required parental consent in an effort to counter the late medieval
Catholic practice of tolerating secret engagements and marriages. All
the leading Protestant reformers allowed parents to annul their children's
secret engagements. The question that began to divide Protestants
sharply after 1540 was whether parents could annul their children's
secret marriages, too. Some reformers allowed parents to annul their secret marriages under any circumstances. Some allowed the same, unless the wife was pregnant or already had children. Some favored
continuation of the secret marriage. Some insisted on it. The
new Protestant laws of the day reflected these disparate views. This
issue became even more divisive in the 1540s and 1550s, when Catholics
began accusing Protestants of frivolously dissolving marriages and
foolishly catering to the tyranny of parents through their wooden application
of the doctrine of parental consent.
Calvin's 1546 Marriage Ordinance did not clearly answer the question
of whether parents could seek annulment of their children's secret
marriages. In 1549, Calvin seemed inclined to allow such annulments.
The occasion was Calvin's commentary on the Adultero-German Interim
(1548), a new imperial law designed to establish the emerging
Catholic teachings of the Council of Trent.

</text>
