<text id="D08" category="" words="1994" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="ECUMENICAL MARRIAGE AS LEAVEN FOR CHRISTIAN UNITY. By:  Journal of Ecumenical Studies, Vol. 42, Issue 2" Author="Jason E King" PublicationDate="Spring 2007" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/detail?vid=4&hid=10&sid=bb3d8aae-82b1-4df3-afe9-03dc56f63d51%40sessionmgr15&bdata=JnNpdGU9ZWhvc3QtbGl2ZQ%3d%3d#db=a9h&AN=26098623">

Introduction 

When scholars apply the term "ecumenical" to marriage, they often seem to use it to mean marriages full of discord and division. Ecumenical marriages, however, should be understood as a potential resource for Christian reunion. This essay, which is a revision of the 2005 Lourdes College Ecumenical Lecture, examines how ecumenical marriages might fulfill this role. It begins by investigating how marriages unite people physically, interpersonally, socially, and theologically, all through love. Then, it indicates how these unifying dimensions of marriage can reconcile differing denominations through ecumenical marriages.

The word "ecumenical" comes from the Greek word "oikoumenikos," which literally translates as "to inhabit the house" and meant "encompassing the whole world." In today's usage, the term's meaning has changed from "including the whole" to "trying to make whole." Churches or people are ecumenical because of their attempts to overcome denominational differences. Yet, when scholars employ the term "ecumenical" in reference to marriage, they seem to use it to refer to discord and division. They do not do this by taking up the negative connotations and rancorous language that for so long characterized approaches to ecumenical marriages. In fact, these authors are in general very supportive and affirming of interdenominational marriages. Instead, the approach these scholars take assumes that ecumenical marriages are troubled. Almost every essay or book on the subject focuses on problems ecumenical marriages face.

Some works start by noting that social-science research reveals several difficulties for interchurch couples. These marriages have lower levels of marital satisfaction and church involvement and higher divorce rates than marriages where the partners are of the same religious tradition. The most frequent causes of conflict in these marriages are "lack of companionship and disagreement over children's religious upbringing." To be fair, most authors nuance this research by noting that other factors, such as church attendance and cultural background, might be the real problems, not denominational differences. Even so, they still indicate that both interdenominational couples and the churches that support them should be attentive to these difficulties.

Other scholarship focuses on practical and pastoral issues facing ecumenical marriages, such as the problems of intercommunion and the celebration of the sacraments. Several authors mention the difficulties of raising children in an interdenominational home. Still others address how interchurch couples need to relate both personally and ecclesiastically. Although overwhelmingly positive, the Interchurch Families Journal and the Association of Interchurch Families' Issues--Reflections--News, the former journal's subsequent manifestation, focus primarily on the problems ecumenical marriages face. Hence, the title of the latter publication lists "issues" first.
This approach to ecumenical marriages assumes that they are fundamentally problematic. By starting with a problem or primarily focusing on a problem, the literature seems to reduce these marriages to their conflicts and difficulties. One of the principal results of this approach is the neglect of one of the key positive aspects of ecumenical marriages. Time and time again, scholars claim that these marriages can contribute to Christian unity. These relationships are "called to exercise a prophetic role for our larger church communities"; "contain numerous elements that ...  [contribute] ...  to the ecumenical movement"; function as "sign," "instrument," and "sacrament" of Christian unity; model "communion" for the churches; and witness to the "unity within our churches." These profound and positive statements about ecumenical marriages suffer from scant attention or development. They seem at times to be an afterthought, a nice sentiment to console the problematic marriage. Whereas the literature is not bad or worthless, the current scholarship on ecumenical marriages is weak--not only for focusing primarily on the problems of these unions but also for neglecting a potentially significant source for Christian reconciliation.
If the positive statements about ecumenical marriages were to be accepted as true and "ecumenical" in the modern sense of "bringing Christians together," the approach to these marriages would change. Although the difficulties that arise in marriages with differing religious traditions and the desperate need for pastoral sensitivity and assistance in these circumstances should not be dismissed, they should not be the fundamental lens through which to understand ecumenical marriages. Ecumenical-marriage rates hover around forty percent for Christians in general, thirty-six percent for Catholics, and twenty-eight percent for active Catholics (those who attend church regularly).To approach these numerous marriages as being primarily problematic misses the true problem: Christians are divided. As Fr. Thomas Ryan, the director of the Paulist North American Office for Ecumenical and Interfaith Relations, has written: "We are quick to forget though that this anomaly [ecumenical marriage] only arises on account of a prior and greater one: the division between churches. These couples have not asked to have the historical divisions of the churches laid on them as they try to live an experience of unity and communion of life in their marriage, but that is what the churches bequeath them."

The reality is that it is not ecumenical marriages that are the origin of division but the churches, and the churches must work to heal the discord. Hence, ecumenical marriages need to be approached differently, both for the sake of the marriages and for the sake of the churches. Ecumenical marriage should be understood as being "witness," "sacrament," and "instrument" of ecclesial reconciliation. The lack of attention to these ideas has both fostered a negative approach to ecumenical marriages and left untapped a great resource for Christian reunion.
This essay examines this potential for ecumenical marriages in two steps. First, it investigates the unifying dimension of marriages in general. Marriages unite people physically, interpersonally, socially, and theologically, all through the impetus of love. Pair these dimensions with the early Christian understanding of marriage as a domestic church --the smallest manifestation of the church, and one has an example of a church uniting and a vision of a united church. Second, this essay then indicates how these unifying dimensions of marriage can reconcile differing denominations through ecumenical marriages. In doing so, a truly positive approach to ecumenical marriages is offered.

Marriage 

What makes marriage work and makes two become one involves a number of factors. First of all, marriage must be rooted in love. This includes the initial falling in love and the romantic moments during the honeymoon year and periodically throughout the rest of the marriage. This love opens up the lover to the world of the beloved and vice versa. The spouses' values, understanding of the world, cares, and concerns are all transformed as their horizons start to intermingle and shape one another. However, this romantic love (what the ancient Greeks called "eros") is not permanent but waxes and wanes. Marriages are hard work. While romance gets a couple started and rejuvenates them from time to time, it cannot sustain a marriage. The instability of romance cannot provide the stable foundation needed for the permanence of marriage.

Marriage needs an additional love, one based on the will, a love that habitually chooses what is good, a love that the early Christians called "agape" and medieval Christians called charity. This kind of love grounds the interactions of the couple in a mutual disposition to do what is truly good for each other. This disposition persists in the midst of disagreements and arguments, when the relationship is going well and when it is struggling, and when one, both, or neither party is in good health. Together, romantic love and agape unify couples by disposing them more and more to do what is right for each other, even when they feel otherwise. The concern of one becomes the concern of both.

This latter love takes the mutuality initiated by romantic love and transforms it by orienting it toward what is good and cementing it in the couple's daily actions. Yet, the habit of perpetually considering the spouse can develop a habit of perpetually considering the thoughts of others. If the spouses can do this well in their marital relationships, they have the basic skills to do it well in their parental and neighborly relationships and with strangers and even enemies. Hence, the unity achieved by a perfect marital love is one that not only unites the couple in common understandings and values but also has the potential to unite the couple with other people.
This love is the foundation. It is the impetus that unites couples. Far from abstractly, however, it unites people concretely through all the various aspects of their relationship. First, it unites them physically. Often, sex as an expression of love is understood as the principle of physical unity. It unites people through their bodies. The Catholic Church even goes as far as maintaining that sex is an inherently unitive act. Sex, though, is not the only means (or perhaps even the primary means)of physical unity. If directed by love, the reality of physically living together is a powerful unifying force. The sharing of a bed, a bathroom, a home, childcare, meals, and all the daily, routine tasks and rituals almost intrinsically unite a couple. Aristotle believed that genuine friends needed to live together in order truly to share the same virtues. Only then would each friend become the "another self" that Aristotle thought friends should be. If this power of domesticity is true for friendship, then it is also true for marriage. The reality and power of actually living together, especially if it is directed by love, is a potent, physically unifying force.

Second, love also unites people through their interpersonal relationships. It moves couples to learn how to communicate with each other. Spouses need to learn how to negotiate the demands of living together in a household, of being parents, grandparents, and aunts and uncles. Each must learn what he or she values and how to discuss the inevitable differences between each other's values. The spouses must learn to address each other's pasts, both the successes and the failures. These interactions must be done in a way that genuinely seeks the good of the other and the good of the marriage. In other words, genuine communication must be directed by love, and, if it is, then the communication leads to union. Hence, it should not be a surprise that the word "communication" comes from the Latin word "communis," which means "mutual participation," and that this word is also the root of "communion," which Christians have used for fellowship among Christians and, by applying the word to the Lord's Supper, fellowship with God.

Third, because love is never restricted to the physical or interpersonal, it also brings a social dimension to marriage. It is almost banal to note the negative effects contemporary society has on marriages; divorce, infidelity, domestic violence, consumerism, and gender inequality are but a few issues. Although not determinative, sociological factors can make good marriages more difficult to maintain. However, the influence can go both ways. Couples can contribute to the well-being of society. Spouses can work at jobs that help improve the quality of society. Teachers do this, as do lawyers, doctors, social workers, businesspeople, nurses, and economists. Moreover, spouses can contribute to society by the care of their children. Establishing a stable and loving environment for children provides the best opportunity for the children to do well in school, sports, and relationships--and thus to do well in the world. These changes not only make the culture better and more peaceful but also make it an environment that is more supportive of marriage and families. The key is to realize that a marriage rooted in genuine love not only transforms the couples but also transforms children, neighbors, strangers, enemies, and societies. In and through these transformations, the couple is not only united but also creates an environment that is more conducive to being united.

Finally, love unites people theologically. The religious dimensions of family can be divisive or unifying. Beliefs about the nature of the world, human beings, and the meaning of life affect decisions, actions, understandings, and the way people can and cannot relate. If a couple is rooted in love, the couple is moved to address these differences and reconcile them.

</text>
