<text id="D10" category="" words="2007" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Secrecy and display in the quest for transcendence in China, CA. 220 BCE - 350 CE. History of Religions 45:4 291-336" Author="Robert Ford Campany" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/pdfplus/10.1086/507857">

SECRECY AND DISPLAY IN THE QUEST FOR TRANSCENDENCE IN CHINA, CA. 220 BCE - 350 CE

There is something about a secret which makes people believe.
(Graham Greene,Our Man in Havana )
In ancient, medieval, and early modern times, esoteric religious traditions
were developed in several civilizations. They represented paths of salvation,
often including alchemical and alimentary disciplines and some sort
of claim to personal immortality, which were transmitted in secret texts
from masters to initiated disciples and were at least partially defined in
contrast to the sacrificial cults of mainstream society. One thinks of the
mysteries of Eleusis and Dionysus, of the various so-called Gnostic texts
and movements, and of the Hermetic path in the Mediterranean world; of
Manichaeism, which once flourished from western Europe and along the
Silk Road all the way into China; of the "books of secrets" of medieval
and Renaissance Europe and the communities of practitioners who made
and transmitted them; and of the siddha traditions of India.

In addition to these complex regimes of salvation, with their intricate mythologies
and cosmologies and their elaborate biospiritual technologies, bodies of
"practically religious" techniques were developed for the pursuit of more
proximate, if no less urgent, felicities; these esoteric procedures, often
rather grossly and unsatisfactorily labeled "magic" or "the occult" in
modern writings, were also claimed to be derived from hidden sources,
their dissemination - however widespread - at least initially controlled by
initiates. Whatever their stated goals and methods, all of these esoteric
traditions, practices, and texts share two essential features: they were constituted
(by both insiders and outsiders) as being in tension with other religious
and cultural currents often seen as predominant and public, and
access to them was restricted, if only by the crucial claim that they
stemmed from secret sources not publicly accessible. A gulf separates
these cultures of secrecy, wherein knowledge was deemed powerful because
access to it was restricted and access to it was restricted because it
was deemed powerful, from those styles of culture Steven Shapin and
Peter Burke have recently argued arose only in early modern times (in
Europe at least), wherein truth-telling and the art of civil conversation
among gentlemen with no reason to misrepresent things formed the basis
of a new epistemological decorum, and wherein lying and secrecy came
to be seen as violations of a code of honor.

Sporadically for a century now, scholars beginning with Georg Simmel
have attempted a "sociology of secrecy" or "sociology of esoteric culture"
3
 - an enterprise perhaps possible only in a historical period when
secrecy has come to seem unusual. To quote one of the most useful contributions
to this literature, "a crucial aspect of esoteric knowledge is that
it is a secret knowledge of the reality of things, handed down, frequently
orally and not all at once, to a relatively small number of persons who are
typically ritually initiated by those already holding this knowledge." In progressively
realizing this knowledge, "the subject develops internally and
liberates himself from the strictures of everyday life." Because this knowledge
is of "the real but concealed nature of things," its recipients must
prove themselves worthy to receive it, so we often find "a series of trials
and ordeals, in the course of which the adept becomes increasingly socialized
into the esoteric culture and increasingly desocialized from the natural
attitude of the exoteric culture." Since esoteric knowledge must be concealed
from public dissemination, it is often "presented to the adept not
directly but . . . symbolically or metaphorically, so that it has to be deciphered
progressively by the neophyte who uncovers layers of meaning
in stages of initiation." Correspondingly, "the social organization and
handling of esoteric culture tends to take the form of secret societies, societies
whose modes and codes of organization and membership lists are
not publicly disclosed." Finally, "since [esoteric] secrets are those that
reveal the ultimate nature of reality, the concealed forces of the cosmic
order, . . . esoteric knowledge is an ultimate source of power, which must
be shared and utilized by a relatively small group of initiates. Such power
is never justifiable in terms of the enhancement of the material conditions
of the esoteric knowers but rather in terms of broad impersonal ends [or]
humanitarian ideals." At first blush, this list of general features seems to fit the masters of esoterica
(fangshi) and practitioners of longevity and transcendence arts
in late classical and early medieval China, with two adjustments. The first
necessary adjustment is that the most "social organization" such practitioners
ever achieved was the formation of loose (and often only fictively
and retrospectively constructed) lineages of the transmission of texts and
techniques. There were no exclusive brotherhoods of practitioners, no
schools or cross-lineage organizations, and no secret societies, only masters with (usually) small clusters of disciples who were free and often
encouraged by their teachers to seek esoteric knowledge elsewhere as
well.

The second adjustment is that the Chinese practitioners of this period
rarely appealed to "broad impersonal ends" or "humanitarian ideals"
to justify their practices. Accordingly, we should be alert to the possibility
that, in the sorts of cases on which this stipulation of Tiryakian's is based,
such professions may have as much to do with self-justifying ideology as
with "humanitarian" concern.

However, in what follows I want to suggest a more fundamental revision
to this sociology of secrecy. To do so I will draw on recent work
by scholars such as Beryl Bellman, Lamont Lindstrom, and Hugh B. Urban
that approaches secrecy as a cluster of forms of discourse rather than as
a type of content, and that approaches discourses of secrecy as strategies
for accumulating a type of cultural capital, to invoke the language of Pierre
Bourdieu.

More specifically, the following article is, in part, an elaboration
on one particular strategy briefly characterized by Urban as "advertising
the secret" - that is, "the claim to possess very precious, rare, and
valuable knowledge, while simultaneously partially revealing and largely
concealing it. For a secret is only worth anything if someone knows you
have a secret."

I will argue a proposition about the practice and practitioners of esoteric
arts in China up until roughly 350 CE, one that may apply equally to esoteric
traditions in other societies (a possibility I leave for future exploration).
That proposition, which will be filled in more clearly below, may for
now be summarized as follows. In China, at least, there was a basic tension
between hidden arts and observed wonders, between reclusion and recognition,
and these two opposing tendencies implied and reinforced each
other; to describe the tendency to secrecy without describing the other
member of the dyad is to paint an incomplete picture. At least if we understand
power and prestige in social terms, for initiated practitioners to
have accrued any power or prestige from their possession of secretly
transmitted arts, it was necessary that the impressive effects of those arts
be shown to the uninitiated. And, as I will demonstrate, they were indeed
shown, massively, publicly, to people of all social levels - and especially
to the elite. For prestige to accrue, it was necessary also that practitioners of such arts be recognized by others as practitioners, whether or not they flaunted their abilities; as we will see, some are remembered for performing wonders, others for refusing to do so, but to the extent that individual
practitioners are textually remembered as practitioners at all, we can be
sure that they were recognized as practitioners by audiences and that this
recognition was inscribed in works of collective memory. In short, the
detailed methods of the esoteric arts and the texts in which they were
transmitted remained hidden, in principle if not always in practice, from
public view, but the wondrous effects of these arts and the reputations of
those who wielded them were socially displayed, socially sought after and
supported, socially discussed, and socially consumed. I will suggest that
secrecy both implied and stoked outsiders' interest; the existence of esoteric
knowledge was rarely a secret; neither the identities of its possessors
nor the special powers it afforded these persons were typically secret. Only
the contents of the knowledge (or even, in some cases, only a small but
key proportion of the contents) were secret. I will argue that this "simultaneous
proclamation and concealment," to borrow Frank Kermode's fine
characterization of the Gospel of Mark, was fundamental to constituting
the "master of esoterica" or "seeker of transcendence" as social roles, and
that, as in Mark, much depended on the recognition of adepts by others
and on the interpretation of their strange words and behaviors.

I begin, in the first section below, by charting the textual portrayal of
secrecy among practitioners of esoteric arts in China. This charting will
then lead us naturally to notice, in the second section, practitioners' habit
of displaying their secretly transmitted abilities. A concluding section
highlights the tension and co-implicative feedback relationship between
these opposing habits.

The culture of esotericism

A history of secrecy in early Chinese cul ture might begin with chapter 65
of the received Daode jing ("Of old those who excelled in the
pursuit of the way did not use it to enlighten the people but to hoodwink
them"), proceed to early "allegorical" and other understandings of the Book of Odes
as indirect or veiled speech, continue to the notion that Confucius hid his teachings in indirect sayings and historical passages that required decoding by interpreters, treat the role of deception and secrecy
in rhetorical and military strategy, and alight on the strange hermeneutic
applied to what had by then become the canonical works of the imperium
in the Han weft texts (of which we are in desperate need of renewed
study) - a hermeneutic that assumed and implied the classics spoke in
code. Such a history has yet to be written. When it is, it should weigh the implications
of these facts: that books in general during this entire period - 
existing only in laboriously copied manuscripts, of course - were rare,
treasured commodities, in many cases not available at all to private readers
but rather locked up inside royal libraries; that even such (to us at least)
apparently nonesoteric books as the texts of the ancient philosophers, including
the Zhuangzi, were held in secret, a practice motivated or at least
justified by the fear of the texts' dangerous effects on readers; and that
there were no bookshops before the first century CE.

As Donald Harper has observed, "Notions of secrecy fueled Han bibliophilia in general; books were regarded as objects of power. In this environment the concern
that books might be misused by the 'wrong person' and the desire to
possess them were equally matched. Specialists [that is, practitioners of
esoteric arts] and elite collectors [of books] . . . shared this mentality."

Books of esoterica, of course, were hedged about with even more
secrecy, expressed and enacted in several ways. The first of these was
nomenclature. The key generic term used to denote esoteric arts, texts,
and practitioners - fang, literally "recipes" or "methods" - itself already
implies specialization and limited access, heightened by its occasional
pairing with modifiers such as mi, " secret," and jin, "prohibited." More fundamentally, these books' contents and typical rhetorical forms created an aura of remote origins. In other words, many esoteric texts were written in ways that created a palpable sense of their own inaccessibility, rarity, and hence, extreme value and sacred power. self-esotericizing texts

Divine revelation and extreme antiquity are two types of remote origin
commonly claimed by esoteric texts for themselves, often simultaneously.
One of the rhetorically simplest ways in which such origins were claimed
was to frame the text as a dialogue between beings widely recognized
as divine, ancient, or both. Two of the medical manuscripts found at
Mawangdui, for example, share this structure. The text titled "Ten Questions"
(Shiwen) presents itself as the record of dialogues between
various ancient figures, notably including the Yellow Thearch and
Yu, who are cast as disciples, and more authoritative and in some cases
transcendent figures, including the likes of the Celestial Teacher,
Rong Chen, and Ancestor Peng.

</text>
