<text id="D12" category="" words="2025" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Between the Lines: Exceeding Historicism in the Study of Religion. Journal of the American Academy of Religion September 2006, Vol. 74, No. 3, pp. 697 - 719." Author="Tyler Roberts" PublicationDate="September 1st, 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=4&hid=10&sid=8df93ef9-55d5-4fbe-9411-b0e1f3c8be31%40sessionmgr13">

The point, I should stress, is not to reject historicism but to identify its
limits. To do this, and to consider the consequences of this delimitation for
the study of religion, I attend here to recent developments in psychoanalytic
theory, particularly in the work of Zizek and Eric Santner. Zizek, while
noting the importance of historicist critiques of "'false' eternalization
and/or universalization," faults Marxist historicisms and their correlative
theories of ideology by arguing that the "most cunning ideological procedure
[is the] very opposite of eternalization: an over-rapid historicization"
(1994b: 327). This "precipitate historicization" (Zizek 1999: 72), he
argues, is ideological because it represses the fundamental trauma at the
heart of every human. In other words, for Lacanians such as Zizek and
Copjec historicism masks a groundlessness of society and self that
takes form in each person as "a surplus existence that cannot be caught
up in the positivity of the social" (Copjec 1994: 4). This "excess" of the subject is particularly evident in hysteria, which, as Copjec notes, "is conceived
by psychoanalysis as a challenge to the subject's social identity:
hysteria is the first analyzed instance of the subject's essential division, its
questioning and refusal of social dictates" (1994: 51). This is an essential
division between the socially dictated self and something "in excess" - 
Copjec's "surplus existence" or what Santner calls a "constitutive toomuchness"
of the psyche. These thinkers do not conceive this "too
muchness" as a core self that exists prior to socialization but as something
that comes to be in the production of the social self. Yet they do
conceive it as a key to breaking the grip of ideology, of the way sociolinguistic
structures and webs of meaning (what Lacan calls the "symbolic")
make possible our recognition of ourselves and thus construct us as subjects.
To describe this process, Santner borrows the term interpellation
from Althusser and Lacan. The question, then, is whether we can think
subjectivity beyond "interpellation," a subject that emerges, as Mladan
Dolar puts it, "where ideology fails."

In The Future of Theory, Jean-Michel Rabate suggests that we think
theory and critique through the lens of hysteria. For Lacan, as Rabate notes,
hysteria is not just a clinical condition but also "gives birth to a discourse
and maintains a quest for truth that always aims at pointing out the inadequacies
of official, serious, and 'masterful' knowledge" (Rabate 2002: 9).
For Zizek, ignoring these limits amounts to a form of "perversion" (1999:
247). Contrasting the discourse of the hysteric with the discourse of the
pervert, he notes that where the former obsessively questions, not knowing
what the other wants, the pervert speaks from a position that knows
and refuses to question. To hystericize the subject, then, is to free it from
the "closed loop of perversion" (Zizek 1999: 248). Historicism, I suggest,
as it is currently practiced in the study of religion, is caught in such a
closed loop insofar as it claims to know that "there is no release from this
historical," that our discourses are never interrupted even by traces of
something else, or, at the very least, that even if there is something more,
academic discourse has no business talking about it. This methodological
historicism has dramatic consequences for what it means to study religion
critically, for it produces a view of critique that is self-confirming
and, because it finds its terminus in the explanation of religion as "social
formation," it provides no resources for thinking about what we do with such explanation, with how we might use it. Taking this cue, I view my
work here as an effort to hystericize the study of religion, to traumatize
historicism in a way that, as Tomoko Masuzawa puts it, brings us
face to face with the ultimately hallucinatory status of the conceptual
devices which we use to manage and distance the past/other from
present/us - those devices in [Walter] Benjamin's own words, that
enable 'historicism' to turn the past into an indolent tale told by stringing
a sequence of events 'like the beads of a rosary' ". (Masuzawa 1993:
33)

One alternative to such uncritical historicism takes the form of Eric
Santner's "psychotheology of everyday life." Like Zizek and Copjec, Santner
distinguishes the "subject," as excess, from a socially constructed "identity."
But because he finds resources for this view not only in psychoanalysis
but also in the Jewish thought of Franz Rosenzweig, Santner is particularly
attuned to some of the implications of these views of ideology and
subjectivity for contemporary religious thought and the study of religion.
His "psychotheology" therefore might seem, especially from the perspective
of historicist scholars of religion, to bring us back to a situation where
religion and its study are "confused, conflated, confounded." In a way, it
does. But such a blurring of boundaries can contribute in a positive fashion
to a more self-conscious and theoretically rich vision of the study of religion.

PART II: THE REAL AS THE LIMIT OF HISTORICISM

As a Marxist and a materialist, Zizek believes that historicist analysis
is absolutely central to critical thought and radical politics. But historicism
that fails to recognize its own limits is "false despite the obvious
moment of truth it contains" (Zizek 2001a: 2), because it ignores the
excess of subjectivity by reducing human beings to the flat positivity of
the historical and social. Today, scholars of religion tend to defend such
moves by distinguishing between "metaphysical" and "methodological"
reductionism. The former, which such scholars eschew, takes the position
that human beings are - really, ultimately - only a function of their
social relations. The latter, by contrast, purports to make no final truth  claims about what human beings really are but employs historicist analysis
to examine the social and historical networks out of which human phenomena
emerge. This distinction can be useful in some contexts, but it
has its limits. Zizek marks these limits with his criticisms of Cultural
Studies, which, he says, is characterized by exclusive focus on histories of
discursive formations and a correlative "cognitive suspension," a refusal
to engage in questions about the "inherent 'truth-value' " of theories. The
problem with such historicism, he argues, is "that it continues to rely on
a set of silent (nonthematized) ontological and epistemological presuppositions
on the nature of human knowledge and reality" (Butler et al.
2000: 231). He acknowledges, though, that voicing these presuppositions
puts the theorist in a difficult position. How do we avoid, on the one hand,
the naïve appeal to social and historical "facts" that makes precipitate
historicism basically a variant of positivism or empiricism, and, on the
other hand, a full-blown metaphysics that denies or ignores the historical
overdetermination of all claims about "reality"?

Zizek's answer to this problem - perhaps surprising to those familiar
with his criticisms of Derrida - is to appeal to deconstruction "at its best"
(Butler et al. 2000: 231). For Zizek, deconstruction refuses the option of
naïve empiricism or metaphysical "theories of everything" by admitting
to being caught inbetween them: "true, it is impossible to adopt a philosophical
stance which is free of the constraints of everyday naïve lifeworld
attitudes and notions; however, although it is impossible, this philosophical
stance is simultaneously unavoidable" (Zizek 2000: 232). An "impossible"
discourse, then, deconstruction "oscillates" between historicist-type
analysis of philosophical and literary texts and "quasi-transcendental"
assertions about the role of "difference." In the context of such an oscillation
such assertions are not simply leaps of faith, made in the face of the
reality of historical specificity and location. Rather, they are attempts to
take such reality seriously by ontologizing it - ontologizing, that is, our
inability coherently to ontologize. As Zizek puts it, "the very feature which
forever prevents us from grasping our intended object (the fact that our
grasping is always refracted, 'mediated,' by a decentered otherness) is the
feature which connects us with the basic proto-ontological structure of
the universe" (2000: 232).

Let me explore this "proto-ontology" in a bit more detail. Zizek states
that "the fact that we cannot ever 'fully know' reality is not a sign of the
limitation of our knowledge, but the sign that reality itself is 'incomplete,'
open, an actualization of the underlying virtual process of becoming"
(Schwartz 2004: ix). Hence, his proto-ontology focuses on a process rather
than a structure of being because, he claims, there is no "ontologically fullyconstituted
cosmos" (Zizek 2001b: 174). This is, as Zizek frequently reminds us, a Hegelian approach to ontology, albeit one that radically rethinks received notions of Hegelian teleology usually suggested by the idea of
"absolute knowledge" (1999: 84-6). Like Kant, Zizek will affirm that what
we can know is limited to phenomena constituted in and through our
knowing activity but, against Kant and with Hegel, Zizek argues that this
does not leave us with a distinction between reality as we are able to grasp
it and "external" reality "in itself." The properly Hegelian move, according
to Zizek, is to reject the contrast between our finite conceptual capacities
and the "hard kernel" of reality and to conceive the limits of our
knowledge as inherent to the "symbolic" order (again, the Lacanian term
for the realm of language and discourse by which human beings represent
and grasp "reality"). Hegel's "absolute," from this point of view, is
not something "above and beyond the domain of our finite reflected reasoning"
but is "nothing but the movement of self-sublation of these finite
determinations" (Zizek 1999: 84). In short, Zizek moves from a "reality"
posited as external to and underlying our diverse, historically specific representations
of reality, to the Lacanian "Real" understood as the gap
between different "finite determinations." "Multiple perspectival inconsistencies
between phenomena are not an effect of the impact of the
transcendent [Real] - on the contrary, the [Real] is nothing but the
ontologization of the inconsistency between phenomena" (Zizek 2004: 167).

In sum, the short answer to the question of the limits of historicism
is, for Zizek, the "Real" - the "a priori of historicity itself" (Butler et al.
2000: 310). The longer answer brings us back to deconstruction, specifically
to what I will call Zizek's "deconstructive materialism." Historicist
reductionism, as we generally find it in cultural studies and in the study
of religion today, is basically a form of materialism, holding that human
beings and their practices, ideas, and social relations are caused by historically
specific material forces. But this stance is -  - as Zizek reminds us and
as all good historicists will concur -  - like all human efforts to conceptualize
and articulate the nature of things, thoroughly embedded in language
and history. That is, the conceptualization of the relation between the
material and the ideal is itself ideal: it depends on those processes of identification
and differentiation that constitute the ideal, or, more generally,
the Lacanian "symbolic" in the first place. So all materialisms entail claims made from within the symbolic about that which is external to the symbolic.
And to the extent that any given materialism does not acknowledge
this limit it is, Zizek notes, again in good historicist fashion, "obscurantist."
That is, it mystifies the relation between thought and "reality" by
ignoring the fact that the very distinction between the ideal and the material
(or the symbolic and the real) is, as Zizek put is it, the "symbolic gesture
par excellence" (2003: 69).
Zizek's own materialism acknowledges these limits in deconstructive
fashion because it makes the basic materialist move of reversing the privilege
assigned to the ideal only as it also disrupts the binary opposition
between the ideal and the material.8 Thus he rejects the equivalence
between "materiality" and the so-called external reality understood as an
ontologically complete set of discrete entities - things in themselves - 
that cause our ideal representations of reality. Instead, Zizek conceives
"materiality" as the "Real," as an "ex-timate remainder" within the symbolic
yet always also resisting it. The Real is the internal limit or "failure"
of the symbolic, "an impenetrable/dense stain within the 'ideal' sphere of
psychic life itself" (Butler et al. 2000: 118 - 120). It is, in other words,
within the symbolic but in the modality of being in excess of it. Or, we
might say, Zizek's fundamental ontological category is the Real as excess,
as something neither simply internal nor external to the symbolic, neither,
as I will discuss below, simply in or out of history.

</text>
