<text id="D14" category="" words="2012" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Ghost Dances and Identity Prophetic Religion and American Indian Ethnogenesis in the Nineteenth Century. University of California Press." Author="Gregory E. Smoak" PublicationDate="2008" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.ucpress.edu/content/chapters/9783.ch01.pdf">

In Wyeth's scheme, Snakes, Diggers, and Pawnacks could at times be
found in the same vicinity, often, indeed, visiting and traveling together.
Moreover, both Snakes and Diggers were fishing people. The Diggers,
however, were found in small, scattered encampments rather than at the
major fisheries. Taken together, early accounts, such as Ross's and
Wyeth's, and modern ethnographic resources suggest the general social
and economic divisions apparent in the Newe world by the fur-trade era.
To borrow Wyeth's nomenclature, the Snakes were the large Shoshonean
populations along the middle and lower Snake. They owned horses and
periodically joined in the buffalo hunt, but mostly they were fishing people
who lived in relatively sedentary villages among the greatest fisheries
in all the Newe country, Sehewooki' and Salmon Falls. The Diggers were
the multitude of small, foot-going Newe groups and family clusters that
continued to pursue a mixed subsistence strategy in more marginal environments
north and south of the Snake River. Finally, the Pawnacks were
most likely the mixed buffalo-hunting bands of the upper Snake River
Plain, who in their annual cycle regularly visited and fished with their
downstream friends and kin.

Despite such visible distinctions, these peoples were not separate
tribes. They maintained close ties with one another, and indeed all were
part of the greater "Snake Nation." That interrelationship was evident
during McKenzie's winter encampment with the Newes near Bear Lake
in 1819. People from all three Newe divisions were in a camp that reputedly
stretched for seven miles. Taking advantage of the opportunity,
McKenzie sought to negotiate peace between the Newes and the Nez
Percés, his two principal trading partners, who were so often in conflict.
The Sherry-dikas dominated both the camp and the council. Along with
the War-are-ree-kas, they spoke in favor of peace and blamed the Ban-attees
for attacks on both the Nez Percés and the whites. The latter people
were eventually brought over to the council and told they must be good,
and the "poor, trembling . . . Ban-at-tees" agreed. None of these groups
represented a separate tribe, but it is also evident that there was an unequal
power relationship at work. This might have been due to the location
of the Bear Lake encampment within the Sherry-dikas' tebíwa, or
homeland. It is also possible that because the Sherry-dikas had developed
a greater band organization and their leaders spoke for more people.
Finally, because they often traveled with the mounted groups and relied
upon them for protection, the trappers generally looked upon the equestrian
people as dominant and ascribed greater power to them.
The principal reason for the greater organization found among the
mounted groups, and for their seemingly dominant status in the Newe
world, was the continuing Blackfoot War. The demands of traveling and
hunting in dangerous territory placed a premium on greater social integration
among the mounted buffalo hunters of the upper Snake River
Plain, who lived closest to the threat. By the 1820s, Blackfoot war parties
regularly ventured deep into the heart of the Snake River country, as far
west as the Great Camas Prairie; and the equestrian Newes, with long
experience in warfare, most often battled the intruders. The men who led
the fur brigades knew the danger well. In 1824, Ross feared the
"Blackfeet and Piegan war roads [that] were everywhere in our way."
But he was lucky and encountered only two sizable Blackfeet camps,
both of which professed peaceful intentions. Ross's successor, John
Work, cautiously tried to keep the Newes between his party and the
Blackfeet. In September 1830, when he learned that the "great Snake
camp" had already left for the buffalo hunt, Work wrote, "This is of
advantage to us as they will be before us and amuse the Blackfeet." Work
spent the harsh winter that followed near the future site of Fort Hall,
constantly fretting over the Blackfeet and noting the passage of Newe
bands downstream, which left his brigade exposed to attack.
The Blackfeet may have been the terrors of the upper Snake River
Plain, but they were not always successful in the brutal fighting. John
Kirk Townsend, a naturalist who accompanied Wyeth's second expedition,
recounted an intense battle on the upper reaches of the Big Lost
River in August 1834. Caught on foot on the open plain, "the Blackfeet
were run down with horses, and, without being able to load their guns,
were trampled to death, or killed with salmon spears and axes." These
unfortunate Blackfeet were probably a horse-raiding party intercepted
short of their goal. Still, the Blackfoot risk had grown so great that formerly
safe havens, such as the Lemhi and Salmon valleys, had become
dangerous "war roads."

One of the consequences of the Blackfoot presence, then, was everlarger
social amalgamations. These were evident as early as 1805, when
the Lemhi Valley Newe joined forces with the Salish to hunt in the Three
Forks country. By the summer of 1819, when McKenzie's Northwest
Company brigade fell in with a "friendly band of Snakes" as they traveled
east along the Snake River, large defensive groups were necessary
even in the heart of Newe country. The fur brigades that worked the
northern Rockies commonly traveled with Nez Percé and Salish allies,
but they also sometimes joined forces with the Newes. The group camping
with McKenzie engaged the Blackfeet in a "severe battle" somewhere
on the middle Snake Plain, and when the victorious Newes returned,
Snakes appeared from every direction to join in a raucous celebration.
Ross wrote: "They came in crowds from their hiding places and joining
the victorious party in their scalp dancing and scalp singing, formed a
host of at least five or six thousand. Their huts, their tents altogether
resembled a city in an uproar, and their scattered fires exhibited rather an
awful spectacle." Although the Newe numbers were probably exaggerated,
the reference to both huts and tents suggests the presence of both
foot-going and mounted Newe, as does the suggestion of more timid
Newes emerging from hiding places. It was late summer, and McKenzie's
party was undoubtedly in the company of mounted Newes returning to
the upper Snake River Plain after their annual trip to the fisheries of the
middle and lower Snake. The foot-going people were at a decided disadvantage in warfare, and the mounted groups exhibited an increasing
Plains influence, including the warrior complex. Indeed, Ross reported
that the more sedentary fishing groups suffered most at the hands of the
Blackfeet, while the mounted buffalo hunters held their own in combat.
Notwithstanding their differences, all of these groups were of the same
"nation," and they came together in large groups first and foremost for
defense
With larger social groups came important shifts in the power of Newe
headmen. Bands formed around successful leaders of important cooperative
endeavors. Liljeblad referred to these leaders as "bosses," although
"talkers" is probably more accurate. For instance, the baingwi-dai'-
gwahni' directed cooperative labor at the fisheries. The dai'gwahni' was
literally "someone who coordinates or conducts a service for the people."
He was an orator and mediator who smoothed over difficulties
among his own people and with other bands. The dai'gwahnee'
increased in importance as the mounted bands traveled ever farther to
access the buffalo. The "band chiefs" whom European Americans
encountered sprang from this political tradition. First and foremost, they
had to be successful leaders of subsistence endeavors. Second, as the
Blackfeet onslaught continued, larger groups coalesced around proven
war leaders. Often these men possessed supernatural sanction for their
abilities. Finally, by the mid - nineteenth century, the ability to act as
effective intermediaries with European Americans became preeminent.
Thus, the dai'gwahnee', men already skilled as intermediaries, most often
emerged as the "chiefs." Among the buffalo-hunting bands, the dai'-
gwahnee' who spoke for the largest groups often fulfilled this role. The
most successful band leaders balanced the needs and desires of their people
against the demands of white society and, most important, negotiated
their people's access to the land and its resources
Still, the power of these leaders should not be overstated. In such a
fluid social world, political leadership developed on grounds that European
Americans could hardly fathom. Newe headmen lacked the coercive
power that white observers were accustomed to in leaders. Individual
choice rather than stable allegiance marked Newe politics, and only
the most capable leaders retained a following. In 1805 Meriwether Lewis
wrote: "Each individual is his own sovereign master . . . the authority of
the Cheif [sic] being nothing more than mere admonition supported by
the influence which the propriety of his own exemplary conduct may
have acquired him in the minds of the individuals who compose the
band. . . . In fact every man is a chief, but all have not an equal influence
on the minds of the other members of the community, and he who happens
to enjoy the greatest share of confidence is the principal Chief."
During McKenzie's peace council in the winter of 1819, the combined
Snakes were led by two brothers, Pee-eye-em and Ama-qui-em, who,
according to Alexander Ross, exercised remarkable control over their
people. Perhaps their size had something to do with their power. Both
men were of great stature, with Pee-eye-em reported to be much larger
than the 312-pound McKenzie! But, clearly, their authority stemmed
from their roles as successful dai'gwahnee'. Ross wrote: "Trade was no
sooner over than Ama-qui-em mounted one of his horses, rode around
and round the camp, and that itself was almost the work of a day, now
and then making a halt to harangue the Indians, remind them of the
peace, their behavior towards the whites, and to prepare them for raising
the camp.
In 1848 Nathaniel Wyeth remarked on the Newes' "almost entire
absence of social organization," except at "salmon time" and during the
buffalo hunt, when "some person called a chief usually opens a trade or
talk, and occasionally gives directions." Wyeth's original journal entries
presented an image of greater respect and influence but still suggested
that ability could only draw followers, not compel them. Writing of the
great fishery at Salmon Falls and the Newe leader in charge, he recorded:
"This chief is a good sized man and very intelligent and the President
would do well if he could preserve the respect of his subjects as well or
maintain as much dignity."

The most famous Newe headman of the fur trade era, the Horn Chief,
embodied all of the talents and characteristics necessary for effective
leadership. The Horn Chief's role as dai'gwahni' was intertwined with
his ability as a war leader. Living close to the buffalo herds on the upper
Snake River Plain meant living in constant conflict with the Blackfeet.
The Horn Chief, whom white fur hunters considered the "principal chief
of the Snakes," was one of the most influential leaders because of his
bold and successful tactics. Once, the story was told, while traveling
alone across the open plain and armed only with a spear, he happened on
a Blackfoot war party. Rather than flee, he charged into the enemy and
killed six in hand-to-hand combat. "He always rushed headlong upon his
enemies without fear of death," wrote the trapper Warren Angus Ferris,
"and rendered himself so terrible . . . that his presence alone was often
sufficient to put them to flight." In addition to his prowess as a warrior,
the Horn Chief also possessed a supernatural sanction for his leadership.
He had survived countless battles, and it was well known among the
Newes that his tutelary spirit had rendered him invulnerable. Whites, of
course, were usually incredulous, branding him superstitious, and
lucky. According to Ferris, the Horn Chief believed that "the moon was
his guardian deity, this extraordinary Indian imagined that she instructed
him in dreams during his sleep; and he taught his followers to believe
that he never acted but in obedience to her directions, and that he could
not be killed by metal." Such beliefs were deeply rooted in the spiritualism
of the Basin and Plateau. Newe peoples believed that tutelary spirits
transmitted sacred knowledge and power, bo'ha, through dreams.

</text>
