<text id="D15" category="" words="1996" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="White Metropolis: Race, Ethnicity, and Religion in Dallas, 1841-2001. University of Texas Press," Author="Michael Phillips" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.whitemetropolis.com/excerpt.htm">

Even as Dallas evolved into a modern city, the Department of Public Health still saw the human population as parceled into cleanly divisible racial segments, using identification cards in the 1940s to loudly announce that Jews did not belong to the white race. Rabbi David Lefkowitz of Dallas' Temple Emanu-El fought to abolish the department's "Hebrew" racial classification. To Lefkowitz, a Reform rabbi, Jews represented a religious group, not a racial category. 
In 1942 Lefkowitz protested when the health department included Hebrew as a race along with Anglo-Saxon, South European, Mexican, Negro, and Asiatic on its documents. "The use of the word 'Hebrew,' under any circumstances, except as the designation of the original language of the Bible, is incorrect," Lefkowitz wrote. "The designation 'Jewish' is a proper one for religion . . . You are not, of course, seeking to determine the religion of those to whom you distribute the identification cards, otherwise you would put down Episcopalian, Baptist, Catholic, Methodists, etc. In this group, the word Jewish could well be included, but not in the former." 
The unfolding drama of the Nazi Holocaust provided a deadly example to American Jews of the dangers of living in Gentile-majority countries where their neighbors viewed them as not just religious but racial outsiders. If anti-Semitism in early-twentieth-century America rose in part from religious intolerance, the Leo Frank murder case and American immigration policy strongly demonstrated that even in relatively safe America, Jews could be viewed by ruling Anglo-Saxons as racial poison. In the 1920s the U.S. government imposed immigration quotas aimed at limiting the number of Jews and other groups who could enter in a given year, abandoning later would-be Jewish immigrants to the mercies of the Third Reich in the 1930s and 1940s. Lefkowitz and others happily received the news in 1944 that U.S. immigration authorities no longer considered Jews as racially different from northern Europeans, a move that might allow more Jews to enter the United States. As they celebrated their newfound whiteness, however, many Jews still saw blacks, Asians, and other groups as belonging to separate racial categories. "In our country statistics of Jews must not be collected from the point of view that we are a race or ethnic group, in the manner of the American races, Negroes, Chinese, Indians, etc.," H. S. Linfield, director of the Jewish Statistical Bureau, informed Aline Rutland, secretary for Temple Emanu-El, in a letter dated March 7, 1944. Until recently, "the government continued to regard incoming alien Jews as constituting a separate race. The new order has put an end to this practice." 
The black civil rights movement and convulsive demographic changes from the 1940s through the 1960s made the issue of racial identity crucial to Jews and other marginal whites. The black freedom struggle in those three decades and the development of a new class of what historian George Norris Green called "little rich" merchants ignited the most intense period of anti-Semitism in Dallas since the heyday of the Klan. These factors placed additional pressure on Dallas Jews to demonstrate their whiteness, thus troubling the relationship between Jews and African Americans. 
A similar pressure shaped the racial and political attitudes of Mexican Americans. For that community, life in the 1950s and 1960s became a race to escape the bottom of the social ladder. Many Mexican Americans, locked in an uncertain civil rights struggle of their own, felt they had nothing to gain by helping the African American community. These Mexican Americans instead battled for a white identity, but this goal proved elusive. Jews and Latinos remained marginalized even as they strained relations with African Americans, ultimately limiting the gains made by black activists. 
. . . Dallas had come a long way toward accepting Jews as part of the racial ruling class, but many still struggled with the meaning of Jewish identity . . . [P]hilo-Semitism existed side by side with anti-Semitism. Jews like Lefkowitz had changed the Dallas health department's racial classification schemes but not the Gentile perception of the community. Even after the discovery of the Holocaust at the end of World War II, some Gentiles saw Jews as nonwhite and found biblical justification for their exclusion. The Dallas Independent School District created an Old Testament course in 1952. In the course materials, Judaism was depicted as a half-baked religion awaiting Christ's arrival for its completion. "While there are sixty-six books in this one volume [the Bible], they are unified in the person of Christ whose coming was prophesied in the first book of Old Testament," declared a bulletin outlining the course. "As you study the lives of these Hebrew people, you will be conscious of expectancy which existed throughout the Old Testament period and which had its fulfillment in Jesus Christ." 
Jews possessed only half a loaf regarding divine truth, according to the course, and they were not even part of the white race. According to the notes for the lesson titled "The Origin of the Races, the Tower of Babel, and the Confusion of Tongues," all mankind descended from the three sons of Noah following a flood that wiped out the rest of humanity. Japheth, according to the lecture, was the father of the Europeans. The Old Testament course then reinforced the Southern white Protestant rationale for African American subordination by claiming all "colored races" were descended from Ham, whose family line was forever cursed by God after the flood, according to Genesis, to be a "servant of servants." According to the DISD, "The children of Shem, inhabiting the land of Arabia, and southeastern Asia, [included] . . . the Hebrews, Arabians, Assyrians and Persians, all of whom speak the Semitic languages." Jews thus yellowed as Asians in the eyes of the DISD.5 This classification followed soon after an American war with Japan in which U.S. troops at times fought with a genocidal fury unmatched by their peers in Europe. The depiction of Jews as Asians came amid widespread concerns over the "loss" of mainland China to the communists in 1949 and during the 1950-1953 Korean War, whose outcome was uncertain at the time the DISD launched the course. This racial assignment not only symbolically darkened Jews but also threatened to render them part of a dangerous yellow horde in Gentile eyes. Alarmed by recent political convulsions within the city, some Gentiles demanded that Jews come down clearly on one side of the black/white divide. 
The issue of Jewish whiteness came to a head just as the black civil rights movement in Texas picked up new momentum during and after World War II. In the 1940s Juanita Craft won appointment as the Dallas NAACP's membership chair. In 1944 she became the first black woman in Dallas County history to vote, and in 1946 the NAACP named her a field organizer. Due to Craft's tireless proselytizing, the Dallas NAACP branch claimed 7,000 members by 1946 as it became the epicenter of the state's civil rights movement. In 1941 blacks served on juries in Dallas County for the first time since the 1890s. In 1943 the NAACP won a lawsuit on behalf of Thelma Paige and the Negro Teachers Alliance of Dallas, achieving gradual equalization of teacher salaries. A. Maceo Smith's efforts to end the white primary system finally paid off with the NAACP prevailing in the 1944 Smith v. Allwright decision. 
Divisions within the African American community over political priorities, however, sometimes complicated the civil rights struggle. Some African Americans felt ambivalent about a future of integration. A 1947 statewide poll of African Americans showed that a clear majority favored the creation of a separate black university over the integration of the University of Texas. "Some Negroes had, or at least believed that they had, a vested interest in retaining segregation," observed Michael Gillette, an historian of Texas' NAACP. "These were often professionals, such as teachers, who feared that they would lose their jobs to whites if desegregation occurred. Thus . . . there existed, 'many, many Negroes who are deathly afraid of the elimination of segregation.'" 
Other African Americans internalized the lessons of black inferiority pounded home daily by segregation and the mainstream culture. Even the Dallas Express, a vigorous supporter of political activism and pride in black culture, at times conveyed negative messages about blackness. Advertisements for hair straighteners and skin bleach abounded in the pages of the Express, which carried the message that kinky hair and dark skin were unattractive social liabilities. "Enjoy the Light Side of Life with new, improved 'Skin Success' Bleach Cream," one ad beckons. "Now you can enjoy the popularity and admiration that goes with a lighter, fairer complexion." 
Black assertion, however, alarmed some marginal whites, such as Jews and darker-skinned or working-class and middle-class Mexican Americans. Fate granted some men like Pete Garcia both a Spanish surname and a light skin. In 1950s Dallas society, the middle-class Garcia rated as a higher grade of human than did his black neighbors, tantalizingly close to the Caucasian status he so desired. Aware that his Mexican ethnicity marked him as an outsider, Garcia sought ethnic promotion. In 1950 and 1951 Garcia was part of a small army that dynamited a South Dallas neighborhood for about eighteen months to preserve the boundary between black and white. The 1950s bombings echoed the 1940 terrorism against socially mobile blacks. Dallas culture taught Garcia to see the world in terms of a zero-sum game. African American gains could only mean loss for Mexican Americans while oppression of his black neighbors provided a quick route to whiteness. 
The city's World War II population boom aggravated an already disastrous black housing situation. From 1940 to 1950 Dallas' population grew by about a third, from 294,734 to 434,462. Dallas' black population grew by 30,000 in that time, but private builders constructed only 1,000 new dwellings open to African Americans. White residents protested construction of a proposed 2,000-home tract south of Dallas' city limits set aside for blacks. The City Council promptly refused to supply water to the development, killing the project. A 1950 "Report on Negro Housing Market Data" found 21,568 black households occupying 14,850 housing units. This meant that one of three black families shared crowded housing with other families, and even those substandard structures skyrocketed in price. 
By 1948 a nine-square-mile community of 25,000 blacks, Mexican Americans, and poor whites lived on a low flood plain in West Dallas. Created by the earlier construction of levees along the Trinity River, West Dallas consisted of "flimsy shacks, abandoned gravel pits, garbage dumps, open toilets and shallow wells." Fewer than 10 percent of those dwellings had indoor toilets, and only 15 percent had running water. Tenants drank from wells located near human waste disposals. West Dallas accounted for 50 percent of the city's typhus cases, 60 percent of the tuberculosis, and 30 percent of the polio. 
Desperation forced relatively prosperous blacks to again venture in the early 1950s into the Exline Park neighborhood, scene of the 1940\-1941 bombings. Twelve bombings in the next year and a half targeted homes sold to blacks in formerly all-white neighborhoods in a two-square-mile area of South Dallas. Not expecting white protection, African Americans armed themselves. Juanita Craft noted in a letter to Walter White, the executive director of the NAACP, that bombing stopped on Crozier Street when "the widow Sharpe" ran from her home firing a gun at a speeding getaway car after one explosion. Fearful that violence threatened the city's postwar economic boom, elites could not ignore these bombings as they had the 1940 attacks. A special grand jury that included several prominent Dallasites, such as wholesale liquor distributor Julius Schepps and Dallas Morning News managing editor Felix McKnight, investigated the bombings. In an unusual move for 1951 Dallas, the grand jury also numbered three African Americans as members, including NAACP chapter president Bezeleel R. Riley and W. J. Durham, an attorney on the Sweatt v. Painter case that led to desegregation of the University of Texas law school.

</text>
