<text id="E04" category="" words="2000" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Invention and Technology Magazine. The Clot Stopper" Author="Ken Garber" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="http://www.americanheritage.com/articles/magazine/it/2006/1/2006_1_34.shtml">

The middle-aged man on the table today was crushed in a construction-site accident. Damage to internal organs ruled out using blood-thinning drugs because they could cause bleeding and death.
With the procedure finished, the man is wheeled out and replaced by a young woman arriving from the intensive-care unit. She is recovering from a bad auto accident and lies face-up on the table, moving fitfully. Hemorrhage from her head injuries means that she can't be given blood thinners. Cho and Todd Getzen, a radiology fellow, go to work. A drape covers the patient's body except for a small patch at her groin, which Cho swabs with an antiseptic wash before injecting a local anesthetic. This badly injured woman is unconscious, but in most cases the procedure can be done with the patient fully awake.
Cho inserts a needle and finds the woman's femoral vein. He withdraws the syringe, leaving the needle, and then passes a wire through the needle's hollow core. The wire serves to guide a dilator into the vein, widening the opening for the eventual passage of the filter. A nick with a scalpel is all that's needed to create an opening through which the dilator can get into the body. There's only a tiny amount of bleeding. This "Seldinger technique," named after its Swedish inventor, allows doctors to place catheters, stents, and filters in the circulatory system with just a local anesthetic and without the invasive surgery that was once mandatory.
"We have patients with the device who've gone back to...playing football, we've had fighter pilots taking huge G stresses."
Cho places a second, stiffer guide wire into the vein and, guided by the X-ray image onscreen, slides it all the way into the vena cava. Now the patient is ready for the filter. An injection of contrast dye lets Cho and Getzen see exactly where blood flow from the kidney joins the vena cava. This is the precise point where the filter's tip needs to go. Cho carefully slides the sheathed filter along the guide wire and up the vein, stopping after about 10 seconds. As viewed on the screen, the filter, furled like an umbrella, emerges from the sheath. Cho operates a trigger device, and the filter instantly springs open, the tiny hooks securing it to the vessel walls. Then Cho pulls out the sheath and guide wire, Getzen places a bandage over the needle puncture, and they're done. The whole procedure has taken less than 10 minutes. With the filter in place, the young woman's odds of developing a pulmonary embolism are now smaller than 1 in 20.
Pulmonary embolism is a fact of life for trauma surgeons and intensive-care-unit doctors because an immobile patient will almost always develop some kind of clot. The nineteenth-century German pathologist Rudolf Virchow was the first to figure out why: Damage to the blood-vessel wall results in a state of hypercoagulability, or elevated tendency to clot. Then the lack of movement adds to the risk of clots and venous thrombosis - clotting in the veins, usually in the legs. Clots that sit in the vein can break loose and head downstream. The result: pulmonary embolisms that are fatal 30 percent of the time if left untreated.
Just sitting still for a few hours can cause clots. Cho recalls the case of a woman who flew from the Philippines to Canada, collapsed in the airplane before arrival, and was rushed to the hospital. "She had massive PE and was dying on the table," says Cho. "She needed resuscitation twice." Doctors broke up the clot in her lungs with drugs and dislodged it with a catheter, and Cho placed a filter. The woman survived - barely.
Besides its suddenness, what makes pulmonary embolism so dangerous is that it has few symptoms, and those are ambiguous. Shortness of breath and mild chest pain signal pulmonary embolism, but they could just as easily mean pneumonia.
Mark Cipolle, a trauma surgeon in Allentown, Pennsylvania, has seen hundreds of pulmonary embolisms, but his own PE caught him completely by surprise. A few years ago he was in a rollover auto accident and fractured a vertebra in his neck. Lucky to escape without paralysis, he was sent home in a neck collar and mostly sat around for three days. Then he developed a clot. "I almost died," he recalls. "I got delirious from lack of oxygen to my brain."
A friend rushed him to the hospital. Because he had bleeding in an eye from the rollover accident, he couldn't receive a blood thinner. So Mark Cipolle, who had collaborated with Lazar Greenfield on several filter-research projects, got his own Greenfield filter. That prevented more clots from piling onto the original clot in the lung and may have saved his life.
Once the Greenfield filter is in, it stays in for life (though other filters designed to do the same job are removable). The vast majority of patients never have to think about it again. Over time the inner vessel wall spreads over the filter's hooks, making the filter almost part of the body. Clots collecting in the filter's conical nose almost always dissolve amid the continuous flow of blood, which has natural clot-dissolving properties.
"We don't limit the activities of any patient who's had a filter," says Greenfield. "We have patients with the device who've gone back to very active lifestyles. They've gone back to playing football, we've had fighter pilots taking huge G stresses ...  . We've even said a boxer could go back to boxing, but the boxing commission didn't think too highly of that."
The filter is remarkably durable and stable, with only a few cases of broken filters reported. Yet it's flexible enough to fold tightly into its narrow sheath for easy delivery. In conceiving and perfecting it, the skills and personalities of its two inventors, Greenfield and Kimmell, meshed well. They had worked together on two devices prior to the filter, one of them a suction cup mounted on the end of a catheter that's still occasionally used to clear clots in the lung during life-threatening emergencies.
Garman Kimmell's contributions to the filter went far beyond that first conceptual leap. "Renaissance man" is how Greenfield describes his former partner. In the 1940s Kimmell invented a pressure regulator for natural-gas wells that is still the industry standard. Kimmell's medical-device company occupied a single room in his oil and gas business, but out of it came a blood pump for open-heart surgery and an early blood oxygenation machine for the Mayo Clinic, in addition to the Greenfield inventions and many others.
Greenfield was an ideal partner. Until his recent retirement he was among the "top 5 or 10" vascular surgeons in the country, according to Cipolle. Greenfield grew up in Houston with his grandfather, who raised chickens and pigeons. At age six, after watching his grandfather sew up the neck of an injured squab, which then recovered fully, Greenfield decided that he wanted to be a doctor. His career trajectory was phenomenal. At age 32 he was assistant professor of surgery at the University of Oklahoma and chief of surgical services at the VA hospital in Oklahoma City; before turning 40 he was named chairman of surgery at the Medical College of Virginia; and in 1987, at age 52, he moved to the University of Michigan as surgery chair, later serving as interim CEO of the university's vast medical campus.
Greenfield's strengths as an inventor were twofold. First, says Abele, "he was great at asking the right question." Few thought pulmonary embolism could safely be prevented with a filter, but Greenfield wanted to give it a try. His other strength was persistence. "He was very, very tenacious at improving the device," says James Stanley, a vascular surgeon at the University of Michigan. Even after the filter was a success and was selling well, "he didn't just give up and say, 'Let it be'; he was continually working at it."
In 1973, at a meeting of the American Heart Association, Greenfield gave a talk about his lung-clot suction cup, with a side presentation on the filter. In the audience was Abele, who was scouting for products for his new medical-device company. Abele introduced himself to Greenfield after the talk, launching a 30-year collaboration. First Abele took on the manufacture of the suction cup, and then, in 1980, when he bought Kimmell's medical-device company, the Kimray-Greenfield filter became part of Boston Scientific's catalogue. Abele renamed it the Greenfield filter. The filter helped Abele's company to grow from two million dollars in sales to six billion today, and Boston Scientific is now the largest life-sciences company in Massachusetts. 
Greenfield never earned a dime in royalties from his filter. His Oklahoma superiors told him that a patent was impossible because he worked for a public university and because, as a doctor treating patients with the device, having a patent would be a conflict of interest. So Kimmell patented the device by himself. "I was young and naive, never talked to the lawyer or anyone else," Greenfield recalls. One positive outcome, though, was a certain independence when it came to his relationship with Boston Scientific. "I never hesitated to criticize and essentially force them to maintain the highest quality standards for production, and for the changes that I thought were needed," Greenfield says. In return for his input, Boston Scientific supported his filter research over the years. "They've been very good to work with," he says, "because it's been very profitable for the company."
The filter has gone through two major design changes. In the late 1980s the company switched from stainless steel to titanium to allow compression of the filter into a sheath for delivery through a catheter. Then, in the mid-1990s, at Greenfield's insistence, the company switched back to stainless steel to make the filter compatible with a guide wire, since some of the titanium filters weren't going in straight. Each change involved years of design work and animal trials.
The basic patent expired long ago, and other filters, most of them inspired by the original, now compete with the Greenfield. The FDA has approved eight designs, including the Greenfield, some with multiple versions. One of them, a removable filter called the Gunther Tulip, was the filter Cho placed in the young woman at Michigan. While such filters have their roles, says Cho, "the Greenfield filter is the best. It's proven over 30 years." Cipolle agrees: "How are you going to improve on a complication rate of 2, 3, 4 percent?" The filter's clean lines and minimalist design are the keys to its success. "If you have additional levels of metal, or too much complexity of the device, you set up turbulence and stagnant areas that are actually clot-promoting," Greenfield says.
The risks of having a Greenfield filter inserted are small but real. In a tiny fraction of patients, insertion of the filter itself causes clots. And, very rarely, a doctor positions the filter improperly, and it later moves, which means it must then be captured and repositioned. Finally, the filter doesn't always work perfectly. Occasionally a big enough clot gets through it to cause a pulmonary embolism. But studies show that it is more than 95 percent safe and effective - the best long-term record of any filter on the market.
During the filter's long history, occasional controversies have erupted over its use. For example, in the 1990s many doctors placed filters not only in patients with existing blood clots in their legs but also in those who were merely at risk for such clots, including cancer patients. After some surgeons questioned such prophylactic use, it began to decline. That's fine with Greenfield. "I never supported that concept, because the filter only addresses pulmonary embolism," he says.
No one questions the Greenfield filter's effectiveness. "Everybody acknowledges this has saved many lives," says Stanley. Greenfield, characteristically, underplays its impact on modern medicine: "It's just plumbing."
Ken Garber is a freelance writer on scientific and medical topics. He lives in Ann Arbor, Michigan.

</text>
