<text id="E09" category="" words="1997" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Daily Racing Forum: Young newcomer making inroads; Trainer profile: Wesley Ward; Le Cinquieme Essai done for year" Author="Chuck Dybdal, Brad Free, Bill Tallon" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.drf.com/news/le-cinquieme-essai-done-year  http://www.drf.com/news/young-newcomer-making-inroads   http://www.drf.com/news/trainer-profile-wesley-ward">

Young newcomer making inroads
By CHUCK DYBDAL
SAN MATEO, Calif. - Jockey Kyle Kaenel believes he made the right decision when he came here to ride on a full-time basis in northern California this summer. The 18-year-old Kaenel has made a positive impression on horsemen here and currently ranks fourth in the Bay Meadows standings with 7 wins from 34 mounts. He lost an eighth win on Sunday when Brave Sun ducked in twice on longshot Cover Magic in the stretch and was disqualified to second despite Kaenel's attempts to keep him straight. Kaenel wrestled with a decision to come here in August when he decided he was going to leave the Maryland circuit. Kaenel rode in Maryland during the spring and summer after spending last winter riding in New York. Trainer James Chapman, a family friend, offered him mounts if he would come to Kentucky. At the same time, agent Joe Griffin, who had booked mounts for Kaenel's father, Jack, called and encouraged him to come to California. "I was going to go with Mr. Chapman to Kentucky in the spring, but he said he wasn't going to be in position to help me with a lot of mounts, so I went to Maryland," Kaenel said. Kaenel, who has been riding for three years and has 259 victories from 1,830 mounts, weighed the decision of whether to ride in Kentucky this summer or come here carefully. "If I went there, I knew I'd ride in stakes," he said. "This looked like I'd have a better chance day in and day out to get mounts. Here I get the experience on all kinds of horses that a young rider needs." Kaenel was a tyke when his dad rode here. He would come to the races wearing what was his father's trademark cowboy hat. "A lot of trainers tell me, 'I remember you when you were this big,' and that helps," Kaenel said. Kaenel credited trainer Steve Miyadi with "helping me with live horses. You have to have a barn behind you." Kaenel has ridden Breeders' Cup Sprint candidate Malibu Mint, trained by Chapman, to back-to-back stakes victories, and will ride her in the Sprint. Malibu Mint will be a longshot, but Kaenel is thrilled to have his first Breeders' Cup mount. "It's going to be tough," he said. "But there are so many horses all they know is to go. She comes from off the pace. Hopefully, that will benefit us." Bonde rues lack of Cup starter Trainer Jeff Bonde was disappointed he wouldn't get to run Untouched Talent in Saturday's Breeders' Cup Juvenile Fillies at Churchill Downs, where she might have been one of the favorites.
She didn't have time to recover from surgery a week ago Monday to repair an entrapped epiglottis. Untouched Talent has won two stakes, including the Grade 3 Sorrento at Del Mar, and finished second in the Grade 2 Del Mar Debutante. Untouched Talent would have been the second Breeders' Cup starter for Bonde, who sent out Spain when she ran fourth in the 1999 Juvenile Fillies. "When I ran Spain, I knew she'd be the fourth or fifth choice, but I knew I had an improving horse," he said. "This time I wasn't sure I didn't have the best horse. I thought this would be as good a shot as we would have." Untouched Talent will still go through the Fasig-Tipton mixed sale immediately following the Breeders' Cup, Bonde said. Two locals to run on big day At least two horses with northern California connections will run on Breeders' Cup Day. Trainer Art Sherman is at Churchill Downs with Siren Lure, who is a contender in the Breeders' Cup Sprint. Trainer Jerry Hollendorfer will run Cause to Believe in the Grade 3, $200,000 Ack Ack Handicap at one mile. Derby attracts 14 Fourteen 3-year-olds were nominated to Sunday's $100,000 Grade 3 Bay Meadows Derby at 1 1/8 miles on turf. Proudinsky, a Bobby Frankel-trained import from Germany, will likely be favored, although Bold Chieftain, coming off a pair of wins, including the Hays Valley in his last start, is a live contender. Bedlam Bertie, Raise the Bluff and Sharper Edge are also expected to go. Illuminise, a stakes-winning filly from the Neil Drysdale barn, remains a possibility. Trainer Julio Canani has made no decision on undefeated Hyperbaric, who would be making his third start. Punishments handed out Jockey Joel Rosario will begin a three-day suspension Friday after his mount, Charm Doll, altered course and caused interference at the three-sixteenths pole in Thursday's eighth race. Jockey Macario Rodriguez was fined $100 for failure to fulfill his riding engagements last Wednesday. Trainer Ed Moger Jr. was fined $300 for failing to report the gelding of Our Tricky Ricky before his Sept. 10, 2006, start at Golden Gate Fields. * Seven fillies and mares will go 1o1/16 miles on the turf in a $20,000 claimer for Wednesday's Bay Meadows feature.

Trainer profile: Wesley Ward
By Brad Free

POMONA, Calif. - A bullring track in Republic, Wash., left an indelible mark on Wesley Ward's first career as a jockey, and his second career as a trainer. "It was the first meet I rode, I was 12 years old, on a track just shy of half a mile," Ward recalled. And it may help explain how Ward quietly emerges as a key trainer each fall during the Los Angeles County Fair meet, run on the five-eighths mile track at Fairplex Park. Fairplex opened Sept. 8, and Ward figures to win about a half-dozen races during the 16-day meet, with maidens, claimers, and un-established allowance runners. But Ward can also train a good horse. He proved it with top female sprinter Bear Fan, graded stakes turf horse Unfinished Symph, and millionaire sprinter Men's Exclusive. Ward was 16 when he won the Eclipse Award as the nation's outstanding apprentice jockey in 1984, and soon outgrew his profession. He turned to training and became the assistant for his father, Dennis, before going out on his own. Once a year, Ward returns to his bullring roots by racing at Fairplex, where his five-year win rate is 34 percent (33 for 96). "The big thing at the fair is that first turn; you have to plan for the first turn when you go into the gate," Ward said. "You don't necessarily have to be in front, but if you're parked wide into that first turn, it's awfully hard to win. "A lot of the horses and riders don't know that first turn," Ward said, "If you're outside them you're [in trouble]. If they don't know that first turn, they're going to bolt and take you out with them." Ward has 24 horses under his care at Fairplex; the remainder of his 40-plus stable is at Santa Anita under the watchful eye of Ward's assistant, Blake Heap. Ward expects to run 20 or more horses at the fair. If history repeats, at least six of those will win. "It's a mix [of categories]," he said. "I've got quite a few 2-year-olds that haven't run yet. Some 2-year-olds take a while with shins and little problems. I gave them time, and they're ready to go." Nearly half of Ward's winners at Fairplex since 2001 have been maidens. "It's a little easier to win at Pomona. You get a horse that ran third or fourth in a maiden-32, and you bring them to Pomona, you catch a weak field that you wouldn't catch at Del Mar. It gives you a real good chance for a horse to break its maiden and get some confidence." Ward said he will spread out his business among different riders, which would be a shift. From his last 33 Fairplex winners, 20 were ridden by the track's all-time leading rider, Martin Pedroza. "A big advantage [at the fair] is the rider," Ward said. "A lot of riders are great riders on the big tracks, but not small tracks. I'm going to use all the riders, and spread them out with the guys that have been helping me out.
"The big thing with this track is if you have a fast horse that can get out in front and get over, more often than not you're going to win," he said. "Otherwise, you're going to have to take back, save ground, and hope the red sea opens." There is one other thing. "I always like to run at Pomona, with the Ferris Wheels and cotton candy. But I've never won a stake at Pomona." That may change this fall at Fairplex Park.


Le Cinquieme Essai done for year
By BILL TALLON
ShareThis
ETOBICOKE, Ontario - Le Cinquieme Essai, a 7-year-old gelding who was looming as the top local candidate for next Sunday's Grade 1, $1 million Woodbine Mile, is through for the season. "He had a little bit of filling in a suspensory," said Paul Nielsen, who trains Le Cinquieme Essai for owner and breeder Bill Scott. "We scanned him, and there's a little tear. It's nothing serious, but if we kept going with him, it would be. "He'll make a nice 8-year-old." Le Cinquieme Essai had won the Grade 2 Play the King, a seven-furlong turf race that is the major local prep for the Woodbine Mile, in his last start on Aug. 26. Last year, Le Cinquieme Essai finished third in the Woodbine Mile, beaten 8 3/4 lengths by the winner, Leroidesanimaux, but just a length for second place by Mobil. Becrux breezes for Mile Becrux, who stayed here with an eye toward the Woodbine Mile after shipping in from California to finish second in the Play the King, breezed six furlongs in 1:18.20 on the main turf course here Friday. Becrux, a 4-year-old gelding trained by Neil Drysdale, had won the restricted Wickerr Handicap at one mile on turf at Del Mar in his start prior to the Play the King. Corey Nakatani, who rode Becrux in the Wickerr, is slated to be back aboard for the Woodbine Mile after Brice Blanc had the mount in the Play the King. Preparation elsewhere, as well Woodbine Mile candidates who breezed at their current home bases on Friday included Remarkable News, Three Valleys, Rebel Rebel, and Ballast. At Belmont Park, Remarkable News worked five furlongs in 1:00.96 on the main track. Remarkable News, a 4-year-old colt trained by Angel Penna Jr., won the Grade 2 Fourstardave at 1 1/16 miles on turf at Saratoga in his last start. The Woodbine Mile would be the second appearance here at Woodbine for Remarkable News, who won the Grade 3 Connaught Cup, a 1 1/16-mile turf race, by a nose over Le Cinquieme Essai on May 28. Javier Castellano, who has ridden Remarkable News in each of his nine career starts, will retain the mount. Three Valleys also worked on Belmont's main track, going six furlongs in 1:13.80. A 5-year-old horse trained by Bobby Frankel, Three Valleys won the Grade 3 Oceanport at 1 1/16 miles on turf at Monmouth Park in his last start. Ramon Dominguez, who rode Three Valleys in the Aug. 6 Oceanport, has the call here. At Saratoga, Rebel Rebel breezed five furlongs in 1:03.18. A 4-year-old colt trained by Richard Dutrow, Rebel Rebel finished third in the Oceanport after winning Belmont's Grade 3 Poker at one mile on turf, with Remarkable News second. At Fair Hill, in Maryland, Ballast breezed six furlongs in 1:13.20. A 5-year-old gelding trained by Graham Motion, Ballast was a front-running winner at 1 1/8 miles on turf under third-level allowance terms last time out. Todd Kabel is scheduled to ride Ballast for the first time here. Two guaranteed wagers The Woodbine Mile will anchor a program that also includes the Grade 2, $300,000 Canadian, a 1 1/8-mile turf race for fillies and mares, and the Grade 3, $250,000 Summer, a one-mile turf race for 2-year-olds. Woodbine will offer a pair of Win 4's with guaranteed pools on the Woodbine Mile program.

</text>
