<text id="E10" category="" words="2008" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Bark: Decoding the Dog Genome" Author="Mark Derr" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.thebark.com/content/decoding-dog-genome  http://www.thebark.com/content/decoding-dog-genome?page=2  http://www.thebark.com/content/decoding-dog-genome?page=3">

Decoding the Dog Genome
A female Boxer provides the DNA for the first complete sequence of the dog genome - what will it mean to the health of man and dog?
By Mark Derr 
"The dog is everywhere what society makes him," wrote Charles Dudley Warner in the January 1896 issue of Harper's New Monthly Magazine. Elaine Ostrander and Heidi Parker update that message in the November 2005 issue of the online journal, Public Library of Science - Genetics: "The domestication of the dog from its wolf ancestors is perhaps the most complex genetic experiment in history, and certainly the most extensive." Undeniably, the results of that experiment are directly manifest in the appearance and behavior of the dog. 
Since hitching its evolutionary fate to that of humans some 9,000 canine generations ago, the dog has proven the most adaptable, versatile and steadfast of companions, serving as a guard; draft animal; hunter; herder; warrior; entertainer; finder of explosives, contraband, disease and lost souls; healer, therapist; physical and spiritual guide; and friend. With the public unveiling last month of the fully sequenced and richly annotated dog genome - the approximately 2.4 billion base pairs of DNA (A [adenine], which always binds with T [thymine], and C [cytosine], which binds with G [guanine]) that form its genetic code - the dog might now also add to its monikers, shall we say, "genomic consort." 
Of course, the dog is not the first mammal other than humans to have its genome fully sequenced - the mouse, rat and chimp got theirs first - but because of its architectonic breed structure, it might prove the most illuminating. To shift metaphors: geneticists can now use the dog genome sequence like a combination zoom and telephoto lens, zeroing in on specific genes and even minute changes within genes, or jetting back to examine broad patterns and interrelationships within it and between it and other genomes that reveal the evolutionary history of an individual, a breed, a population, or the entire species and genus. 
Dog as Cultural Construct
A cultural and biological construct from the start, the dog is a mash of intensive human tinkering and the natural proclivities both of its wolfish fore bearer and of its randomly breeding dog ancestors. Indeed, the newly released analysis of the sequenced dog genome points to two unmistakable genetic bottlenecks - about 9,000 generations (taken by the sequencers as 27,000 years) ago, when perhaps as few as two tamed wolves produced the first litters of what became dogs. Since then, through what Darwin called conscious and unconscious selection, humans have cleaved the dog into breeds, in effect making it the most variable of mammals in terms of size and shape, with the exception of humans themselves. The most intensive period of breed formation occurred between 100 and 300 years ago, coincident with the rise of "scientific breeding" and clubs devoted to the cult of purebred dogs, primarily in Europe and North America. 
By most estimates, there are today more than 400 breeds worldwide, many with specialized morphologies and behaviors, nearly all genetically isolated. The majority of those breeds are also susceptible to one or more of more than 400 genetic disorders, approximately 350 of which are also found in humans, including epilepsy, kidney cancer, deafness, blindness, auto-immune disorders, congenital heart disease, skeletal malformations, neurological abnormalities, bleeding disorders and neuropsychiatric disorders. 
Because traits and diseases often cluster according to breed and because breeders maintain extensive pedigrees, canine geneticists have long argued that the dog represents an ideal natural model for examining how genes shape appearance, function, behavior and health. In 1991, Jasper Rine, a geneticist at the University of California, Berkeley, with two researchers in his lab - Mark Neff, a postdoctoral fellow, and Elaine Ostrander, a staff scientist - started the Dog Genome Project to study those issues and in the process create a map of the dog genome they could link to that of the human genome for comparative study. [Ed. Note: See interview with Mark Neff.] From that effort was born a cottage industry, under the informal leadership of Dr. Ostrander (now at the National Human Genome Research Institute of the National Institutes of Health) and involving a small group of scientists worldwide, devoted to sequencing the dog genome, segment by segment. The researchers also lobbied to have the dog genome sequenced as part of the continuing Human Genome Project, in order to complete the task quickly and accurately. 
In 2003, scientists at the Institute for Genomic Research and what is now the J. Craig Venter Institute in Rockville, Md., published a proprietary sequence covering 75 percent of the genome of a Standard Poodle, Shadow. On the other hand, sequences prepared as part of the Human Genome Project are posted in public data banks in the US, Europe and Japan as soon as possible after they are completed, so researchers can have access to them. 
In July 2004, without fanfare, researchers from the Broad Institute at MIT and Harvard and Agencourt Bioscience Corp., of Beverly, Mass., led by Kerstin Lindblad-Toh, deposited in those public data banks their "first draft" sequence of 98 percent of the genetic code for "dog" in general and Tasha, an inbred Boxer from upstate New York, in particular. Their sequence was more complete and considerably more detailed than that of Shadow.
Then came a pause - of the seemingly interminable sort that occurs between the time certain dogs are called while snorfling in the park and the time they decide to respond - that was devoted to revision, analysis and assigning chunks of the sequence to their appropriate chromosome. The dog has 38 pairs of autosomal chromosomes - inheriting one from each parent - and two sex chromosomes. Lindblad-Toh's team did not sequence the Y (male) chromosome.
Finally, at a press conference in Boston on December 7, 2005; in a lengthy article in the prestigious journal Nature on December 8; and in supplemental articles in the December issue of Genome Research, Lindblad-Toh and her team, along with Ostrander and dog genome scientists, officially unveiled the by then 99 percent complete sequence of Tasha and a SNP (pronounced "snip") map showing 2.5 million "single nucleotide polymorphisms," or mutations, in the genomes of Tasha, nine other purebred dogs, four wolves and a coyote. This map is useful for finding genes and examining interrelations between groups and individuals. The Nature article also contained an analysis by Lindblad-Toh's research team of the dog genome's structure and a new look at the dog's family tree, origins and transformation by humans. (Full disclosure: Bark deadlines being what they are, I did not attend the press conference, which was designed to receive maximum coverage in the daily media.)
The Dog Genome
Much of genomic science is still involved with characterization and description of the DNA sequence and parts therein, genes being only the most famous. It involves naming things previously perceived dimly, if at all, and often of unknown purpose. But without that basic work, the genome is basically unreadable. 
From a certain perspective, the dog is just another mammal, albeit with a genome slightly smaller and "cleaner" - "there is less junk," Lindblad-Toh said - than that of its human companion or the ubiquitous lab rat, to which the researchers also compared it in Nature. Tucked within the 2.4 billion base pairs of the dog's DNA are some 19,300 genes. By comparison, the human genome consists of approximately 2.9 billion base pairs of DNA and, at most recent count, approximately 22,000 genes. Approximately 72 percent of the dog genes are orthologous, meaning they correspond on a one-to-one basis with genes found in the human and rat genomes, although their functions might differ. 
Comparison of mouse, human and dog genomes have identified a core 812,000,000 base pairs (5.3% of the total human genome) of ancestral sequence common to all three species. This DNA encodes proteins (1-2% of the total genome), and includes specific sequences that control gene expression. This portion of the genome is under what biologists call purifying selection, wherein variations on a gene or changes in a sequence are selected against, or weeded out. The sequencing of additional mammalian genomes, including those of Rhesus monkey, cow, opossum, elephant, rabbit, cat and shrew, should help to sharpen the focus on the DNA definition of mammal-ness. 
Despite the similarities between all three species, it appears the genome better reflects the social reality of dogs and humans than does taxonomy, which places the rat closer evolutionarily to humans than the dog. The researchers reported in Nature that some sets of functional genes, like those involved in brain development, showed signs of having evolved similarly in dogs and humans - and more rapidly than in rats. It is a suggestive finding. 
The dog's value in comparative genomics lies in large measure in its breed structure, and here the researchers offer some support to a couple of recent suggestions that repetitive segments of DNA are somehow tied to the dog's physical plasticity, its ability to assume so many different shapes and sizes, as well as to fall victim to various inherited diseases. Geneticists have focused not only on SNPs - changes in a single base - but also on repetitive blocks of DNA, including "short interspersed nuclear elements" and "tandem repeats."
SINE elements, as they are known, are repetitive segments of DNA between 150 to 750 bases long. Interspersed throughout a genome, they move around over time, and some are species-specific. 
On the whole, the dog genome has fewer SINE elements than the rat or human. But it has a "highly active carnivore-specific SINE family" that is full of mutations that vary between breeds, Lindblad-Toh and her co-authors wrote in Nature. These SINE elements are greater in frequency by a factor of at least 10 than any found in humans, and are believed to play a role in gene expression. When inserted into genes, they can cause diseases, like narcolepsy in Doberman Pinschers and centronuclear myopathy (a muscle disease) in Labrador Retrievers. 
Wei Wang and Ewen F. Kirkness of the Institute for Genomc Research, writing in Genome Research, argue that SINE elements are a major source of genetic diversity in the dog. Citing their research, Lindblad-Toh and her colleagues speculate in Nature that the variation from SINE elements "has provided important raw material for the selective breeding programs that have produced the wide phenotypic variations among modern breeds." In that event, SINE elements may have been what has allowed humans to produce everything from the Pug to the Irish Wolfhound.
But no one knows. In December 2004, John W. Fondon, III, and Harold R. Garner of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center proposed in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences - in a paper that caught the attention of scientists, if not the press - that changes in the length of "tandem repeats" found within genes are responsible for the phenotypic variation between breeds and the speed with which breeders can change a breed's appearance. Once called "junk DNA," like so many other parts of the sequence whose purpose was then unknown, these "tandem repeats" occur when two or more nucleotides form a pattern that repeats itself over a short stretch of the genome.
Simply, tandem repeats are shorter than SINE elements. Both are suspected of playing a role in creating the plethora of dog breeds. But changes in the timing of development are also believed to be involved. Sorting that out is where the Dog Genome Project began and where it still must go. In that sense, the genome sequence represents a beginning rather than an end.
A Genomic Look at History
It is often remarked and lamented that despite, in some cases, centuries of inbreeding and use of "favored sires" year after year, litter after litter, even the most purebred of dogs continue to show variability in terms of appearance and behavior. In other words, they don't always breed "true" to the breeder's desire. In behavioral terms, as John Paul Scott and John L. Fuller observed 40 years ago in their seminal book, Genetics and the Social Behavior of the Dog, through selective breeding, humans have concentrated different aspects of wolf behavior in dog breeds so that each one represents "one of many possible individual behavioral variations."

</text>
