<text id="E13" category="" words="1995" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Backpacker: Patagonia Common Threads Recycling Program, HIKING BOOTS REVIEW; HIKING BOOTS REVIEW: MIDWEIGHT AND LIGHTWEIGHT ; LOW-CUT HIKING BOOTS REVIEW " Author="THE BACKPACKER EDITORS, STEVE HOWE, MIKE LANZA" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.backpacker.com/green_guide_editors_choice_green_award/gear/12192  http://www.backpacker.com/march_2006_gear_hiking_boots_review_stratos/gear/10671  http://www.backpacker.com/may_2006_gear_hiking_boots_review/gear/10888  http://www.backpacker.co">

EDITOR'S CHOICE GREEN AWARD APRIL 2006 
Patagonia implements the Common Threads Recycling Program to reuse your old Capilene long underwear tops and bottoms 
by: The Backpacker Editors 
Patagonia Common Threads Recycling Program
Recycled underwear? It makes more sense than you might think.
Wanted: Your tattered, smelly, nasty old Capilene long johns. Yup, you read that right. Patagonia has developed another eco-friendly recycling initiative, one that turns old underwear into brand-new stuff. 
We're not talking about patching holes and washing the stink out. Patagonia is actually breaking down long underwear tops and bottoms into polyester molecules, purifying them, and transforming the raw material into plastic chips that are then melted, spun into thread, and woven into new Capilene garments. 
Once the program is fully online, the potential impact will be huge. Patagonia currently makes more than 1.4 million Capilene garments a year, and by September 2006 at least half of the polyester in that line will come from recycled soda bottles, shower curtains, and other waste. By September 2007, every Capilene garment will also contain fibers from recycled underwear. The net result will be a 76 percent energy savings and a 71 percent reduction in greenhouse gases compared to production methods that use only virgin materials.
For every 100 pieces of Capilene that Patagonia recycles, it can make 95 new garments. And the company is already working on the obvious next step: collecting other non-Capilene polyester products (like fleece and other manufacturers' long johns). Stay tuned for more on this later in the year.
Available in dozens of styles ($29-$78), Capilene has been a staple for backpackers since it was introduced in 1985. It's one of the best base layers money can buy - soft, quick to wick and dry, and incredibly durable. And it'll stay that way. "We've been working on using recycled polyester to make new Capilene for 10 years," says Jill Dumain, Patagonia's environmental analysis director. "And we finally have a process that has zero performance impact on our final product." 
To participate, drop off your washed Capilene items at the nearest Patagonia store, or mail them to Patagonia Service Center, Common Threads Recycling Program, 8550 White Fir Street, Reno, NV 89523-8939; www.patagonia.com.
HIKING BOOTS REVIEW: MONTRAIL STRATOS XCR 
Boots that are amazingly stable, delightfully lightweight, and surprisingly waterproof. 
by: Steve Howe, BACKPACKER Rocky Mountain Editor 
This staff favorite topped a recent test of lightweight boots (8/05), thanks to its ounce-scrimping combination of ankle support, versatile fit, cushy sole, and innovative waterproofing (it features an external Gore-Tex XCR sock). Cut mid-high, this trail-runner-style shoe has impressed us from the Canadian Rockies to Glacier and the North Cascades, handling 5-day trail treks with up to 50 pounds. They've gotten us up Class III Mt. Siyeh in Glacier, and across crumbling moraines in Switzerland. They gained yet another fan on a recent speed blitz of seven national parks in a week, where our female tester called them "surprisingly stable on rocky terrain, dreamy lightweight, and insanely waterproof." Best for narrow- to medium-width feet. 
Price: $140 
Weight: 2 lbs. 2 oz. 
HIKING BOOTS REVIEW: MIDWEIGHT AND LIGHTWEIGHT 
Go light on your feet with the Adidas Cloudcap XCR and Garmont Nasty. 
by: The Backpacker Editors 
Adidas Cloudcap XCR 
For steep slopes with iffy footing, Rocky Mountain editor Steve Howe usually prefers boots with stiff edges and high-cut ankle protection. But after wearing these nimble midcuts on a 3-day winter trip through Utah's canyonlands, he's making an exception. "By far my favorite midweight boots," he says. "They're stable, weatherproof, and cushy enough for daily trail runs--and even the occasional asphalt jog." Much of that stability and cushioning is due to its GCS (Ground Control System) heel construction, an innovation that earned cousin company Salomon an Editors' Choice Award in 2005. Internal springs disperse the shock from footfalls, especially awkward ones, and even on steep slickrock, the wide outsoles resist rolling over. Of course, it doesn't hurt that the Cloudcap has an aggressive tread made from a rubber that was grippy enough for the slipperiest of Sulphur Creek's slot-canyon boulders. The Gore-Tex XCR liner and full tongue gusset wards off wet snow and and water from stream crossings with ease, and the well-padded upper repels ankle-biter rocks, sand, and grit. Bottom line: An excellent choice for fast and light trips, with the protection you need for loaded travels on or off trail, all at a running-shoe weight. $145; men's 6-131/2, 14; 2 lbs. 2 oz. (men's 9); (800) 448-1796; www.adidas.com. 
Garmont Nasty 
When two veteran testers told us that these were the most comfortable light hikers they'd ever worn, we took notice. The Nasty is a runnable low-cut that grips granite and scrambles up rocky hills like a mountain goat. Unlike many lightweights, it has soles with rounded instead of squared-off edges to prevent excessive pronation and supination. We thought the rounded soles might lead to rolled ankles, but testers instead reported that their feet felt liberated--with more natural flex and range of motion. The sole is made up of four separate sections, a construction that reduces weight and provides support, protection, and stability in all the right places. Studded rubber toe bumpers and heel cups grabbed trail features at any angle. Rubber lugs in the arches gripped on rounded surfaces like logs. The synthetic uppers cradled testers' feet without pressure, and the asymmetric lacing system, which drops the lace path to the side of the foot for comfort and security, won praise. Best for wider feet. $100; men's 8-121/2, 13, 14; women's 51/2-101/2, 11; 1 lb. 11 oz. (men's 81/2); (800) 943-4453; www.garmontusa.com. 
LOW-CUT HIKING BOOTS REVIEW 
Stay light on your feet with the Lafuma Active Raid GTX XCR, Garmont Eclipse XCR, Merrell Chameleon II XCR, Montrail Mountain Mist XCR, and Vasque Breeze Low XCR. 
by: Mike Lanza, BACKPACKER Northwest Editor 
Once upon a time, low-cut shoes were called "sneakers" and used for tennis, and backpackers wore something from a cow that weighed nearly as much. How times have changed. 
Unless you're heading into serious weather or walking on trick ankles, today's low-cut hiking shoes are the way to go. They're supportive, cool, and comfortable, so you'll hike faster and farther with less fatigue. All you have to do is find the model that fits your feet and favorite trails. Our six field testers--three men and three women--logged 2,400 miles in evaluating more than a dozen new models; our top five picks, all of which have a Gore-Tex XCR waterproof/breathable membrane, follow in order of overall performance. 
TESTERS: Kari Bodnarchuk, Jane Brison, Jonathan Dorn, Michael Lanza, Annette McGivney, David Ports 
RATING SCALE: 5 = perfect gear; 1 = save your money 
Lafuma Active Raid GTX XCR OVERALL 3.8 
Rain, sand, mud, or snow--nothing slowed this all-around top performer. 
"Versatile" is the word that kept cropping up on our testers' evaluation forms. The Raid is supportive enough for hiking with 35 to 40 pounds, yet light enough for fastpacking, talus-hopping, even short-distance running. Several distinctive features allow this shoe to multitask. First, each lace has two cord locks for adjusting ankle and forefoot volume independently, which allows a precision fit whatever your foot shape, and gives late-day swollen toes breathing room without forfeiting ankle support. A slightly higher collar provides better-than-average ankle buttressing and protection from trail grit. Finally, a curvaceous rocker bottom permits a sneakerlike stride. 
We subjected these shoes to wet snow in the Bitterroots and mud in Hells Canyon--and never got damp socks, thanks to the Gore-Tex XCR liner (a feature on all of our test shoes). The unisex sizing fit both men and women surprisingly well, though wide-footed men should go up a half-size. Traction was reliable on snow, wet rocks, packed dirt, and pea gravel. And durable construction details such as double stitching and reinforced toes should keep these shoes kicking for several hundred miles. Our "sole" beef: so-so underfoot protection and torsional stability, especially for heavier hikers. $110; 2 lbs.; men's 6-12 (women should go down a size) (800) 514-4807; www.lafuma.com. 
Garmont Eclipse XCR OVERALL 3.7 
For big-load backpacking, this burly shoe is the best choice here. 
Picture a Hummer convertible, and you've got the Eclipse: built to go over anything, or through it. The chassis is stiffer and more supportive than any other shoe we evaluated in this class; testers carried 40-plus pounds for days on the Appalachian Trail and in the North Cascades, and negotiated miles of sharp, fossilized coral in the Azores. The broad platform offers excellent stability on trail, but gets a bit tippy on uneven terrain like talus. No other shoe offers as much padding in the tongue, and testers appreciated how its asymmetrical shape folded comfortably over their ankles. Waterproofing is good--our feet stayed dry through hours of rain and puddles. Solid construction, including a reinforced toe and heel and tough nubuck/synthetic upper, guarantees years of hard use. 
The tradeoffs? The Eclipse is a heavier and stiffer shoe than true fastpackers will want, and it has this field's least breathable upper. Traction was so-so on loose gravel and steep downhills due to the absence of a pronounced heel cut. Lastly, it required more break-in time than other models, though the Eclipse was very comfortable after that. Best for medium- to high-volume feet and wide heels. $130; 2 lbs. 5 oz.; men's 8-13, 14, women's 5-11 (802) 658-8322; www.garmontusa.com. 
Merrell Chameleon II XCR OVERALL 3.6 
Balance dayhiking comfort and backpacking support with a switch-hitter. 
This agile low-top earned a permanent spot in our editor-in-chief's footwear closet after he dayhiked the 26-mile Devil's Path in New York's Catskills--16,000 feet of elevation gain and loss, and a torturous trifecta of rocky ground, polished roots, and innumerable steep scrambles. "These shoes nailed every step of it," he says. "My feet felt so good after 13 hours that I half-jogged the last 2 miles to the car." 
The Chameleon succeeds by combining good forefoot flex (for fast, comfortable striding) with midfoot and torsional rigidity (for arch support). While the shoe isn't as stiff as the Garmont and Vasque models, it has better support, cushioning, and underfoot protection than the Lafuma and Montrail. It's equally adept at dayhikes with 20 pounds or backpacking with 40. The shoes stayed dry through rainstorms, and breathed surprisingly well for a mostly leather upper. The dot-pattern outsoles stuck to rock whether dry or wet, but slipped on gravelly trails and mud. We expect at least a few seasons of hard use. 
The negatives: Only three of six testers gave fit a thumbs up--testers with low-volume feet and two of three women had problems--and the shoe is relatively heavy. Best for medium- to high-volume feet. $110; 2 lbs. 6 oz.; men's 7-12, 13, 14, 15, women's 5-11 (888) 637-7001; www.merrellboot.com. 
Montrail Mountain Mist XCR OVERALL 3.5 
This nimble trail runner ably crosses over to moderate backpacking duty. 
Surprise, surprise: Here's a hardy trail runner--the best in this pack at moving fast--that's also great for dayhiking, backpacking, even scrambling off-trail. One tester took these straight out of the box on a 6-day trip in California's Trinity Alps and found them comfortable from the first step. Versatile, too: "They handled snowfields, steep, muddy hillsides, and slippery rocks, all with a 40-pound pack." This review's lightest shoe marries plush cushioning and excellent torsional stability with good forefoot flex and rocker. Some of us carried 40 pounds comfortably, thanks in part to a plastic exoskeleton that supports feet from the laces to the ankle. Credit also goes to gel cushioning in the forefoot and a full-length plastic midsole plate. 
Waterproofing proved reliable, and breathability is among the best in the bunch. In fact, the shoes never felt damp during back-to-back 16-mile summer dayhikes in Glacier National Park. But the toebox's tight fit was uncomfortable for some testers, and while the snug collar keeps out sand and stones, it's so snug you have to force your foot through. Also, after a few hundred miles, seams and toe rands on some testers' shoes began to unravel.

</text>
