<text id="E14" category="" words="1996" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Food and Wine: What Chefs Know Best; DIY Cheese" Author="Ratha Tep, Jen Murphy, Megan Krigbaum, Jessica Tzerman, Kristin Donnelly, Christine Quinlan, Cat Jang ; Barbara Kingsolver" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.foodandwine.com/articles/what-chefs-know-best-july-2006  http://www.foodandwine.com/articles/diy-cheese">

What Chefs Know Best 
F&amp;W polled 100 chefs from New York to Portland, Oregon, on everything from their favorite pans to cooking with sodium alginate. Here's what they told us. 
Coolest Collection
Michael Cimarusti of L.A.'s Providence cooks with Bakelite tools from the '30s and '40s.
Favorite Cookbooks
Spoon Cook Book by Alain Ducasse This compendium of recipes from Ducasse's Spoon restaurants around the world, published in 2004, draws on ingredients from Japan to Mauritius.
El Bulli, 2003–2004 by Ferran Adrià "I should take Spanish classes so I can read it," says Sam Mason, pastry chef at Manhattan's WD-50. "But the pictures are ridiculously great." Worth the $210.
Charcuterie by Michael Ruhlman and Brian Polcyn A definitive new tome on salting, smoking and curing.
"I'm inspired by artists who use a limited palette, like painter Piet Mondrian and the White Stripes, two musicians who create an incredible sound."
 - Graham Elliot Bowles, Chicago's Avenues
CHEF'S FAVORITE KITCHEN TOOLS
Fantasy Serving Pieces
Audible meals "With seafood dishes, how about delivering an iPod that plays the sound of ocean waves?" says Richard Blais of One.midtown Kitchen in Atlanta.
Always frothy Josiah Citrin of Mélisse in Santa Monica, California, would create a tureen with a built-in blender to keep soups airy.
4 Japanese Knives
1. Misono Misono's superthin blades are great for fine dicing.
2. MAC MAC's Chef series is more affordable than many Japanese knives.
3. Masamoto A favorite among chefs who work with lots of fish, like Ken Oringer of Clio in Boston.
4. Kershaw Shun The "D-shaped" handle - thicker in the middle - provides an excellent grip.
3 Great Pans
1. All-Clad Felicia Willett of Felicia Suzanne's in Memphis likes their durability.
2. Le Creuset "They're wonderful for braising," says Cory Schreiber of Wildwood in Portland, Oregon.
3. Old-Fashioned Cast-Iron Tom Douglas of Seattle's Dahlia Lounge uses his grandmother's pan.
Top $10 Gadgets
1. Peelers A wide, sturdy handle and a flexible blade make plastic peelers the most useful small kitchen gadget.
2. Citrus Reamers Easy to grip and maneuver, reamers are favored over juicers.
3. Egg Toppers Alessandro Stratta of Alex in Las Vegas loves this stainless steel tool, which removes the tops of soft-boiled eggs for an elegant presentation.
4. Paring Knives These refute the idea that the bigger the knife, the better, says Laurent Manrique of Aqua in San Francisco.
MOST INSPIRING INGREDIENTS
5 Coveted Ingredients
Prized culatello prosciutto from Armandino Batali's SALUMI in Seattle, a favorite of Bruce Logue of Vivace in Carlsbad, California ($35 per lb; 877-223-0813).
Hard-to-find Oaxacan chiles from THE CHILE GUY in Bernalillo, New Mexico, a staple of Robert Del Grande's Cafe Annie in Houston ($15 to $25 per lb; thechileguy.com).
Normandy ducks from STONE CHURCH FARM in Rifton, New York, adored by Michael White of Fiamma Osteria in Manhattan ($6 per lb; 212-717-8100).
Sake-cured caviar from BLIS CAVIAR in Ann Arbor, Michigan, prized by Alex Talbot and Aki Kamozawa of Keyah Grande in Pagosa Springs, Colorado ($13 for 1 oz; mikuniwildharvest.com).
Heritage chickens from FICKLE CREEK FARM in Efland, North Carolina, a must for Andrea Reusing of Lantern in Chapel Hill (sold locally, from $3 per lb; 919-304-6287).
Chemical Reaction
Methylcellulose
At Moto in Chicago, Homaro Cantu creates faux marshmallows with methylcellulose, which solidifies when warmed and liquefies when cooled.
Sodium alginate
Using this thickener made out of seaweed, Sean Brock of McCrady's in Charleston, South Carolina, creates round balls to hold heirloom-corn soup.
Tapioca maltodextrin
Paul Liebrandt of Gilt in New York City uses this tapioca derivative to make fine foie gras powder.
MUST-HAVES FOR THE PANTRY
What's your favorite baking chocolate? "I've experimented with other chocolates to break my Valrhona habit, but I keep coming back."
 - Nicole Krasinski, Rubicon in San Francisco
5 Favorite Peppers
Cayenne Daniel Humm of Eleven Madison Park in Manhattan uses cayenne in almost every sauce: "A touch, so it makes flavors fuller without adding heat."
Aleppo Mindy Segal of Hot Chocolate in Chicago uses this subtly hot and tangy Syrian pepper in a vinaigrette for arugula salads.
Sichuan With the ban lifted last year, the United States is finally getting authentic, pungent Sichuan peppercorns from China. Anita Lo of New York City's Annisa likes their fragrance and complexity.
Red Chile This hot pepper has a slow burn. "We use it in all our salumi [cured meats]," says Dan Latham of L&amp;M's Kitchen &amp; Salumeria in Oxford, Mississippi.
Piment d'Espelette Gavin Kaysen of El Bizcocho in San Diego accents Dover sole with the sweet-spicy Basque pepper.
Most Underused Spice
Chefs overwhelmingly singled out cardamom. Tory Miller of L'Etoile in Madison, Wisconsin, sneaks it in while brining pork: "It adds a floral note without being overpowering."
Most Versatile Spice
"Black pepper goes with practically everything," says Michel Richard of Citronelle in Washington, DC. Karen Barker, pastry chef of Magnolia Grill in Durham, North Carolina, likes using it in desserts.
Top Cooking Essentials
1. Olive Oil Chefs might argue over which country makes the best (Italy, France, Spain, Greece), but olive oil is their top must-have.
2. Vinegar Michael Tusk of Quince in San Francisco likes the flavor of extra-vecchio (aged for a minimum of 25 years) balsamic vinegar.
3. Salt Joseba Jiménez de Jiménez of Seattle's Harvest Vine uses 60 types, like a fleur de sel found near his château in Navarrenx, France.
GREAT VALUE RESTAURANTS
What kind of fast-food place would you open? "My wife and I joke that if we don't make it in New York City, we'll drive a BBQ truck along the Côte d'Azur in France and serve brisket."
 - Laurent Gras, Bistro du Vent, New York City
Soup "Since it rains all the time around here, I'd open up a soup place with choices like fresh spinach with pickled morels," says Scott Dolich of Park Kitchen in Portland, Oregon.
Sandwiches Alfred Portale of Gotham Bar and Grill in New York City would make Italian sandwiches; Todd Gray of Equinox in Washington, DC, would serve hot Reubens.
Burgers Chad Robertson of Bar Tartine in San Francisco would offer homemade ketchup and freshly baked hamburger buns at his imaginary joint, Liz Burger.
Best $10 Meals
Potbelly Sandwich Works This sandwich chain got its start in an antiques store in Chicago. Now there are 110 locations in eight states. Chef Vikram Garg of IndeBleu hangs out in the 7th Street store in Washington, DC (726 7th St. NW; 202-478-0070).
Yuca's, Los Angeles Pastry chef Annie Clemmons of Cyrus in Healdsburg, California, loves the carnitas (pork) tacos at this tiny taco shack in a liquor-store parking lot. "They're 10-napkin tacos because they're so juicy and rich," she says (2056 Hillhurst Ave.; 323-662-1214).
Red Pearl Restaurant, Homewood, Alabama Chris Hastings of the Hot and Hot Fish Club in Birmingham, Alabama, orders the salt-roasted shrimp at this 60-seat restaurant in the back of a family-owned Asian grocery store (243 W. Valley Ave.; 205-945-9558).
Baguette Box, Seattle "Out of control," says Daisley Gordon of Seattle's Campagne about his favorite sandwich: deep-fried chicken marinated in rice wine (1203 Pine St.; 206-332-0220). 
Favorite Dish of '05
Zak Pelaccio's salad of crispy pork belly and pickled watermelon at Malaysian joint Fatty Crab in New York City. "It's a cool combination of everything that's great about food."
 - Brian Hill, Francine Bistro, Camden, Maine

DIY Cheese 
Barbara Kingsolver learns that making a pound of mozzarella at home is even faster than baking a cobbler, but speed is not the only reason to try it 
Years ago, when I was young and still sure of my own power over boring routines, I studied a map one weekend and found a new, faster route back home from the city where I'd recently moved. I described my clever navigations to my grandfather, boasting that I'd saved 37 minutes. "Thirty-seven," he mused. "And you just used up 15 telling me all about it. What will you do with the other 22?"
Time-saving, the modern credo that sends us zipping from microwave dinners to the fast lane, can blur the truth that life is a zero-sum equation. Every minute saved will get used up on something else, possibly an activity no more sublime than watching TV. Ever since my grandfather's rebuke, I've tried to bear in mind that taking time with the quotidian might make it satisfying enough to be the goal, rather than the obstacle. Cooking dinner, especially, is a pleasure to stretch out over the day's end when work is done and family members trail home. A quick recipe can turn slow because of the experiments we hazard. We make things from scratch for the fun of it. We grow a garden. We bake bread. We make cheese.
Okay, I know. You were with me right up to that last one. I'm not sure why, since it takes less time to make a pound of mozzarella than to bake a cobbler, but most people find cheesemaking a preposterous idea. If friends happen over just as I'm draining a freshly made Neufchâtel, they act like they've caught me at witchcraft. 
In our family it began with experiments. We missed certain things, soft cheeses especially, that my daughter and I often don't eat because of our mild lactose intolerance. A little knowledge of biochemistry (and a love for learning about interesting food processes) led us to think we might feel comfortable eating cheeses again if we made them ourselves, culturing out a lot of the lactose and draining it off with the whey - and this turns out to be true. Making a great soft cheese is as simple as warming some milk, stirring in a special bacterial culture that imparts a particular flavor, allowing it to curdle overnight, then draining off the whey. Our chèvre and fromage blanc were so delicious, we were inspired to try hard cheeses, which are often heated gently in the curd stage, then pressed and aged in a cool cellar or in the crisper drawer of the fridge. Our successes keep us trying. We've even converted some of our friends. You could be next. 
I know, you don't have time. Who does? To calm the great American subservience to hurry, to convince us that an hour or two spent rendering up cheese in our own kitchens could be worth the trouble - what would that take? A motivational speaker, an artist, a devotee, a pal who builds your confidence? A Cheese Queen, maybe? 
The answer is yes, all of the above, and she exists. Her name is Ricki Carroll. Since 1978, when she started New England Cheesemaking Supply Company and began holding workshops in her western Massachusetts kitchen, she has taught some 7,500 people how to make cheese. That's not even counting those of us who ordered her supplies online and worked our way through her book, Cheesemaking Made Easy, which has sold over 100,000 copies (the new edition has been renamed Home Cheese Making). She's inspired artisans from the Loire to Las Vegas. Partly to hone my own skills, but largely out of curiosity, I sought out the woman whose Web site really does identify her as the Cheese Queen. 
Her reign began even before the Sunday morning last spring when my family and several of our cheesemaking friends stepped onto the porch of a colorful Queen Anne with lupines and lilies blooming around the stoop. We walked through the door and fell through the looking glass into a place where cheesemaking antiques mix in with handmade dolls and African masks, unusual musical instruments and crazy quilts. 
Ricki waved us into the big kitchen as she hastily pinned up her curly hair with a parrot-shaped barrette. She'd generously invited our group to sit in as her guests at an ordinary one-day workshop for beginners. We sat at long tables and introduced ourselves to the 20 other students. For several men this was a Father's Day gift. Others described practical goals: a chef hoped to broaden her culinary range; mothers desired healthier diets for their families. Martha, from Texas, owned water buffalo and dreamed of great mozzarella.

</text>
