<text id="E22" category="" words="1995" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'THE MAN WHO DISAPPEARED.' Rolling Stone, 0035791X, 12/28/2006, Issue 1016/1017" Author="Neil Strauss" PublicationDate="December 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.lancs.ac.uk/ehost/detail?hid=106&sid=b96fbdd5-f435-4e88-a967-80a363bfc672%40sessionmgr111&vid=7&bdata=JnNpdGU9ZWhvc3QtbGl2ZQ%3d%3d#db=a9h&AN=23488320">

PAUL CLIFFORD NELSON WAS born an January 21st, 1936, in the small town of Warren, Minnesota, population 1,678, to second-gene ration Swedish immigrants. His father, Clifford, ran a Ford, Mercury and Lincoln dealership, sold Case machinery and owned a wheat farm. His mother, Clara, maintained the home. They were both devout members of the Evangelical Covenant Church, a Protestant sect formed by Swedish immigrants in the late nineteenth century, and they dragged Paul to church on Wednesday nights and often twice on Sundays.
"His folks didn't approve of him going to movies," says Doris Hoper, the Warren High School homecoming queen, to whom he was married from 1959 to 1973. "They didn't approve of going dancing. They were good people, but what else was there to do in Warren?"
On a trip to North Dakota, Nelson began his record collection by stealing his first two singles: Hank Williams recording as Luke the Drifter and Chet Baker performing with the Gerry Mulligan Quartet.
Nelson also took an interest in writing in high school. He started penning stories for the school newspaper, The Chronicle, then moved on to editing the school yearbook and writing sports stories for the local'Warren paper. After graduating, Nelson won a scholarship to St, Olaf College in Northfield, Minnesota, but transferred in sophomore year to the University of Minnesota, chiefly because he wanted to be in a bigger city.
One afternoon in his rooming house, a freshman by the name of Jon Pankake happened to hear Nelson talking about APBA, a baseball-statistics game involving cards and dice. Also an APBA fan, Pankake decided to introduce himself.
Pankake remembers opening the door to find a clean-shaven sophomore with a crew cut, glasses and jeans, "I would describe it as the ideal college friendship," Pankake says. "You come from a small town in Minnesota, you're the smartest guy in your class, you have aspirations that no one else shares, and you're all alone in the world. Then you come to the University of Minnesota and meet someone in the exact same position, and you stay up all night talking about movies and music and ideas."
They found their tastes to be similar, in music  -  Peggy Lee, Julie London and Chet Baker  -  as well as in film. "There was a time when we were very into Jimmy Dean," Pankake says. "Paul had even adopted the red nylon jacket that Jimmy Dean wears in Rebel "Without a Cause, and he had somehow gotten a life-size cutout of Dean from Giant to put up in his room. That was quite spooky at the time."
The two soon immersed themselves in the world of writing, criticism and interpretation surrounding the culture they loved. They got into auteur theory and began reading John McCarten, who reviewed movies for The New Yorker. It was here that Nelson's critical tastes were shaped. "[McCarten] was a very give-'em-hell kind of reviewer," Pankake says. "He would roast the Hollywood standard cotton-candy product and hold out for the good reviews for John Ford and Howard Hawks."
For fun, after watching a new film. Nelson and Pankake would write reviews for each other to read, trying to, as they put it, "smoke out the honest filmmakers from the people who just did product." They didn't necessarily have any professional writing aspirations  -  until Pete Seeger came to campus to perform.
Nelson at the time was working part-time at a local record distributor. One of its many accounts was Folkways, and, itching to dive deeper into folk, Nelson took home Harry Smith's Anthology of American Folk Music. For the weeks that followed, it was practically all Nelson and Pankake listened to and talked about.
"I was never able to understand why that strange music got a hold of us," Pankake says. "But we went from thinking Peggy Lee was a great singer to thinking Vera Hall was a great singer in less than a year."
When they heard that Seeger was going to be performing at the University of Iowa, they drove to the show. Afterward, they sought out Seeger and told him they were thinking of starting a magazine about folk music. Seeger replied, "It's a free country  -  you can do what you want."
So in 1960, the pair self-published the small newsletter that would make their names, The Link Sandy Review. "We always joked that The Little Sandy could have as easily been a fanzine about movies," Pankake says. "We like to think that we flipped a coin at some point and folk music lost."
Nelson stayed after hours in the record distribution offices where he worked to run off the first edition of 300 copies on the Gestetner mimeograph machine; later editions were assembled in the basement of friend and folk singer Tony Glover's parents' home. Doris, whom he married around this time, managed their small subscriber base.
"We wanted to be for the music that wasn't being heard," says Pankake. Basically a collection of reviews with an editor's note, The Little Sandy Review had a sense of humor that the other folk zines lacked. And its writers cared passionately about music, culture and integrity  -  which came across in a savage, youthful, witty idealism that wasn't afraid to take revered artists and labels to task for shoddy work.
In an epic twenty-one-page review of the Newport Folk Festival in one of the magazine's later issues. Nelson wrote, "We come to praise Newport, not to bury it, but, alas, it fairly greets us with a shovel in its hands, an embarrassed grin on its face, and the Folkways Anthology at its feet."
As the fanzine grew in prestige, Nelson got bis friend Tony Glover a small recording deal for the trio Koerner, Ray and Glover (whose debut album Nelson produced). He later sent that album to Elektra Records, which signed the band, rereleasing the album and putting out four more.
And then there was Bob Dylan.
"Dylan was just a kid around campus in the folk scene," Pankake says. "He wasn't Dylan yet. He hadn't gone East and managed that transformation. He was just a second-rate coffeehouse singer. Paul and I had seen him playing in a coffeehouse in Dinkytown. And Dylan had seen The Little Sandy Review and knew who we were from that."
Later, Dyian would visit with the pair to be schooled in seminal folk, particularly Moe Asch's 19405 recordings of Woody Guthrie. As Nelson recalled it to his friends, Dylan sounded more like Harry Belafonte before he was exposed to the Guthrie 783. In an incident that became one of Nelson's favorite stories (he tells it in Martin Scorsese's Dylan documentary No Direction Home), the young singer purloined a bunch of records from the physically imposing Pankake, who came after Dylan brandishing a table leg to get them back.
Throughout his life, Nelson held fast to the Dylan bootleg recordings he had from this time, though he often played people a cassette of a later argument he had with Dylan at a party in Minneapolis. "Paul was saying Bob should move away from political songwriting, and Bob was saying no, everything had to be political," Elliott Murphy says. "Paul was right, but Bob, because of the force of his personality, won the argument."
In 1963, Nelson moved to New York on the heels of the respect that The Little Sandy Review had earned him. Though he aspired to write about film, he ended up taking the reins as managing editor of Sing Out!, the leading quarterly of the folk boom. Nelson and his wife, who was six months pregnant with their son, Mark, rented a two-bed' room apartment in a new building on Queens Boulevard. But after Mark was born, everything changed for Nelson.
He'd met a woman named Bobbi London, a folk singer in a group called the Pennywhistlers. London also worked at the front desk of the Sing Out! office, filling subscriptions. As she tells it, Nelson had asked one of her bandmates about her, and he'd told him that she slept with men for books. Though the account was spurious, Nelson was intrigued. Unbeknownst to his wife, Nelson started dating her. And, together, they made the annual pilgrimage to the Newport Folk Festival in 1965. They were near the front of the audience when Dylan came onstage and went electric.
"The sea parted," London says. "When we looked around, we just saw Jac [Holzman, founder of Elektra Records], Paul and myself on one side of the water and everyone else on the other. The music was pretty loud and not refined, but you could hear what it was going to be eventually. We knew that everything was going to change. And it did."
When Nelson returned to New York, he wrote a defense of Dylan in Sing Out!. "It was a sad parting of the ways for many, myself included," he wrote. "I choose Dylan. I choose an. I will stand behind Dylan and his 'new1 songs, and I'll bet my critical reputation (such as it may be) that I'm right."
Irwin Silber, the magazine's founder, wrote a piece alongside Nelson's expressing the opposite point of view: that the music was "not very good" rock &amp; roll and "not very good Dylan."
In the end, Nelson was right. And his critical reputation was made.
A man of principle over practicality, Nelson quit the magazine after the review was published. "He knew when he wrote the piece that Dylan would be ostracized and vilified," London says. "And he didn't want to be part of that."
After he left Sing Out!, Nelson planned to pursue screenwriting but continued to eke out a living as a freelance writer.Though he and his wife would remain together until 1968  -  when she moved back to Warren with their son  -  and would remain married until 1973, he began spending more and more time at London's East Village apartment. She was struck by his fastidious ways. "He had a remarkable, rigid way of living his life, including the way he treated his writing," she remembers. "He would go over a word like someone analyzing the Talmud. He would work well into the night, going over it again and again, until the piece not only read perfect but looked perfect on the page. Even the way the type was positioned on the page looked beautiful. He chose the same paper to use every time, until they discontinued the color."
At every turn, Nelson seemed to choose culture over commitment. He connected with people over films, music and movies, and could discuss them for hours, yet he rarely talked about himself or his own emotions. Whether it be the Westerns of John Ford or the detective novels of Ross Macdonald or the songs of Leonard Cohen, he gravitated toward art with a stark moral code that elevated the loner misfit to the status of solitary romantic hero.
The next chapter in Nelson's career began in 1967, when Danny Fields became editor of a pop magazine called Hullabaloo. In need of a reviews editor, Fields asked several writers to turn in reviews of the Doors' first album and the Stones' Got Live If You Want It, both of which he liked. "I wanted to hire someone who agreed with me and who I felt liked them for the right reasons," he says. "And that someone was Paul Nelson."
Nelson's reviews of the albums, like many of his reviews before and after, were oriented in the world of cinema, while the writing itself had an uncommon grace, conveying the passion of rock &amp; roll with literary elegance: "There is a certain type of movie nut who sits front-row center, leans forward and lets the film rush over him like the rush of wind past his ears, feels what is going on up there, his face aglow from the light of the screen. There is no distancing here, no attempt to push back for perspective.

</text>
