<text id="E23" category="" words="1991" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="What &quot;Evidence&quot; Says About Art.' Art in America; Nov2006, Vol. 94 Issue 10, p57-67" Author="Carter Ratcliff" PublicationDate="November 2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.lancs.ac.uk/ehost/detail?hid=8&sid=f6861be9-db55-43ab-ab92-bc9e4c5e1e51%40sessionmgr10&vid=1&bdata=JnNpdGU9ZWhvc3QtbGl2ZQ%3d%3d#db=a9h&AN=23071486">

1
Over a quarter of a century ago, two young photographers, Larry Sultan and Mike Mandel, approached a number of institutions with a strange request: Let us look through your photographic archives, copy certain images and present them as our work. They met little resistance, in part because they bore a letter from the National Endowment for the Arts identifying them as recipients of a grant for 1975. Certified by a federal agency as professional artists, Sultan and Mandel were given free rein just about everywhere they went. Professional methods and purposes often seem mysterious to outsiders. Why not assume that these artists were up to something useful or at least harmless?
For two and a half years, they combed through the image-vaults of nearly 80 bureaucracies of various kinds: federal agencies, aerospace corporations, university laboratories, fire and police departments. They were in search of something elusive: a hint of the strange or the sinister in pictures intended as neutral records of business as usual. One of their discoveries is a black-and-white print of three men gazing intently into the spray given off by a fanlike device. Even odder than this peculiar gizmo is the look of studious, almost reverent attentiveness on each of the men's faces. What is going on here? We can't know because Sultan and Mandel have removed the caption from this and all other images they collected. In a sense, they stripped these pictures naked, not to uncover their meanings but to put them up for grabs. 
As Mandel recently recalled, "We usually were looking at 4-by-5 contact prints, which permitted us to examine a lot of material very quickly. One day, at the Los Angeles Water Department, Larry started at one end of the room, I started at the other. Between us, we looked at 400,000 images." In all, they eyeballed over two million photographs before settling on about 500. From these they selected 57, which were shown at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art in 1977. From San Francisco, the exhibition traveled to the Fogg Museum of Art at Harvard, the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago, and on to several other venues. It then entered an archive of its own, at the Center for Creative Photography at the University of Arizona, Tucson. For nearly three decades, the Center has been the repository of the entire project - the 57 images that went on view in "Evidence," as the exhibition was titled; prints and file negatives of the 500 photographs from which the smaller group was selected; as well as correspondence and other paperwork generated by the project. At the time of the show, the artists published a book that bore the same title and presented the same sequence of 57 images.
For years, "Evidence" could be seen only in the pages of this book. Then, early in 2004, the Center for Creative Photography mounted an exhibition of the original images. Re-titled "Evidence Revisited," it traveled from Tucson to the Loeb Art Center of Vassar College, where I saw it, and on to the Photographer's Gallery in London. There were, as well, selections from "Evidence" on view at the Stephen Wirtz Gallery in San Francisco, and last summer a version of the show was seen at the Berlin Biennial. On the occasion of "Evidence Revisited," the artists published a new edition of the book. This one contains two more images than the original edition, as well as an introduction by Sandra S. Phillips, senior curator of photography at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, and an afterword by Robert F. Forth, dean of the California College of the Arts.
Before "Evidence," Sultan and Mandel collaborated on other works, among them a series of enigmatic billboard images seen along the freeways of Los Angeles. More recently, they have worked together on large photographic murals for public places, among them the San Francisco International Airport and the Children's Center for the Administration of Children's Services in Manhattan. These vast pictures are mosaics: fields of small ceramic tiles, each one bearing an image-bit transferred from a photograph. This variation on a traditional medium is Mandel's invention, and he has employed it to carry out a number of mural projects on his own. Recently, he and his wife, the artist Chantal Zakari, revamped the medium again, this time for the digital age. Exchanging photography for Internet pictures, they produced a wall-sized mosaic of Webcam sex titled Suzi, which was on view at Gasp Gallery in Boston for six weeks in 2005. Here, tiles functioned as pixels to generate virtual imagery at the walk-in scale of architecture.
Sultan's solo works include Pictures from Home (1992), a portfolio that mixes images from his family's snapshot and movie archives with the artist's formal photographs of his parents. Thus the familiar myths sustained by old pictures are questioned from a later, more detached point of view. The Valley (2003) shows men and women relaxing in the living rooms and on the patios of houses in the San Fernando Valley - the site, as well, of Pictures form Home. Naked or clad in bathrobes, these figures are porn actors and actresses. Each of these houses, in all its suburban banality, has been rented for the three-day period it takes to make an "adult" film. The master fiction of pornography is that a person can be all body and the body can be entirely sexual and thus completely manipulable. Sultan's pictures of porn-bodies off-camera do not attack this fiction directly. These are not didactic images. Rather, they draw us into speculative contact with a variety of informal portraits, many of them exasperatingly opaque. Yet the opacity of these faces and postures is engaging, as is the indecipherable strangeness of images in "Evidence." Whatever their subject, Sultan and Mandel bring it to life by putting it beyond the reach of reductive analysis. (My praise for the elusiveness of "Evidence" should not be taken as a sign that I am a relativist or doubt the possibility of objective truth. There is much about which we can make objectively true statements - an obvious point that has no bearing on art, because art raises no issue of truth. Art is fictional, though not all fictions are art. To count as art, a fiction must be complex enough - one might say, resourceful enough - to resist all our attempts to assign it a settled meaning.)
Mandel and Sultan were of course glad to see "Evidence" reemerge as an exhibition after nearly three decades in mothballs. However, as both artists note, the Center for Creative Photography's "Evidence Revisited" presented some difficulties. "The Center imposed its own curatorial design," says Sultan. "The images were resequenced, in an attempt to supply thematic coherence. Our intention in 1977 was to leave it open, to make room for the viewer. And we were careful to avoid the kind of sequence that would congeal around formal qualities." At the Berlin Biennial, too, the curators "wanted to have their own way" with "Evidence," according to Sultan. The result, says Mandel, "wasn't the perfect show." Nonetheless, he adds, the walls where this version of "Evidence" appeared "were so decrepit and debased" that "the narrative inherent" in the work was reinforced, atmospherically. 
"Narrative" may be a misleading word. There is no story to be read into "Evidence," however its images are arranged. Still, in its original sequence - the one reestablished by the new edition of the book - the work uses technology's self-images to shine a questioning light on its imperative: to shape and control. In one photograph, a man stands with a bag of some translucent material over his head. Another man holds a blow torch to the bag. What on earth is going on here? In the absence of a caption, the viewer has no idea, just as it is impossible to know why men are wading into the wall of foam that advances from the background of another photograph. To traverse the eye-level row of pictures is to drift from one conundrum to the next. What are the silhouetted figures doing inside the translucent cube? Why does the gloved hand cover the monkey's face? How did the space suit come to be lying dace down on a stretch of office carpeting? We can't even tell if there is anyone - or anything - inside the suit.
"Evidence" offers glimpses into a world where hard hats are often worn with suits and ties, as mid-level functionaries employ procedures and pieces of equipment intelligible only to the must specialized expertise. And there are excursions to scrubby landscapes inhabited only by down-to-earth hardware. A series of metal retaining walls shapes a hillside. A platoon of triangle-headed objects - sensors of some sort? - crowd into the foreground. Three beds stand in an open field, accompanied by trash cans and fire extinguishers. These images form a suite of indecipherable puzzles, yet the frustration they induce is a small price to pay for the uneasy pleasure of immersion in their oddness. 
One photograph shows a man carrying a black case as he negotiates a heap of stony fragments at the bottom of a concrete-lined pit. Another is a tight shot of broken stones piled up and confined by gridded wire. Pictures of various substances chipped, torn and otherwise fragmented comport nicely with stop-time images of explosions. Measuring devices appear frequently, as do close-ups of ropes, cables and various species of rigging. Though many of these pictures show a step in the accomplishment of some complex task, the exhibition is haunted by a sense of highly sophisticated futility - or worse. A man in high rubber boots stands ankle deep in the dark liquid flowing into the even darker depths of an immense conduit. Viewers eager to nail down a meaning could see him as a guide to an underworld where the intrepid traveller discovers that the effects of technology are even direr than we imagine.
Sultan and Mandel grew up in the San Fernando Valley, just east of Los Angeles and well within the aerospace industry's sphere of influence. When they were young, advanced technology was aglow with utopian promise, not all of it merely implied. Though they find that promise unpersuasive, they are not Luddities nostalgic for the imaginary idyll of preindustrial times. They feel, rather, that our times are too easily seduced by the hope of total control, whether technological or social or political. The rundown walls in Berlin on which the most recent version of "Evidence" was exhibited are those of a school for Jewish girls. Long in ruins, never renovated, this setting has a "rough history," as Sultan notes. With this understatement, he recalls the 20th century's most atrocious attempt at social control - Nazi genocide, which made deathly use of technology.
2
Those who expect art to perform community service will insist on seeing "Evidence" as an indictment of technology. Undeniably, Sultan and Mandel's selections are well calculated to endow advanced technology with a spooky aura. But conjuring up an aura is not to be confused with bringing an indictment and making it stick. To do that, one must present a coherent argument and support it with solid evidence. This is precisely what "Evidence" does not do, what it cannot do. The exhibition's lack of verbal explication of any sort removes every last ounce of evidentiary weight from the images it puts on display. "Evidence" is a thoroughly ironic title for these pictures. Yet Sultan and Mandel are ironists only in passing. Their overriding aim is to loft us out of our usual ways of thinking. They want to send us into speculative orbit around images that we will never be able to interpret with any certainty.
"Evidence" begins with a photograph of footprints on flagstones. A bit later in the sequence, there are pictures of handprints and burnt-out fuse boxes - all of them taken, presumably, by a crime scene photographer from one of the police departments that appear in Sultan and Mandel's list of sources. Labeled, these traces of a human presence would be far less mysterious.

</text>
