<text id="E29" category="" words="1995" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Cementing the Deal: Oyler Wu Collaborative's husband-wife principals sell their brand of design by showing off their Los Angeles live-work loft.' Interior Design, Nov 2006; 'Raise a Glass: Here's to the Winecenter Kaltern, the showcase that Feld72 built " Author="Edie Cohen" PublicationDate="Nov 2006, Nov 2006, June 2006" SampledFrom="All, All, Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.interiordesign.net/article/484249-A_Star_is_Reborn.php">

Today, Dwayne Oyler and Jenny Wu are living large. That wasn't quite the case back when they were working as associates at Toshiko Mori Architect and Gluckman Mayner Architects, respectively, and renting a tiny New York apartment, only 250 square feet. During that time, the couple established Oyler Wu Collaborative and began to heed the lure of Los Angeles. Wu is a native. Plus, says Oyler, "It has more variety."
They first explored Venice Beach and its bungalows after making the move - and marrying - two years ago. "But we still liked living in an apartment, New York - style," Wu recalls. A visit to craigslist.org led the couple downtown to the American Cement Building, which had been converted into lofts.
One draw was the building's tenant list: Architects and photographers as well as the inevitable "industry" professionals provided an instant coterie of kindred spirits. Another attraction was the building itself. Built by DMJM in 1964, this unofficial Wilshire Boulevard landmark has a facade of interwoven concrete X's that are both stunning and structural. The configuration, Oyler explains, eliminates the need for columns inside the building. (Except in the garage.)
The 1,400-square-foot space that the couple rented presented an absolute tabula rasa. "All we had," Wu says, "was concrete everywhere." Bare-bones amenities were limited to a small bathroom and a kitchen with plastic-laminate cabinetry and a stainless-steel sink.
Faced with fashioning an all-inclusive live-work environment, the architects were adamant that nothing should diminish the openness or the experience of the building's intrinsic sculpture. In order to appreciate both to the fullest, the pair lived in the empty space for four months, taking the time to experiment with diverse schemes before deciding on one that they could construct themselves. The result would still have to look finished enough to show off to prospective clients, since Oyler Wu Collaborative was yet to have a body of built work.
Oyler and Wu worked entirely with shop-grade birch plywood at a cost-effective $40 per sheet. "And we had the table saw and drills to do it ourselves," Oyler says. The literal backbone of the design is a 7-foot-high partition that runs 24 feet from front to back, separating the public zone from the bedroom and anchoring just about everything. Slightly splayed in plan, starting at 12 inches wide and eventually angling out to 30, the wall also handles diverse storage requirements - for personal paraphernalia as well as computers, a printer, and a scanner.
To counterbalance the wall's industrial mass with a more ethereal quality, the architects left some panels as open frames, then stretched translucent white chiffon over them. The same holds true for the wall's two shojilike doors, which mark a subtle division between work and home. Oyler and Wu built the door frames from shaved-down two-by-fours. "We laid out the frames on the floor and lived around them for a month," Wu says. "They look simple, but there are many complex junctions."
Oyler and Wu's shared plywood desk, attached at one end to the wall, extends 16 feet into the public space. As for the desk's top, Wu says, "It was the last thing to do, and we were running out of money." Stone was clearly beyond their means. Stainless steel was, too. So the couple opted for cement-board, which they sanded and finished with three coats of polyurethane.
Spanning the 33-foot-long window wall in front of the desk is a triple-tiered low plywood shelving unit where the architects display their models, creating a miniature city against a backdrop of the real thing. Taller pine shelving, purchased this time, houses the couple's library and keeps Oyler's collection of stringed instruments within reach. In breaks from work, he reaches for a guitar, mandolin, bass, or German 19th-century violin. Wu, for her part, keeps up with flute and piano. Talk about multitasking and multitalent.
Additional furnishings are few. The live-work area is outfitted with Paola Lenti's braided rope-yarn chaise longue and rug, Piero Lissoni's stainless-steel mesh chairs, and Oyler's own cantilevered cocktail table in plywood, pine, and cement-board - the base weighted down with pennies. The bedroom holds simple rectilinear pieces that Oyler made while living in New York: a cherrywood bed, a maple armchair, and a pine desk with drawers made of wine crates.
So far, the minimal scheme is working. "We can't take prospective clients to, say, the big courthouse we've just built. So we bring them here, where we can show our attention to detail and ability to pull it together," Wu says. Just ask developer Sven Altmetz, who was on the hunt for architects to design a ground-up loft building in Venice. He came. He saw. He commissioned.

Italy's South Tyrol has a split personality. It's culturally part Italian and part Austrian, with a dense dialect comprehensible only to natives. Yet the Winecenter Kaltern, nestled amid the Dolomites, has nothing split about it. Representing a collaborative of 410 regional vineyards, the tri-level building combines shopping and tasting areas in one clean, harmonious sweep that shows equal respect to all the bottles, whether a $10 table wine or a $300 Trento Denominazione di Origine Controllata.
The commission resulted from an invitational competition between five firms. Among them, the only one not in Italy was Feld72, an Austrian firm with a name derived from the office's street address. However, two of Feld72's five architect partners - most of whom are graduates of the Universität Wien - were born in the South Tyrol, leading the firm to become involved in several competitions there. The partners won the Winecenter Kaltern job on the combined strength of their previous urban interventions and architecture throughout Europe as well as a measure of renown from the Biennale di Venezia, 2004: Feld72 did an urban-space installation there.
Facing the Strada del Vino, the village's aptly named main road, the Winecenter reveals Feld72's ability to bridge the centuries - led by Peter Zoderer, acting as project architect, and Anne Catherine Fleith, in charge of furnishings. (She's the one partner who graduated from the Ecole d'Architecture de Strasbourg.) The team came up with an L-shape building that simultaneously creates a high-visibility icon for car traffic and respects a 1911 stone warehouse across the road.
The center's beige skin of fiberglass-reinforced concrete panels imparts depth and substance, Zoderer notes: "Using them on the roof as well as the walls emphasizes the building's monolithic nature." At ground level, runs of frameless windows put the interiors onstage. Solar glazing on the upper levels has a translucent, scrimlike quality.
One wing, just a single story, is entirely dedicated to retail. The conjoined three-story tower has additional sales space at ground level, a wine bar and lounge on two, and a skylit tasting room at the top. With nary a full-height divider in the place, it seems far larger than its 4,000 square feet. (And it actually is: There's a 3,700-square-foot wine cellar, open by appointment.)
Aboveground, the interior is all white walls and ceiling, sand-colored epoxy-resin flooring, and acacia for the cash-wrap counter, the tasting bar, cabinetry, millwork, and some of the flooring. "There are very few materials, just white and wood," Fleith explains. "So the product stands out." Overlapping open levels carve up the volume into function zones. "A veritable wine tour is created through the complex progression of atmospheres and spatial impressions," Zoderer says.
That path begins with a figurative tour of the local wine country. Ambling along a central row of display tables, guests discover how the architects addressed one of their chief challenges: organizing and presenting a vast amount of merchandise. Tables for mid-value wine are all about utility, with an added pizzico of romance. Each can hold entire cartons below; the tops are incised to cradle single bottles, accompanied by laminated photos and text describing the vintage and vineyard in question. Along the walls, cabinets and shelves hold lower-priced wine. The most expensive bottles are stored in the cellar.
For the 40-seat lounge on the second level, Fleith selected tables in dark-stained beech and chairs covered in complementary black leather. In the tasting room at the very top, the palette lightens up with a long table topped in white linoleum and chairs with white leather-wrapped seats. "Against the white, the reds and yellows of the wine really shine," she says. Differences among merlots, cabernet sauvignons, pinot blancs, and Rieslings aside, the tasting room's only color comes from a row of small rectangular abstract paintings.
With neutral tones so dominant, saturated color truly bursts from behind the acacia doors of the three restrooms, completely awash in tinted epoxy. There's magenta for women, lime for men, and tangerine for the handicapped. Proof that the Winecenter Kaltern isn't completely sober, after all.

"Go West, young man," Horace Greeley advised. And Jason Pomeranc heeded the call. With Thompson Hotels properties already in New York and Washington, D.C., Pomeranc was looking to Los Angeles for expansion. What he found was the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel, a National Register of Historic Places listee with a star-studded past. The find came courtesy of Dodd Mitchell, who was already renovating the 1927 landmark for new owners Goodwin Gaw and David Chang - and knew that they happened to be in need of a management operator. Since Mitchell was also, simultaneously, in the middle of a Thompson Hotels project in New York, he put out the casting call to Pomeranc. Last December, they inked the deal.
At the time, the Roosevelt renovation was almost complete, after 18 months of work. Before Mitchell arrived, the interior had been positively "decrepit," he says. Quite a comedown from the hotel's heyday. The first Academy Awards took place there in 1929, and the duplex penthouse was a rendezvous destination for Clark Gable and Carole Lombard.
Every inch bears the Dodd Mitchell Design stamp, 300,000 square feet of interior and exterior space, total. For starters, that means 300 rooms - 240 in the original 12-story tower, 60 in a 1950's cabana-style building - the triple-height lobby, and the Tropicana bar near the famous swimming pool painted by David Hockney. Combine that with three new attractions, Dakota and 25 Degrees restaurants and Teddy's nightclub, and the result is a self-contained campus destined for enrollment by Hollywood's current tribe of starlets. (A magnet for boldface names, Teddy's was instantly splashed all over the gossip columns when promoter Amanda Demme clashed with light-sleeping hotel guests and L.A.'s liquor authorities. It's now closed temporarily.) Mitchell somehow got the whole thing done on a $12 million budget. "The fact that we pulled it off is ridiculous. But I started out my career at the end of a broom at a set-design shop. That makes anything possible," says the self-taught designer, a confessed high-school dropout.
Renovation always brings surprises. The biggest at the Roosevelt was the lobby's ceiling. Hidden behind drywall, the Moorish-style polychrome-painted surface was restored in a Michelangelo-esque process over the course of three months. To counterbalance that colorful composition, Mitchell designed large-scale, chocolate-brown leather-covered sectionals for the room below.
From the lobby, a vaulted brick colonnade leads to Teddy's, once just a "concrete box," Mitchell recalls. Today, it's a procession of arches, columns, and niches inspired by an underground church in Istanbul. Black curtains further define seating groups, some composed of massive squared-off club chairs in jet-black leather, others of vintage discoveries. The 19-foot-long crystal chandelier above the U-shape bar - topped in embossed faux crocodile colored a deep plum - is a testament to Mitchell's resourcefulness and ability to get things done. When an estimate for the fixture came in at $150,000, he bought the crystal drops in Spain, made the frame of polished steel in L.A., and outsourced assembly to New York. Total: $30,000.
A onetime club kid, Mitchell knows what it takes to get people to where the drinks are. Fire. At the the poolside Tropicana bar, nestled in a corner of the cabana building, an 8-foot-long fireplace is backed by smoked mirror. So far, Prince, Alec Baldwin, Jake Gyllenhaal, and Kirsten Dunst have been sighted lounging on the teak seating nearby.
On the cabana building's second floor is the Marilyn Monroe suite.

</text>
