<text id="E33" category="" words="2007" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Closing the loop on intelligent wells' World Oil; May2006, Vol. 227 Issue 5, p27-33" Author="Walter Going, Adam Anderson, Guy Vachon" PublicationDate="May 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.lancs.ac.uk/ehost/detail?hid=14&sid=d85c35cc-8380-4cd5-80b5-d750465365d5%40sessionmgr4&vid=3&bdata=JnNpdGU9ZWhvc3QtbGl2ZQ%3d%3d#db=buh&AN=21265090">

These benefits may include increased ultimate recovery, accelerated production, cost reduction by having one well do the work of two, or cost and risk reduction by avoiding costly intervention. Similarly, if placing adjustable downhole chokes in an intelligent well adds value, it follows that the optimum performance of the well will require changing the choke settings during the well life. The well-centric closed loop system described in this article can apply the same nodal analysis process that justified intelligent well economics initially to guide the well's operation.
The primary functional components of an intelligent production system with closed-loop control are well monitoring, well and reservoir modeling, decision making, and control and optimization. Closing the well loop, traditionally, has involved a human who monitors the well, observes how actual production compares to the original analysis and issues commands for the intelligent well to be reconfigured.
Closing the loop with automated systems can add value in several ways. Resource, equipment and workflow efficiencies can be maximized. Accelerating well recovery and prolonging a well's productive life by adjusting a few simple parameters can positively impact the entire reservoir. Controlling production and accurately forecasting production flows can help operators meet government regulations focused on field optimization. Combining systems and reducing human intervention at the well site reduces the exposure to commuting hazards and leverages the improved efficiencies of experts working in their normal environments, while enhancing the ability to alert operators when well maintenance is needed. Faster response and decision-making based on automatic alerts on certain pre-defined conditions can reduce costs and improve profits.
Adding automation facilitates human intervention by retaining the well model and changing the monitoring activity from polling to interrupt-driven to help maximize resource, equipment and workflow efficiencies, and improve well recovery, safety and reliability. Eventually, automated systems will be able to advise when wells deviate from their expected behavior in ways that prompt diagnosis of emerging, unexpected problems early enough to avoid them.
OPTIONS
During an intelligent well's early life, the surface subsystems that interface with the downhole equipment commonly operate as standalone entities that are periodically monitored and manually logged. Eventually, collective monitoring and data acquisition may consolidate the available data into a single-source repository and enable control from a remote location via a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system. These steps increase the amount of available data for making control decisions but do not change the means by which the data are analyzed. Because high volumes of raw data are unwieldy until analyzed, monitoring unprocessed data does not in itself add significant value to an intelligent well.
The emphasis on well-centric closed-loop systems going forward is to provide systems that use available data to enhance decision-making to improve efficiency and recovery above and beyond what is currently realized from intelligent well control and remote monitoring alone.
The slow-loop optimization process requires processing wellsite data with analysis tools that typically are reserved for operation at central locations. Using these same tools offers at least three options to close the well-centric control loop by automating data processing and output commands to modify the producing configuration of the well.
Option 1 involves sending an alarm to an operator detailing the recommendation for external review and manual control execution. This option most closely follows the traditional path of having a person execute the direct control and presumably observe the system's response. Preprogrammed analysis is delivered to the decision maker. The efficiency gain comes from automating the analysis, which limits the decision-maker's action to validating the conclusion and acting on the result.
Option 2 calls for performing the recommended control function in response to operator confirmation. This option increases efficiency when executing the change in control is complex and the system is programmed to deal with the complexity. An example where this option would be advantageous is changing the operating point for a downhole choke. Adjusting downhole chokes frequently requires executing a sequence of hydraulic outputs over an extended period of time. Using Option 2, the operator would receive a system message proposing a change to the downhole choke setting. The change would be implemented only after receiving a confirmation from the person monitoring the process.
In Option 3, the control function is performed, and the operator is notified of the action taken. The analysis and control capabilities required to execute this option exist in current intelligent well systems. However, because it removes human oversight from the control loop, it requires considerable confidence in the accuracy and stability of the entire process. It also assumes that the software accommodates the health, safety and environmental requirements and the side effects of any action that affects well production. The confidence to employ Option 3 will evolve in part from successes obtained with systems that are initially deployed using Options 1 and 2. Regardless of the control operations and feedback opportunities, some intelligent wells are more obvious candidates for early application of closed-loop control than others.
AUTOMATED CONTROL OF SIMPLE FUNCTIONS
Completing the well illustrated in Fig. 2 with interconnected surface support systems that consolidate all available data and control functions into a SCADA system offers many opportunities for automating functions and processes that reoccur throughout the life of the completion, Fig. 3.
For example, the downhole adjustable chokes will require many setting changes over the life of the well. After being trained and given written instruction on the manufacturer's hydraulic logic, well technicians can use a manually controlled HPU to adjust the chokes. Conversely, the HPU can be constructed for automation such that all valving can be switched by commands from a microprocessor. Replacing the manual HPU with an automation-friendly version yields numerous options for control distribution.
The first function for the automated HPU is providing the hydraulic outputs to adjust the choke settings. The system should also maintain a record of the current choke setting. The simplest method is to input the choke setting when the system is commissioned, then update the position with each hydraulic output cycle, which would change the choke setting. A preferable solution is for the control system to monitor a feedback parameter which can be fed into logic to confirm that the intended change has occurred downhole.
For an adjustable choke such as the Baker Oil Tools HCM-A, which is operated using a balanced hydraulic piston, hydraulic fluid volume returning to the HPU provides feedback. When the choke position is changed by applying hydraulic pressure at surface, the fluid volume delivered from surface will be the sum of the volume consumed within the receiving chamber of the downhole choke plus the volume required to pressure the control line. The volume returned to the HPU via the opposite control line will be exactly the fluid displacement volume from the opposite fluid chamber in the choke.
Without automated HPU feedback to confirm that the choke adjustment is complete, the operator can survey well performance indicators such as downhole pressures and flow rates for confirmation. The limitations of using only well performance indicators is that the parameter values corresponding to the choke position must first be learned from early well performance and adjusted as they change over time.
Programming logic to adjust the downhole choke ensures positioning reliability and operational efficiency. For example, the HCM-A adjustable choke has six unique choke settings in addition to fully open and fully closed, or 14 total identifiable positions including repetition of fully open following each choked position and following the fully closed position. The 14 positions are accessed in a repetitive sequence in accordance with the customer's specification for the specific choke settings needed. The most convenient choke adjustment sequence requires two hydraulic outputs, one to move the choke to fully open and the second to move the choke to the next setting in the sequence.The most inconvenient adjustment sequence occurs when the desired new setting is the previous setting. This sequence requires up to 12 hydraulic outputs. The value of automating the process becomes obvious when considering the time required to apply and bleed pressure 12 times. Depending on the depth of the downhole chokes and type of hydraulic fluid employed, it is not uncommon for 12 hydraulic shifts to consume more than two hours. By programming the control system to execute the shift sequence automatically, the well technician is freed to attend to other tasks. Additional efficiencies are gained if the process can be commanded and observed remotely.
Fig. 4 illustrates a simplified logic flowchart to manage either a single position change for a downhole choke or a change through several positions. In this example, agreement between the volume of hydraulic fluid returned to the HPU and the choke displacement volume confirms that the shift is complete. For other systems the feedback parameter is easily revised to handle variations on the tool functional characteristics. Variations of this logic have been used in eight surface control units. The additional expense for the control system is offset by the reduction in operator training needed to properly control the downhole chokes.
Using automation to shift downhole chokes and measure the volume of returned hydraulic fluid can close the loop within a subsystem for which a vendor is wholly responsible for equipment supply, including the sleeves and the surface control system. The same functionality could be programmed into the operator's SCADA system. However, it is more efficient to place the logic and control commands on the vendor's system because the programming effort to create the program logic is reusable for many applications. Because the entire logic implementation is handled by the downhole vendor, the operator minimizes the quantity and complexity of interface issues between the SCADA provider and the downhole equipment vendor. Low-level control commands such as, "Apply hydraulic output 'A'," "Measure return fluid volume," and "Compare return volume to expected value" reside on the downhole vendor's controller. Only higher-level commands such as, "Set Upper Sleeve to Choke Position 7" are needed from the SCADA system when it is linked to the downhole controller.
In this example, implementing control logic at the lowest level is beneficial. The approach is very compatible with a SCADA central control in that the command to drive the shift sequence can still come from the SCADA system, which can also monitor the progress of the sequence being executed by the HPU.
SCADA CONTROL FOR COMPLEX FUNCTIONS
An ESP-lifted well will need to be shut in from time to time. Given sufficient duration, each shutdown and startup provides an opportunity to acquire new buildup and drawdown data that can be processed to update the original reservoir parameters and modify the production parameters if warranted, Fig. 5. Assuming that the acquisition rate during periods of normal production is too infrequent to obtain optimal build-up data, the first action during shut-in will be to increase the data recording rate. At least one downhole choke must be closed after the ESP is shut down to isolate the two zones. Closing the second choke will further enhance the value of the data by eliminating wellbore storage effect.
When standalone interfaces control the well, capitalizing on the opportunity to obtain build-up data requires the production technician or technicians to manually execute the process. Shortening the time required to isolate the zones after production ceases will improve data quality. Thus, the objective is to reset the data rate for the surface and downhole gauges, shut down the pump, close the production wing valve and close the downhole choke in the shortest amount of time. Using a closed-loop control system, where the data acquisition components, ESP and downhole choke control are integrated, limits the technician's manual action to initiating the shut-down sequence and closing the (manual) wing valve. The remaining activities can be driven by the SCADA system. If the wing valve is automated, the entire process can be driven by the SCADA system with single command.
This level of integration is being considered for smart fields, whose aim is to tie all of the monitors and controls for a well into an addressable system and link entire fields to a central command and analysis system.

</text>
