<text id="E34" category="" words="2009" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="BROTHER & THOMAS' Ceramics Monthly, 00090328, Dec2006, Vol. 54, Issue 10" Author="Richard Busch" PublicationDate="December 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.lancs.ac.uk/ehost/detail?hid=14&sid=b7a76218-672e-41e6-ae47-712d07ee8faf%40sessionmgr12&vid=4&bdata=JnNpdGU9ZWhvc3QtbGl2ZQ%3d%3d#db=a9h&AN=23364963">

The story of Brother Thomas' ascendancy as an artist is one of a remarkable journey marked by a series of chance encounters, life-changing events, deep conflicts, critical interventions from friends and acquaintances, and even a brush with death when, in a bout with depression following his departure from the monastery after 25 years, he came perilously close to taking his own life. Thomas was then in his early fifties and for years had struggled with an inherent conflict that pitted the necessary restrictions of the monastic community against the fledgling artist's need for the freedom to pursue his art.
Years later he would write about the growth of the artist whose quiet inner voice cannot be denied, where limitations and constraints inevitably give way to a higher awareness:
"In the Japanese language there is a word that resonates with a common experience in the lives of artists. The word is shoshin. It means 'beginners mind,' a primal state of openness. In the growth of the artist's awareness, this beginner's mind emerges first without reflection upon itself, hence there is no consciousness of inner source or inner purpose. There is a shell covering the chick. It moves at this point towards acquiring skills to express an intuitive response to something wonderful. For years the artist's work is focused exclusively on technique. But gradually, or perhaps suddenly, the chick must grow out of its shell. Practical things begin to fall like the barriers they are. There is movement into a place of spirit in art. It is here that the person becomes truly aware that art is not something 'I do,' but has become something 'I am.'"
Brother Thomas' journey began in Nova Scotia where he was born Charles Bezanson (his name was changed to Thomas when he entered the monastery) in 1929. As a youngster, he showed an aptitude for drawing, which his parents encouraged. After college, while working in the economic research department of the Nova Scotia government, he volunteered weekends at the local handcrafts center, where he discovered day and had his first experience throwing pots on the wheel.
"The government job was just that," he recalls, "a job, with little satisfaction. One day a friend was listening to my frustrations ad suggested that I quit and go to Europe, 'while you're still young,' she said, 'while its still there.'"
And so, in 1958, he went. It proved to be a life-altering decision. He spent a couple of months in Italy, absorbing the art and culture, then traveled to Spain and Portugal, then London, where a chance encounter steered him in a whole new direction. Bezanson had spent most of his money and had no clear idea what to do next. One autumn day while sitting on a park bench in London, watching a fellow on a soapbox railing against the monarchy, he got to talking with a middle-aged man in a black suit sitting at the other end of the bench, who seemed to sense that Bezanson was at loose ends.
They got into a conversation and after a while the man opened a paperback book by Thomas Merton, a Cistercian monk, and read a short passage about a new monastic movement in the United States, a return to the original nonclerical concept of monasticism.
"He passed me the book," Bezanson remembers. "In it, I found the name Weston Priory, in Vermont. I got absorbed, my thoughts now turning to possibilities. I moved to pass him back his book. He was gone. Poof! Then and there I felt an awakening. I wrote to Weston Priory. Within a fortnight an answer arrived: 'Come. ... '"
" ... the beginner's mind is open to all that is," Bezanson has written." It is a wise Zen master within us. Life is always a willingness to begin again. ...  In the end, it is not the worker at all who shapes the work, or even the work that shapes the worker. It is the search shaping the searcher."
On a cold Christmas Eve in 1959, thirty-year-old Bezanson, soon to take on the moniker of Brother Thomas, came to the little snow-covered town of Weston, in the southern part of the state, and found the place that would be his home for the next 25 years. The priory, then just four years old, occupied an old white farmhouse that sat on the crest of a hill, next to a small white chapel. There was a moonlit sky, he remembers, and a backdrop of woods and mountains.
He took a short trip back to Nova Scotia for immigration papers, then returned to Weston to begin his new life as an American citizen and Benedictine monk--a life of Gregorian chant; of rising at 4 A.M. for prayers; of study; of work in the gardens; of tending chickens and other tasks, including his role as monastery treasurer. He found the small community of young monks a talented and compatible lot, and remembers his early years there as "blessedly happy."
As luck would have it, barely three weeks after settling in at the priory, a crate mysteriously arrived with a small electric kiln. Suddenly a new outlet emerged for the pottery skills he had learned at the handcraft center in Nova Scotia.
He started making things again--mugs, bowls, ashtrays, whatever would sell--contributing to the community's income. Though not particularly stimulating work, his skills improved rapidly. But as the years passed, his focus began to shift from these mundane objects to the more individual, one-of-a-kind pieces--predominantly vases and plates--that he especially enjoyed making and which have become the hallmark of his life as a potter. His reputation grew, and serious collectors started acquiring his work.
But despite this taste of success, something important was lacking. "The personal work was acquiring a dynamic of its own," he explains. "Something was happening that took me another decade to fully understand. The ancient immiscibility between the individual and the group had begun."
The conflict grew following a trip to Japan in 1978. The highlight was the chance to meet six of Japan's most-revered potters, all Living National Treasures. He had brought along pictures of his work, as well as small teabowls as gifts. The potters were impressed.
"One of them, Kakiemon the 15th, from the town of Arita, was especially responsive," he recalls. "I expressed to him the frustration that many potters in the West feel about the difficulty of getting pottery accepted as art the way it is in the East. He gave me his full attention, nodding sympathetically from time to time. After a while, he looked at me intensely and said simply, 'you just work.' Just work. It was a call to be faithful to the process. It was a classic Zen response."
The effect was profound. Bezanson returned from Japan with an affirmation that the path he was on was the right one, that pottery-as-art was what he was meant to do. With unquenchable energy he began taking every available spare minute to make pottery for himself. "I demanded more time for my work, even if it generated a 'me against them' conflict between my unique force and the common life of the monastery. I rapidly became the odd man out, the marginal monk." He felt excluded, angry, lost. He had to leave. He was 53 years old.
"My leap from the monastery was like a jump from the top floor of a burning building," he remembers vividly. "It was a crushing blow. Death seemed preferable to life. I have some inkling why people take that last step into terminal darkness. But I do know why I did not. Hope is the last to die."
Bezanson talks about angels as metaphors for the people who have played critical roles in shaping his life. Two such angels are a couple named Fred and Edith Bloom, who had been collecting his pottery for several years while he was at the monastery. One day the Blooms were walking along Newbury Street in Boston and one of them--he doesn't remember which--found themselves in dire need of a bathroom. They popped into the Pucker Gallery, met owners Bernie and Sue Pucker, got into a conversation, and told them about Brother Thomas. The upshot was an association that has lasted more than 25 years and has brought Bezanson worldwide recognition.
"Had the Blooms not needed a bathroom on Newbury Street that afternoon, I would not be talking about angels today," he says. "For who accomplishes anything without the angels in our life? They need to be remembered, if not always in words, then always in our hearts. I do."
But While Bezanson was grateful for that initial Pucker connection, his depression persisted for lack of a place to work. And then again, as if by some mysterious intervention, came a letter from the Benedictine Sisters of Erie, Pennsylvania. As it happened, sister Joan Chittister, the prioress, knew of Brother Thomas' work and of his need for a studio. She offered him a place--a former storage building that the sisters had recently acquired.
And so, in May of 1985, he moved his equipment to Erie. Within three months he had set up his studio, made dozens of pots and had his first firing. His spirits soared.
For the last twenty years, Brother Thomas Bezanson has lived and worked productively in his Erie studio, having a major show at the Pucker Gallery every other year, and seeing his pottery develop and find its way into an ever-growing number of collections, public and private, lie works mostly with traditional forms--vases, plates, cups--and there is a dazzling precision in their execution, lie has chosen to work with porcelain for the way it reveals his glazes with clarity and brilliance.
His studio sits across a courtyard from a residential building where he maintains a small room on a floor that he shares with several sisters from the monastery. His room is spare--a desk, a chair, a bed, some clothes in the closet. There is a common space and a kitchen. The sisters cook dinner. He takes a tray. He watches the evening news, maybe a show, reads, then it's early to bed. While sitting in his studio one recent day he points to the building across the way: "I spend little time there. It's where I sleep. This," he says, gesturing to the sprawling studio space around him, "is where I live."
Brother Thomas comes here six mornings a week at 5:30 and spends a couple of hours at prayer, reading, and having a light breakfast. He then starts work around 9 A.M. His studio is a quiet place where he allows things to happen without planning or agendas. A lump of porcelain on the wheel begins to rise and take shape. It may turn out to be a vase, or a plate, or some other form. "I don't know what I'm making until I make it," he explains.
At first glance the studio looks cluttered, but there is clearly order beneath the facade. Pots in various stages of completion sit on shelves. An adjacent room serves as his office; another is for storage of completed pots. He negotiates the space with the ease of someone who could do it blindfolded. Lifting heavy lumps of clay and 50-pound bags of glaze materials for half a century has kept him lean and strong. Though 76 years old, he could easily pass for someone a dozen years younger. Tousled gray hair and a medium-length beard add an extra dose of personality to a handsome face that is already full of character. His conversations exude energy, warmth and a sharp sense of humor.
Cycles of work last a year or more--time to produce enough pieces that meet with his satisfaction and can be sent off to Pucker for the next show. It is a period of creation, of allowing the work to emerge from within, of collaboration with the fire.
Though failures are common, some results strike him as so stunning in their beauty that they defy even his own understanding of how they happened.

</text>
