<text id="E36" category="" words="2004" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Retrospectives and New Beginnings.' Performing Arts Journal, 84 (Volume 28, Number 3), September 2006" Author="Nicholas Birns" PublicationDate="September 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://muse.jhu.edu.ezproxy.lancs.ac.uk/journals/performing_arts_journal/toc/paj28.3.html">

Hopkins, whose previous large-scale work, the operetta Accidental Nostalgia, speculated on the delights and sorrows of amnesia, is also performing a memory play here. There is nostalgia for the possibility of collaboration between two famous modernist creators (Hopkins noted that Thomas died early of drink, a few blocks to the south of where she was performing) and the possibility of a kind of space-age futurism that seemed realizable then.
Yet Tsimtsum, with its sense of the apocalyptic collapse of this envisioned techno-future as expressed visually by Hopkins casting off the metallic space costume for more autumnal garb, seems a consciously post-9/11 performance piece. Her musings on "responsibility and irresponsibility" indicate a more sober environment, one in which creativity cannot, as a kind of utopian predicate, simply assume a social vacuum. Tacitly, this argues for a less charismatic conception of the artist, though Hopkins does clearly admire the bravado of Stravinsky and Thomas. Hopkins's body language becomes less meticulous and formulated. Her movements become more spontaneous and emotionally accessible to the audience. At the end of the piece, she subsides into a chair in a corner of the stage, seeming exhausted, yet also resolute, in a paradox that grasps the creative contraction of the title, Tsimtsum.
Hopkins, by the end, was wearing a red dress instead of a space suit, as the set itself is transmuted, resembling a cross between a bordello and an airport hangar. There was also a sense of release and of healing, Hopkins tells the audience that "you are no longer Dr. Cook," that their temporary therapeutic role - and the performance - is over. But was the point that the patient had reassembled an integrated Stravinskian memory? Or had she purged herself of the Stravinskian illusions of the past?
The Collective, featuring Rennie Harris, employed hip-hop choreography and Asian inflected costumes as well as a Japanese performer in their piece, Heaven. At first, four female dancers attired in black held the stage. Unlike Hopkins, who utilized a deliberately hemmed-in portion of the stage, the four dancers took advantage of the entire area, at times exerting themselves like whirling dervishes, at times anchored in fixed positions, sometimes advancing toward the audience in quasi-military formation, sometimes cavorting seemingly without regard for the audience. Eventually, a fifth, male dancer (Tony "Why KNOTT" Denaro), attired in bright red, appeared like a mystical quintessence in a cosmos of four natural elements. The joy of difference this immediately inspired was soon transformed into the sadness of difference, as it became clear the red figure was to be the sacrifice. Here, though, the sacrificed person was male, not female (the "Chosen One" in the original Stravinsky/Roerich conception of the ballet was a young girl).
This gender reversal, casting the male in the role of vulnerable victim, tallied with the movement vocabulary, far from any Stravinsky would have known, in marking a manifest difference between the Collective's practice and that of received modernism. Yet, in a way, the Collective's version of Stravinsky was the most "Stravinskian" in spirit. Its adherence to the fundamental principle of sacrifice prompted reflections on the role of exchange and substitution in the sacrificial economy, as explored in the thought of Marcel Mauss and René Girard, where sacrifice and expenditure assume a role in maintaining the social order that mandated a kind of relinquishment, sometimes cruelly mandating a relinquishment of life. As a commentary in a different "key" on Le Sacre du Printemps, the Collective achieved an effect not unlike Millicent Hodson and Kenneth Archer's meticulous 1987 reconstruction of the original Nijinsky ballet of Le Sacre for the Joffrey.
Dayna Hanson and Linas Phillips presented a much more irreverent interpretation of Stravinsky in Track 11. Standing stage right, Phillips, assuming the aw-shucks attitude of a college sophomore under-prepared for his seminar presentation and announcing he had forgotten the CD liner notes he needed, rushed off the stage and then returned to play "Track 11" of a putativeStravinsky's Greatest Hits CD (the audience is never sure whether this is an actual CD or just a spoof). An example of Hanson and Phillips' combination of irony and sincerity was their request that the entire audience stand for the national anthem, announced as a Stravinsky composition.
A film on a giant screen recounted some basic information about Stravinsky, especially the fact that he was born well-off yet always needed money; he depended on patrons for handouts, even as he lived in high style. At the same time, the film incongruously presented Stravinsky as an advocate for the homeless, introducing an elderly homeless man (impersonated by Hanson) who had once been bought lunch by the beneficent Stravinsky. Throughout this segment, Hanson danced in an offhanded manner that nevertheless kept the audience aware of movement in the tableau. The way Hanson and Phillips introduced the life of Stravinsky itself is somewhat taboo-breaking. There was always an attempt, in modernity, to exclude both the personal and the political, whereas Hanson and Phillips show us how important both these categories are. As in the Hopkins piece, the utopian predicate and the sense of social vacuum are vigorously challenged. As ludicrous as Hanson's and Phillips's reframing of Stravinsky's life story into that of ambiguous benefactor to the homeless was, its intent was not to trivialize, castigate, or mock Stravinsky. Stravinsky, who in his lifetime was often accused of truckling to the wealthy, depended on others for sustenance in the manner of homeless people. Alternatively, Stravinsky, in giving succor to people through his art, was in an aesthetic way an unquestionable benefactor.
David Neumann's hit the deck. (studies and accidents) was compelling in its rigorous choreography and deployment of personnel. As with the Collective, four dancers were joined eventually by a fifth figure, in this case a singer, Nicole Cherniak Hyde. Chairs were used as both a place of rest and an accommodation for the body as a mode of discipline. The dancers' approaches varied - sometimes stampeding intently, sometimes seemingly slightly abashed and aware of the audience, sometimes heedlessly making fools of themselves, as in the Collective piece, depending on who was watching. The choreography manifested an athleticism and an intricacy reminiscent of Twyla Tharp. Neumann has danced with both Doug Varone and Doug Elkins, and he exhibits some of Varone's bravura and Elkins's ingenuity. Yet Neumann's conception was as visual as it was tactile, reminding us that Stravinsky attained his cultural importance as part of a modernist avant-garde that included the visual arts. Neumann's work demonstrated qualities of the visual 
arts, collage, assemblage, and a scattershot yet premeditated organization of the readymade. This also operated as a kind of vestigial testimony to the important role played by set design in traditional ballet. The presence of a solo piano player as well as the trained operatic singer made Neumann's piece, which samples an array of music from many different aspects of Stravinsky's career, the most musical of the five.
Yvonne Rainer's AG Indexical, with a little help from H.M. had been hailed as her return to dance after many years of being more concerned with film. The piece was strikingly dance-centered. The primary multimedia element was a small TV at the lower right of the stage which showed Stravinsky/Balanchine's 1957 ballet Agon. But even this called our attention to the balletic element in Rainer's piece rather than absorbing us into a multimedia spectacle. "AG" in Rainer's title stands for Agon, while "Indexical" exemplifies her piece's relation to the Stravinsky/Balanchine original. Linguistic theory from the Russian formalist Roman Jakobson onward has associated the idea of the indexical, of pointing to something nearby but not organically a part of the original, as a form of metonymy. Rainer's dance achieves a metonymic relation to Balanchine's text, consulting it, pointing to elements in it, but neither emulating nor rejecting it. The four dancers include three dressed for Judson Church; the fourth, complete with ballet slippers, was dressed for City Center. The latter, Emily Coates, is a trained ballerina whose movements were variously embraced, harried, pestered, and framed by the other three dancers. The casually dressed "modern" dancers had different body types, which added to the impression that their physical manifestations constituted different styles of commentary on the conventional "dance body" of the ballerina. Rainer's longtime collaborator Pat Catterson co-created the dance, and her gestures, though a world away in specific motions from the ballerina's, convey an analogous sense of meticulous poise. Without effacing the difference between the two modes of dance, Rainer indicated both the stringency latent in her dance and the potential for creativity in Balanchine's.
Seeing Agon on screen in Rainer's piece crystallized thoughts generated when I last saw the Balanchine dance performed at Lincoln Center - in its combination of taut restraint and latent sense of playfulness, that Agon is imaginatively congruent with theNeue Sachlichkeit cultural moment in the 1920s and even with less "weighty" composer such as the Englishmen Constant Lambert or Lord Berners, who both wrote scores for ballet. That a level of playfulness was present even in the original obviates any potential for moralizing Stravinsky's legacy, by either parodying him or putting him on a pedestal. Rainer's tableau connected the playfulness of her own piece with that she elucidated in Agon. Conscious reference to a precursor only accentuated Rainer's ongoing commitment to the new. In this regard, "H.M." refers to Henry Mancini, whose unforgettable theme song for the Pink Panther movies is played, unexpectedly, at the end of the piece. Mancini's music was quoted by Rainer not so much as a pop culture riposte to Stravinsky but because it, too, has become a classic - the classicizing response can now apprehend even what once might have been regarded as kitsch. There can thus be modern classics and postmodern classics - the idea of classicism can operate as an open ended one. As Rainer, lithe and lissome at age 71, skipped down the stairs of the theatre to receive the cheers of the audience along with her performers, the overriding impression was of modernity still kept thoughtfully and buoyantly in play.
The following week DTW presented Forgeries, Love, and Other Matters, a joint venture by Meg Stuart, an American choreographer resident in Europe, Benoît Lachambre, a Québécois dancer, and Hahn Rowe, an American composer. The piece has been performed in Europe extensively over the past year, but this engagement was the first time it was performed in New York. The first image is of an elevated metallic scrim. Then darkness, pierced by a figure holding a flashlight who descends downward and to the left. This was Rowe, who performed a techno-casual mix of synthesizer and guitar on stage, occasionally interacting with the two principals. Stuart and Lachambre entered, and the stage was revealed as dominated by a large, matte brown, carpeted hill, sloping up to the metallic scrim. The male and female dancers notice each other, speaking only after a long while. Lachambre then ran up to the scrim and, seeing his own ur-nakedness in the mirror it provided, gave a primal scream of horror, more like Enkidu in Gilgamesh than Adam.
Lachambre's physicality prompted com-parisons to his compatriot, Marie Chouinard, with whom he danced in the 1990s, especially since Sourcing Stravinsky had already called to mind Chouinard's extraordinary performance of Le Sacre du Printemps seen at the Joyce in 1995. Chouinard's physicality is both atavistic and theoretical; Lachambre deploys the body more as a medium of expression, a kind of imaginative currency, and seems as interested in the body's micro-flexibility, its intimate interstices of movement, as in its aggregate physical power; Stuart's dancing seemed far less pronounced than Lachambre, spontaneously arising from human movement rather than proceeding from a formalized gestural language. Completely unmannered, it was more "fortuitous" than "improvisational" in mode. Even though Stuart, at one point, was nearly naked as well, she wore a floppy blonde wig throughout the performance and generally, in an anthropological sense, seemed more representative of culture than nature, in a way that both built upon and poked fun at gender stereotypes.
The first words in the performance, spoken by Stuart, were "Are we there yet?"

</text>
