<text id="F03" category="" words="2001" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="KARMIC WAVES, THE DESTINY OF THE UNITED STATES ... AND YOU! Dell Horoscope Magazine" Author="Judi Thomases " PublicationDate="May 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.starladyastrologer.com/articles/karmic_waves_destiny_of_the_united_states.pdf">

The Mission as Shown in the Great Seal
Like prophecy, the Great Seal reveals our nation's destiny.
The definitive book on all its complex metaphysical symbolism is by Paul Foster Case, "The Great Seal of the United
States : Its History, Symbolism and Message for the New Age" (Builders of the Adytum, 1935). 3 For the student of
occultism, it will be easily seen that the founders of the U.S. were metaphysicians (i.e., awakened souls), that the
purpose upon which the nation was founded was that of an ideal, evolved, pluralistic society under God's guidance,
and that its destiny intends the realization of this purpose.
In this thin (only 34 pages long) but jam-packed book is shown the deep significance of the number Thirteen, the
multifaceted symbolism of the obverse and reverse sides of the Great Seal, the Declaration's explicit intent to
conceive a government in harmony with Divine Providence, and the New World Order of the ages (Novus Ordo
Seclorum) that such an entity would bring into being. The wise founders knew that, to bring this destiny to
fulfillment, the work of man would need to be completed by a higher power.
For instance, the all-seeing Eye on top of the pyramid, which refers to Heavenly Wisdom as well as each person's
own Third Eye, is the symbol of both watchful spiritual care and inner guidance, built upon a foundation of longlasting
strength. The words Annuit Coeptis mean "He hath prospered our undertaking," a clear reference to God's
hand in this nation's creation. 4 The words E Pluribus Unum mean "Out of the many, one," a statement of the uniting
not only of self-governing states but of the diversity of mankind's cultures, races, and religions. And the eagle itself,
always the Scorpionic symbol of regeneration, represents both power and vision, with every item it holds or displays
reinforcing the meaning of perfected humanity. The density of symbolism detailed in this little handbook is too great
for the scope of this article, but suffice it to say that each and every detail of the Great Seal was carefully chosen to
convey a purpose and a destiny imbuing this government. The Founding Fathers did not escape tyranny and
oppression just to throw together any old system!
So America is The Great Experiment: people ruling themselves, not by a king, not by a religion, but by a philosophy
and an ideal, which is truly the definition of democracy. The outcome of this Great Experiment, I believe, leads us to
The New Order of the Ages ...  and if not here, where else in the world would it occur?! Yes, America has flaws, because of its primarily young soul level of awareness. 5 But, America is evolving and maturing, especially as we
deal with Plutonic events of great destruction and rebirth. Many will seek meaning to their lives, and aspire to serving
something greater than the self's appetites. This path will ultimately broaden the meaning of the phrase, "a purposedriven
life", as people react to catastrophes of their brethren with compassion and a search for significance; the
phrase itself will no longer be coempted solely by the Religious Right.
What Chart to Use?
To speak of our nation's future, we must first decide upon which horoscope to use. Popular choices have had Gemini,
Scorpio, or Sagittarius rising, all with their proponents. (When choosing intuitively, not logically, I can see some
merit in the Scorpio rising, with our focus on money and power, but I lean more toward a Sagittarius rising because
of our national motto of freedom to pursue individual self-realization.) Both Gemini and Sagittarius risings offer an
angular Uranus, befitting a nation of individualists, born of revolution.
But, because of Pluto's recent transits, and the great national traumas of 9/11 and Hurricane Katrina, we have
definitive touchstones to rest some solid rectified conclusions upon. As with any defining moment as powerful as
9/11, Pluto must be shown transiting to a major chart element. On that awful day, Pluto was at 12 Sagittarius. The
famous Sibley U.S. chart of 7/4/1776, 5:10PM LMT, Philadelphia , PA , has its Ascendant at 12 Sagittarius.
[Sibley Horoscope  -  progressed to July 30, 2006]
This almost single-handedly confirms the chart, giving us the chance to study house placements, rulerships, and other
astrological factors. It therefore puts Mars into H7 (open enemies, terrorism, attacks), and accounts for the War on
Terror in the years following, as transiting Pluto, ruler of H12 (hidden factors) opposes from H1 (how we're seen, our
image). Then, when Pluto stationed exactly opposite Mars for the final time (on 9/2/05), what foretold another harsh
event was actually an attack by Mother Nature, i.e., Hurricane Katrina. Since Pluto comes from natal H2 (our money,
values), and opposed Mars, ruler of natal H4 (property), the event was an economic disaster against the land itself.
This, too, confirms the rightness of this horoscope.
There's much more: the elevated Neptune, our idealism; the tenth house Saturn (test of power and responsibility), our
role as world police; the angular Uranus (rebellion), a nation of individualists; the Fortuna/Vertex/Node in Leo H8,
Hollywood's existence and great influence on others' values (more on this interesting factor later).
Most ironically, though, using the Sagittarius rising (independence) chart, our Achilles heel is so obvious! It
emphasizes our dependency , which is ... on foreign oil! Neptune (oil) is placed in H9 (foreign), squaring Mars in H7
(enemies). With Pluto now transiting H1, setting off this square, the inevitable drama of cultural clash, the weakness
of the energy dilemma undermining our economy, and hatred of America were all cosmically defined. (By the way, if any reader thinks the election of John Kerry would have forestalled this, they might want to study these astro-patterns
more carefully. Or, perhaps that's why it was inevitable that George W. Bush get reelected, in order to play them out!)
Now, whenever I see such a blatant karmic pattern shown, I have to ask why. What does the universe want out of
this? Why is this drama being thrust upon humankind? There is always a higher purpose behind even the most
horrendous events, if only to force mankind to yearn for solutions to life's suffering.
What patterns are showing now?
Remembering the fact of America 's cosmic purpose, we can look more deeply at the Sibley chart and Pluto's
upcoming transits.
Some really important things are afoot.
Pluto is finishing its 12-year transit of Sagittarius. During its passage, a war of beliefs has raged (Islamic
Fundamentalism vs. Western civilization), a beloved Pope has died and been replaced leaving the church and its role
at a critical crossroads, the O.J. Simpson/Michael Jackson/Robert Blake/Martha Stewart trials have tested the judicial
system, pedophilia in the priesthood has been exposed, the make-up of the U.S. Supreme Court is undergoing change,
and the U.S. relationship with foreign interests has been spotlighted.
The Moon in the Sibley chart (always the planet that will be shifted most when considering various birthtimes) is at
27 Aquarius (brotherhood) in H3 (communications), ruling H8 (other people's money). So transiting Pluto has yet to
sextile it, and will do so in 2007, at the same time that it will semi-sextile its natal position, and trine the nation's
progressed Ascendant at 28 Leo in H9 (better relations with foreign allies). This bodes well for deep positive change
for the people, since Aquarius is humanitarian and democratic (e.g., tv announcers now reflect all races). E Pluribus
Unum ("Out of Many, One") is truly manifesting. Everyone rushed to help fellow Americans in their suffering, and
many nations reached out to America in its hours of need. Did we need disasters to learn to see ourselves in each
other? I guess so.
Perhaps, too, our problems will drive us to invent a new energy source, not for lovely environmental reasons, but for
hard economic ones.
By 2008, Pluto will enter Capricorn. This will surely uncover and cleanse abuses in government and Big Business,
such as fraud and collusion. Just as Pluto's entry into Sagittarius kicked off with a high-profile news event that
revealed the flaws in our legal system, expect 2008 to start off with a very ugly scandal about a mega-corporation
and a big name in government . Flaws in these two intertwined institutions, as well as many other weaknesses and
abuses related to each, will bring disgust before better resolution. And the legal system will continue to remain under
fire as transiting Saturn enters Libra to square transiting Pluto briefly in August 2010. But Capricorn's influence can
bring attention to everything that's aging, from the population to the nation's infrastructure, while Pluto requires
repair, rejuvenation and renovation. Will we figure out how to stave off death, or discover the Fountain of Youth?!
Furthermore, Pluto is hitting the Galactic Center at 26-27 Sagittarius. This is a big moment for humanity  -  and for the
universe  -  since we (and other sentient life) are the manifestation of the universe's evolution to create a form that
knows itself. I believe it represents a huge transformation of this creature ... us! And of Sentient Form itself. It won't
happen right away, but this transit is the key turning point to the evolving New Human.
Getting More Specific  -  Current Happenings:
Transiting Pluto (terror, pressure), ruler of H12 (secrets) from H2 (money), is in H1 (image) finishing its t-square to
our afflicted Neptune, ruler of intercepted H3 (cars), in H9 (always the issue of dependency upon foreign oil), and
Mars (war) in H7 (open enemies). This has brought the Iraq War quagmire, and a debilitating energy crisis, and has
revealed, once again and even more, America 's great weakness. But once the aspect finishes, to its own progressed
position as well (by the end of 2006), it will not repeat until late in the twenty-first century, when Pluto transits the
third decanate of Pisces.
We must find a way to resolve our Achilles heel. Improvement can come with Pluto's emerging sextile to the nation's
humanitarian Aquarian Moon (the people)/progressed Mercury (ideas), trine to the progressed Ascendant, and semisextile
to its own position in H2. Katrina's misery highlighted our national compassion even more than 9/11 or the
Tsunami. Great lessons were given to mankind, not only within our borders, but globally, and America 's generosity
was met by the same from most other nations in our time of need. The Moon in Aquarius (technology) in H3
(communication, transportation, ideas) is dispositor of the Sun in H8. This can be a wonderful period for transformed
empowerment, for emotional and economic growth for the whole country, for improved relationships with other
nations, and for a new inventive approach to alternative fuels, especially as Pluto's quinqunx to Mercury/Node keeps
the pressure on.
Neptune , from H9 (higher values), can help a lot too as it finishes a trine to Saturn in Libra H10, which is bringing
forth compassion and healing, person to person and nation to nation. This is further enhanced as progressed Mars,
which turns retrograde in Libra (relationships) in 2006, works its way towards that Saturn in H10, allowing it to
receive Neptune 's trine as well.
Uranus , ruler of H3, hasn't been as helpful. It is finishing its square to natal Uranus in H6, always a disruptive,
chaotic period, in this case regarding the job market and transportation domain. Buses weren't made available in a
timely manner during Katrina, and two airlines have recently folded. But Uranus will do us some favors later.
Saturn (discipline, limitation), ruler of H2 (money), from H10  -  a test of power  -  will perform its true role of
taskmaster. With Saturn's transit through Leo until September 2007, we see the beginning of a period of tightened
resources for the Baby Boomers born with Pluto in Leo. This also coincides with Saturn's transit of our country's
North Node, a time of greater burdens but maturation. It is conjuncting Node/progressed Moon in Leo (the spotlight)
in H8 (debts, funding), and squaring progressed Saturn retrograde in Scorpio (investments, insurance) in H11 (allies).

</text>
