<text id="F13" category="" words="2008" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Backyard Poultry Magazine: It takes a village...  ; A Poultry Community Needs Supplies " Author="Cherrie Nolden ;Elaine Belanger" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.backyardpoultrymag.com/issues/1/1-1/Cherrie_Nolden.html ; http://www.backyardpoultrymag.com/issues/1/1-1/Elaine_Belanger.html">

It takes a village... 
MadCity Chickens political movement works to get a poultry ordinance passed 

 
Mad City Chickens is a group of pro-poultry folks in Madison, Wisconsin who worked to make keeping chickens in their city legal and who now strive to educate and encourage homeowners to keep feathered friends in their backyards. 
Prior to May 2004, chickens were not forbidden in Madison, but construction of a coop to house them was illegal. Yet there were enlightened people living in Madison, keeping chickens hidden on their properties, reveling in the self-sufficiency and pleasure chicken-keeping brought and frustrated that these innocuous creatures could not be legally kept. They were the Chicken Underground and initiated the political movement that brought the right of chicken ownership to residents of Madison. 
They petitioned (then) Alderperson Matt Sloan to change the Madison Ordinance to allow a few chickens in backyards. The political climate was right and Matt drew up a set of rules based on those of other cities like Seattle and Portland that had allowed backyard chickens for years. 
In the meantime, two (of the many) key people in the movement, Alicia Rheal and Bryan Whiting, spearheaded a campaign to gather public views and support for a pro-chicken and coop policy for Madison. They wrote articles for the neighborhood newspaper. Soon other articles were written about the chicken movement in Madison and Milwaukee papers, and they were interviewed on a local television station. Doctor Mark Cook of the UW-Madison Poultry Science Department wrote Matt Sloan a letter of support for the idea and neighbors wrote letters to their representatives. It was six months of non-stop chicken awareness, education and promotion, until the final passing of the Ordinance on May 5, 2004. 
The particulars of the Ordinance are:
•	Up to four domestic fowl allowed per single-family dwelling,
•	No roosters,
•	No slaughtering,
•	Poultry shall be kept within a secure enclosure and not allowed to run free,
•	Enclosures shall be located no closer than 25' from nearest neighbor's residence and
•	A $6 permit is required (per household), to be renewed annually.
The group renamed itself Mad City Chickens, put madcitychickens.com on the Internet and, in June 2004, started holding chicken keeping classes: City Chickens 101 and Chicken Coops 102. There have since been eight CC101 courses and one CC102 taught, with between 8-12 people in each class. The interest is very high, with people being turned away for a Willy Street Coop chicken class after 60 people registered. The first Mad City Chickens potluck was held in January 2005 and a coop tour was organized for June. 
I advertise for the group every Sunday at the Northside Farmers Market and at the Food For Thought Festival on the Square. The number of Madisonians now keeping chickens is growing in leaps and bounds. 
But who can resist? A small, inexpensive, easy-keeping pet that lives outside all year long, produces food, is very personable, aesthetically unique and comes in so many varieties that you don't have to have just what your neighbor has. I don't know how it can get much better than this.
Don't Become a Nuisance
Every animal has characteristic odors associated with its body processes. They range from bad breath to body odors to manure odors. The effect of these odors is multiplied by large numbers of animals, but it is also increased by the support systems we use. These might include inadequate ventilation, improper drainage, poorly designed water systems, decomposition of manure before it is removed, spilled feed and so forth. 
These things are all under the caretaker's control and they take place beyond the animal itself. They often combine with the normal animal odors to create a condition to which some people object. 
Generally speaking, people who keep livestock and poultry accept some of the odors that go along with such production. Most people, however, are no longer familiar with animal odors on a daily basis. It must also be recognized that any given odor affects different people in different ways. Often this is conditioned by something else we associate with that odor, often a personal experience that was less than desirable. 
Managing the odors from poultry so they do not become an intolerable nuisance to others is an obligation of the producer. 
Zoning, the right to use one's land as he or she sees fit, the necessity for food production and being there first are all strong points in conversation. But they do not always stand up in court. Being declared a nuisance in spite of these things can result in being closed down by order of the courts. 
It's an absolute necessity to keep odors from your place below an objectionable level. That level will vary with communities and individuals, but it will always be conditioned by what they think of you as a person. 
Projecting a good image is a must. A neat, orderly farmstead with attention paid to details and a considerate attitude toward others is essential. These things must be coupled with good management of carefully designed facilities. 
Give this some thought as it is an important part of raising poultry. 




A Poultry Community Needs Supplies 


 
Whenever exciting changes happen in a community, such as Madison's poultry ordinance, there are usually business opportunities that come with it. Two active members of the Mad City Chickens group share information with us regarding the business opportunities they see. 
For Cherrie Nolden, this opportunity allows her to provide a needed service, share her knowledge, and do something she loves. 
Cherrie got into Mad City Chickens (MCC) as a community service project but knows that she can also offer other services to those searching for poultry information. 


Cherrie and her husband, Lee, have lived on their 10-acre farmette, Prairie Paradise Farms, LLC near Stoughton, Wisconsin for about four years. (Stoughton is about eight miles south of Madison.) 
She is a currently a graduate student in wildlife ecology at UW-Madison but also works to encourage people to understand the origin of their food, increase their personal security by learning to raise their own food, and to simply spend more time outside in a tv/computer-free environment while connecting with their neighbors. 
Cherrie feels that backyard chickens provide the kernel to nourish all of this and do so better than any other backyard activity she has previously encountered. Chickens provide the flavor of farm life that so many city-bound people yearn for, without the expense of buying a farm. 
As a graduate student, Cherrie is paid a stipend for a half-time research appointment and puts in well over 40 hours per week; usually 50-60. Lee is a full-time farmer and certified independent crop consultant. 
Cherrie and her husband are working to make city folks' desire to keep chickens into a viable business for their farmette. They raise the breeds people want, and folks can get them in small batches (Madison's ordinance allows four birds per single-family dwelling) rather than having to order 25 birds, the minimum most hatcheries require. Cherrie says, "Buyers are willing to pay a slightly higher price than the hatcheries charge for the convenience of only having to purchase the smaller quantity." Cherrie throws in some additional benefits for the customer. "I offer free advice and consulting on any chicken questions they may have. We also replace and rehome any birds that grow up to be roosters (not allowed in town) for those who are uneasy about making their roosters into roasts," explains Cherrie. 
Cherrie got into Mad City Chickens as a community service activity that followed her interests in poultry and she continues to do most of her work with the group with this motive in mind. But, when people ask her where they can buy chickens, she tells them about her farm as one of the options. Cherrie is a local and county-wide 4-H leader and is helping MCC form a 4-H club in downtown Madison so the kids in the families with chickens can experience the record-keeping and youth development opportunities that 4-H membership affords, while being able to win ribbons, trophies and premiums by entering their chickens in the local fairs. 
The products
Prairie Paradise Farms, LLC sells processed chickens, free-range eggs (duck and chicken) and garlic at a farmers market Cherrie helped start in Madison. They are not allowed to have the live chickens at the market so they give out free information on keeping chickens in the backyard and encourage people to stop out at the farm to pick out their birds. 



Products on the farm include straight run and some sexed chicks, pullets and hens depending on the desires of the customer. If Cherrie is wrong on the sex of the chick, they are replaced at no charge when it shows that it is a cockerel. She also takes any extra birds people may have and helps them find homes. Cherrie says, "I give a farm tour to anybody who sets up an appointment and explain what we are doing. Besides the chickens, they raise grass-fed beef and sheep, grow garlic organically, breed, train and sell registered Norwegian Fjord horses and raise geese and ducks to weed and de-bug the gardens. They offer any of their animals to 4-H members for their projects. 
Visitors see the living conditions the animals enjoy and get a presentation on self-sufficient, sustainable living and animal welfare." 
Develop a business plan
"We've always wanted to farm for a living and started the planning process when we purchased our first animals," Cherrie tells us. They wrote a business plan with assistance from Paul Dietmann, Sauk County Agricultural Agent and Dick Cates' School for Beginning Dairy Farmers at UW-Madison. "We've been adapting this plan as new ideas and opportunities present themselves. The chicken aspect just started seriously in January 2005 with the first Mad City Chickens meeting. We had raised chickens for years but this group looked like a good community service/education project plus a potential customer base." 
Over the last year, they have had a hard time keeping up with the demand. "We plan to eventually buy or rent a larger farm to expand the production to meet our direct marketing customer's needs and support both of us off of the farm proceeds. I also hope to participate in on-farm research," states Cherrie. 
Spread the word
Currently, Cherrie advertises primarily at the Farmers Market Stand and on the Mad City Chickens website. She feels that they have a very colorful and attractive display that helps draw the people in and connect them to their products. They give away free information, advertise for Dennis Harrison-Noonan and advertise for Mad City Chickens. The booth is multi-purpose and is also used for the Science Alliance, promoting scientific inquiry and discovery as well as the semi-annual Horticulture Days that educates the community on poultry in the garden. 
What has worked... 
Cherrie has found that a two-person team, one who focuses on marketing and planning and the other who focuses on production, with both actively and continuously researching and improving their respective areas, has worked well for their business. 
She feels small businesses should start small and try not to take out loans to get started. Let the sale of products pay for the start-up costs. 
Another key factor is learning to see an opportunity and responding quickly to fill a need. 


For her, focusing a lot of effort on public education and outreach and providing free information to help people get started has led to added business, word of mouth advertising and also adds personal pleasure to her work. It helps that they have a good grasp of the science behind the methods for the consumers who are well-educated and the respect for those who take the time to get the whole story. The best sales marketing tool has been to invite folks to visit the farm to see that they walk the walk and can talk the talk, and of course, having lots of petting and baby animals for the buyers with the most influence: the children.

</text>
