<text id="F18" category="" words="1995" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="American Journalism Review : Judgment Calls   " Author="Rachel Smolkin " PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.ajr.org/Article.asp?id=4185">

Judgment Calls   
The outcry over decisions by major newspapers to disclose the Bush administration's secret monitoring of international banking transactions was fast and furious. 
Although the Wall Street Journal, the Los Angeles Times and the Washington Post also published articles describing efforts to trace the financial records of suspected terrorists, the New York Times broke the story on the Web and bore the brunt of the outrage. The administration had asked the New York Times and L.A. Times not to publish. But both papers ultimately decided to anyway, posting their pieces the evening of June 22 and publishing them on page one the following day. 
The clash between the First Amendment's guarantee of a free press and the patriotic duty to protect American lives and uphold national security puts the media in an uncomfortable position. For the second time in six months, the New York Times had infuriated the administration by exposing a secret program in the war on terror. The piece followed a December 16 story disclosing the National Security Agency's warrantless eavesdropping inside the United States. In that instance, too, the administration had pleaded with the Times to withhold publication. But after delaying for more than a year to conduct additional reporting, the Times published the article--and won a Pulitzer Prize for it. 
On June 26, President Bush condemned the global banking records story. "Congress was briefed," he said, answering questions from reporters. "And what we did was fully authorized under the law. And the disclosure of this program is disgraceful. We're at war with a bunch of people who want to hurt the United States of America, and for people to leak that program, and for a newspaper to publish it, does great harm to the United States of America." 
Vice President Dick Cheney weighed in more pointedly the next day. "Some in the press, in particular the New York Times, have made the job of defending against further terrorist attacks more difficult by insisting on publishing detailed information about vital national security programs," Cheney said in a June 27 speech. He called the Times' Pulitzer for its NSA story "a disgrace." 
Those statements were positively temperate compared with the reaction among administration allies. Sen. Jim Bunning, a Kentucky Republican, accused the New York Times of "treason." Rep. Peter King, a New York Republican who chairs the House Committee on Homeland Security, asked the U.S. attorney general to launch a criminal investigation of the paper. On June 29, the House of Representatives voted 227-to-183 to condemn the publication of classified information and to urge news organizations' cooperation in the war on terror. In early August, Sen. Kit Bond, a Missouri Republican, introduced a bill that would criminalize the unauthorized disclosure of classified information. 
The punditry was even more vociferous. On June 28, San Francisco talk show host Melanie Morgan told the San Francisco Chronicle that New York Times Executive Editor Bill Keller should be jailed for treason for approving publication of the banking records story. "If he were to be tried and convicted of treason, yes, I would have no problem with him being sent to the gas chamber," Morgan told the Chronicle. "It is about revealing classified secrets in the time of war. And the media has got to take responsibility for revealing classified information that is putting American lives at risk." 
In all likelihood, the most biting media retort to the sorts of accusations leveled by Morgan and others came 11 years earlier, in the 1995 autobiography of Ben Bradlee. In "A Good Life," the former Washington Post executive editor wryly observed: "Editors--and reporters, and especially owners--don't like to be accused of giving aid and comfort to the enemy, even when they know it not to be true. It riles the kooks and the woolly hats of this world, and results in a great deal of ill-tempered and unnecessary correspondence." 
In his inimitable style, Bradlee fired back at his critics. ("Dear Asshole," he began in response to a letter labeling him "UnAmerican.") But in this gentler age of transparency and accountability, not to mention heightened public contempt for the media, editors have largely swallowed their frustration. They have chosen to answer passionate--often virulent--denunciations by explaining the painstaking path that national security stories travel to publication. 
Keller and Los Angeles Times Editor Dean Baquet took the unusual step of publishing a joint op-ed piece illuminating their decisions on the banking records stories. "There is no magic formula, no neat metric for either the public's interest or the dangers of publishing sensitive information," the editors wrote. "We make our best judgment." 
In interviews with AJR, top editors at the newspapers involved in recent high-profile skirmishes, as well as other authorities on national security reporting, explained how stories based on classified information are reported and how editors decide whether to publish in the face of administration objections. (AJR also requested interviews with Cheney and White House Press Secretary Tony Snow; both declined.) 
The editors described a deliberative process guided by intense questioning, a willingness to pull back on technical details that could endanger lives and, ultimately, a commitment to informing the public about the government's use of power. 
As Keller and Baquet wrote in their joint piece, "The process begins with reporting. Sensitive stories do not fall into our hands. They may begin with a tip from a source who has a grievance or a guilty conscience, but those tips are just the beginning of long, painstaking work." 
Washington Post Executive Editor Leonard Downie Jr. says national security articles seldom develop the way the public tends to assume: Not since Daniel Ellsberg leaked the Pentagon Papers to the New York Times in 1971 can he recall an instance in which a single person supplied an entire story to a journalist. Instead, a beat reporter such as the Post's Dana Priest, who won a Pulitzer for her November story exposing the CIA's secret prison system of "black sites" for hiding and interrogating some al Qaeda captives, "gradually unearths the outlines of a story." 
Keller concurs that there's a "sort of mythology that some disgruntled bureaucrat calls a reporter cold and says, 'Meet me in a parking garage, and I will hand over a box of files on this secret program.' It pretty much never happens that way." Reporters may hear something that's "the most shadowy notion of what's going on" and stitch information together from multiple places. "That's part of the puzzle you struggle with when you're deciding whether to publish," he says. "Do you trust those people to tell you when it's safe to publish when they may not be in a position to really know?" 
As a reporter on these stories, "you want to know everything you can know because even if you withhold certain details, you're going to write a better story if you have all of that in your head," says Steve Coll, a staff writer for The New Yorker, former Washington Post managing editor and author of the 2005 Pulitzer Prize-winning book "Ghost Wars" detailing the secret history of the CIA's role in Afghanistan. "You're in the fog all the time, always groping..you're always concerned that you're missing something." 
Occasionally reporters "get lucky, and you have sources that are sitting on top of what you're interested in and allow you to see the whole of it," Coll says. "But often sources only have partial access, or even if they have fuller access, they're only willing to talk about part of what they know... Particularly when the subject matter is surrounded by both classification concerns and political debate, it's as treacherous as it gets. The only way to attack that problem is through reporting, and it means also trying to surround a subject from as many angles as possible." 
Often that means seeking viewpoints from foreign as well as domestic sources. "Even if I have great American sources, I want non-American perspectives to make sure there isn't some angle of vision that I'm failing to internalize," Coll says. But even that does not always save a reporter from errors: In the run-up to the war in Iraq, Britain and France also believed in the existence of weapons of mass destruction. The United Nations, however, "did have it more or less right. To the extent that any American paper did document the limits of WMD..it was clear that did come from the U.N." 
As a reporter works to confirm information, an initial tip can unravel partially or entirely. On June 13, the L.A. Times' Washington bureau was told about the banking records by a source who said, "'Here's the broad outlines of the story, and it's competitive, the New York Times is working on the story,'" recounts Douglas Frantz, the L.A. Times managing editor who oversees newsgathering. Some of that initial guidance turned out to be wrong. The tipster said the FBI was using administrative subpoenas to go to the Belgium-based cooperative known as Swift and gain access to the records. "As it turned out, it was in fact the Treasury Department." 
Reporters are trying to pry out sensitive information during a period of intense anxiety. "I haven't heard direct threats, but there are occasional reminders from administration officials that, in their view, the Espionage Act may apply to newspapers that publish classified information of any kind," says Doyle McManus, the L.A. Times Washington bureau chief. Those warnings, combined with high-profile setbacks for journalists' ability to protect sources in federal courts, do not intimidate reporters, McManus says. "It does make them worry about the well-being of their sources. They are hearing this concern from their sources, and they are taking precautions to try to protect their sources, keeping sources' names out of written notes, for example, taking more care with telephone or e-mail communications." 
As reporters dig, they sift through often-intriguing details about particular programs. Investigating the secret prisons story, the Post's Priest "came across a lot of information about covert antiterrorism projects that right from the outset it was clear to us that details here and there would not be important to readers" but would either be "injurious to Americans potentially or could damage these programs potentially," Downie says. "As we gradually shape what we think the story's going to be, most often senior officials will talk to the reporter about concerns and ask them to raise them with us." 
Downie says government officials are involved "very, very early on" in the process, "particularly officials that are doing their jobs well. Reporters are talking to them, asking them questions. They can see stories taking shape." Sometimes an official raises a specific concern that may resolve itself as the reporting proceeds, if, for example, a technical detail about an operation turns out to have little relevance to the story or is clearly of interest only to someone who wants to harm the country. Government officials also may drop a request to withhold publication. 
Especially with national security stories, the Post "sort of had a standing rule that we wanted to hear about concerns of these kinds if they were raised during the reporting," Coll says. The editors first tried to "understand what [the officials] were worried about, or if it was a concern they were voicing on their own. Then we'd ask the reporter to tell whoever was raising the question to kick it up their chain and determine whether the government side did have a concern or somebody down in the middle ranks was being overly cautious... You sort of challenge them" by asking, "'Are you speaking for your boss? And if you are speaking for your boss, would you mind putting your boss on the phone at some point?'" 
If publication concerns reflect the government's position, there's a "tacit protocol," Keller says. "It's one thing for the flack at the department to tell the reporter, 'You shouldn't publish this,' but if the administration is really serious, somebody fairly senior on their side contacts somebody fairly senior on our side."

</text>
