<text id="F19" category="" words="1996" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="&quot;Jeff College Boys&quot;: Thomas Eakins, Dr. Forbes, and Anatomical Fraternity in Postbellum American Quarterly, Vol. 57, No. 2 (Jun., 2005), pp. 355-383" Author="Alan C. Braddock" PublicationDate="2005" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.jstor.org/stable/pdfplus/40068270.pdf?acceptTC=true">

For Eakins and Forbes, a common institutional affiliation catalyzed the fraternal anatomical discourse to which each man contributed in his own way. The institution in question was Jefferson Medical College, one of Philadelphia's preeminent medical schools, where both men had studied anatomy, though at different times. To borrow the words of a contemporary medical student celebrating solidarity among his peers at the college, Eakins and Forbes could be called "Jeff College Boys." One of the many discursive links between art and medicine to be explored here is a monumental commemorative portrait of Forbes that Eakins painted in 1905 (fig. 1), a work that has received little critical attention, despite its august location today adjacent to the artist s most famous painting The Gross Clinic (Portrait of Dr. Samuel D. Gross) of 1875 in Jefferson's shrinelike Eakins Gallery. As we will see, the Forbes portrait offers eloquent visual testimony of the mutual, enduring anatomical interests of painter and doctor, even if the two men did not actually meet face-to-face until the occasion of its execution.
Despite the heroism often ascribed to Eakins and Forbes as proponents of modernization in their respective disciplines, anatomical study and teaching implicated them in a political conflict with classes of people whose bodies tended to be sacrificed on what Philadelphia sensationalist fiction writer George Lippard once described as "the foul altar of a dissecting table."8 The idea of sacrifice, though already invoked by Lippard s antebellum use of the word "altar" might seem to some readers inappropriate here because such anatomical material was already dead and (usually) not killed for the purpose of dissection. Viewing dissection in terms of sacrifice gains historical validity, however, when we recognize how in the nineteenth century the practice laid bare not only anatomical knowledge but also socioeconomic disparity. Whereas some people could afford to bury their dead intact with dignity, others needed public assistance, which stipulated that the corpses in question (including those left unclaimed at morgues) be used as dissection specimens before burial. Anatomical dissection thus entailed a sacrifice of human dignity on the part of those whose corpses were cut open as well as on the part of their living relatives and other members of their group, for whom the process provided a glaring reminder of inferior class status. A similar, albeit less morbid, set of conditions governed living anatomical models - typically laborers who sacrificed a significant measure of dignity by disrobing before their superiors, whose eyes performed a kind of visual dissection. Ironically, Eakins, Forbes, and other members of their professional class came to view sacrifice reflexively in terms of their own labor and even "martyrdom" in behalf of anatomical knowledge, as if metaphorically identifying with and appropriating the lowly or abject status of their specimens. At the same time, anatomical study potentially confronted such professionals with empirical proof of the basic biological equality among humans, regardless of race or class, and hence the historical contingency of their social privilege. That is, while anatomical study depended upon unequal social relations, its findings had the power to call such relations into question. Of course, most professional anatomists and artists of the period, inculcated in social evolutionist doctrines of racial and cultural hierarchy, either did not notice or disregarded such biological evidence of human equality. This remained true at least until around 1900, when the German-American anthropologist Franz Boas waged a fierce campaign against such doctrines. Although Eakins and Forbes were still active then, no documentary evidence indicates that either man consciously embraced Boasian ideas. As we will see, however, in the case of Eakins and his art there are tentative signs of disenchantment with the older hierarchical paradigm.
Several art historians recently have examined Eakins's medical imagery (though not the Forbes portrait) in relation to issues of gender, sexuality, vivisection, and public perceptions of surgery, but their accounts focus either exclusively on the painter s immediate artistic circle or on historical phenomena rather distant from the cultural politics of anatomy in Philadelphia. Little critical attention has been given to ways in which anatomical bodies facilitated a fraternal discourse broadly shared by artists and physicians there after the Civil War. By discourse I mean a network of related ideas and representations deployed by individuals from different disciplines - individuals (such as Eakins and Forbes) operating according to their own specific disciplinary needs while nonetheless constructing, and partaking of, a common cultural pattern. Broadly speaking, the fraternal discourse uniting Eakins, Forbes, and their respective professional circles over the anatomical body resembles a homosocial structure such as that identified by literary historian Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick in English fiction, wherein male characters frequently established relation-ships through a legitimating, yet subordinate, female object of desire. For Sedgwick, "in the presence of a woman who can be seen as pitiable or contemptible, men are able to exchange power and to confirm each other s value even in the context of remaining inequalities in their power." T he structure that Sedgwick describes therefore addresses not only the subjugation of women, but also the corollary effect of establishing fictive relations of equality among men. According to Sedgwick, "The sexually pitiable or contemptible female figure is a solvent that not only facilitates the relative democratization that grows up with capitalism and cash exchange, but goes a long way - for the men whom she leaves bonded together - toward palliating its gaps and failures." This "male traffic in women," as Sedgwick describes it, would seem to relate historically and structurally to Sappol's "traffic of dead bodies." Expanding on Sedgwick's insight, I contend that the anatomical body per-formed a similar bonding and palliating role for Eakins, Forbes, and their students, whose fraternal discourse likewise hinged upon a mediating subal-tern. Whereas Sedgwick focuses on a subaltern female, I propose here a subordinate figure encompassing but not limited to woman, broadly defined by class rather than gender. By thus modifying Sedgwick's terms, I do not wish to undermine the strength or historical specificity of her feminist interpretation so much as extend its considerable critical power in a direction already implied by her comments regarding the "gaps and failures" of capitalism. In Philadelphia, an industrial metropolis that witnessed massive socioeconomic trans-formation during the postbellum period, anatomical fraternity offered certain white male professionals a communal refuge from challenges to their traditional authority wrought by emancipation, immigration, labor unrest, the women's movement, and other modern phenomena, including the inequalities of capitalism. Although the anatomical body was not always female, like Sedgwick's go-between it tended historically to become a binding object of epistemological, even romantic, desire among men in nineteenth-century dissection rooms. Noting Edgar Allan Poe's dictum that "the death of a beautiful woman is ... the most poetical topic in the world," Sappol catalogs numerous literary and historical instances of desire for cadavers in American anatomical discourse of the period, a desire often associated with obsession and violence. From Sappol's account, a complex picture emerges of nineteenth-century anatomical speci-mens functioning as fetish objects of a sort, not necessarily gendered distinctly female, yet nonetheless helping fraternal white males negotiate the traumas of modernity. As with the Freudian fetish, desire directed toward the anatomical body was a contradictory mix of repetitive fascination and revulsion, longing and disavowal. If the anatomical body was not always female, nor was it necessarily black. Nevertheless, racial otherness often factored into the social construction of specimens as belonging to a benighted class. Acknowledging this racial dimension certainly does not preclude or cancel out the aforementioned fraternal desire for such specimens. The long history of white male appropriation of black culture and corporeality, as in the institution of blackface minstrelsy, confirms this. Here the scholarship of cultural historian Eric Lott provides further theoretical nuance and interpretive guidance. Although minstrelsy and anatomy obviously were different nineteenth-century institutions, Lott s subtle analysis of the former in his book Love and Theft reveals a dialectical complexity of racial dynamics that finds uncanny echoes in the anatomical world of Eakins and Forbes. Whereas working-class white men smeared their faces with burnt cork and adopted other bodily signs of blackness in order (paradoxically) to confirm their whiteness, medical and artistic professionals achieved a roughly similar result through frequent, direct, and prolonged physical contact with black bodies, cutting them open and mingling with their muscles, en-trails, and skeletons. Both acts - smearing and cutting blackness - constituted (to quote Lott) "small but significant crimes against settled ideas of racial demarcation." For Lott, the fraternal, appropriative gestures of minstrelsy functioned in a contradictory manner by simultaneously constructing white identity and illustrating "how precariously nineteenth-century white working people lived their whiteness," insofar as they repetitively adopted guises of otherness. For me, the procedures of anatomy suggest a similar precariousness in the identities of white professionals such as Eakins and Forbes, who enjoyed a privileged social status but were not too squeamish about difference to immerse their hands literally into the bodies of others, black or poor. Saying this does not undo their real, historical position of power vis-a-vis anatomical specimens, but it helps us better understand the dialectical relation between dissector and dissected. Two Scandals During the 1880s both Eakins and Forbes became lightning rods of public outrage in separate anatomical scandals that touched a common nerve of cul-tural anxiety in Philadelphia over the specimen body. Art historians are familiar with the Eakins affair of 1886, when he was forced to resign his professor-ship at the Pennsylvania Academy after removing the loincloth of a living male model while lecturing on anatomy to a mixed class of male and female students- an incident covered extensively in Philadelphia newspapers. For several years leading up to that scandal, trouble had been brewing between Eakins and academy administrators over his unusual insistence on training art students to dissect human cadavers. In 1884, before the scandal erupted, the artist s friend Earl Shinn wrote in The Art Amateur that "Mr. Eakins is an accomplished anatomist" under whose leadership the academy "affords abundant, not to say super-abundant, opportunities for dissection." Cadavers dissected at the academy came from the same public pool of poor and/or unclaimed bodies that supplied medical schools. We do not know the specific identity of the living male model notoriously revealed in 1886, but it could have been one of Eakins s students, for he preferred their bodies to those of prostitutes and other working-class people typically hired to pose. To Eakins, using students (and even occasionally himself) made sense, but it chafed against the sensibilities of some attending his lectures as well as their parents, for whom ^//models - living or dead - by definition belonged to an inferior class. In other words, Eakins blurred accepted social distinctions and thereby disclosed a degree of precariousness (following Lott) regarding professional class identity. The bonding, fraternal functions of the anatomical body (following Sedgwick) will become apparent momentarily. The other Philadelphia anatomical scandal occurred a few years earlier, in December 1882, when Forbes, then professor of anatomy at Jefferson, was indicted on charges of conspiring with a group of body snatchers to steal cadavers from Lebanon Cemetery, an African American burial ground in South Philadelphia. The cemetery, which no longer exists, was located near the intersection of South Broad Street and Passyunk Avenue, just north of The Neck - a marshy, polluted area downriver that provided a backdrop for sev-eral hunting pictures (featuring black laborers) produced by Eakins between 1874 and 188 1. Although Forbes eventually was acquitted, ostensibly for lack of evidence directly implicating him in the conspiracy, there was no question that his alleged accomplices had been delivering stolen corpses to Jefferson, as they were caught red-handed with six black bodies and keys to the doctor s anatomy laboratory. Nor was there much doubt- especially among African Americans in the city - that the practice had been going on at Lebanon Cem-etery for years. Despite Forbes's acquittal, his sensational arrest and trial shocked the city by publicly exposing an active black market supporting its hallowed medical establishment.

</text>
