<text id="F22" category="" words="1986" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Poets and Writers: Four-Legged Fiction ; NEA Responds to &quot;Reading at Risk&quot;" Author="Joe Woodward ; Kevin Canfield" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.pw.org/content/fourlegged_fiction ; http://www.pw.org/content/nea_responds_quotreading_riskquot">

Four-Legged Fiction
It used to be that when a writer bestowed human qualities on an animal - the ability to speak, for instance - it almost always meant trouble. George Orwell's menacing midcentury classic Animal Farm (Secker &amp; Warburg, 1945), a satire on the development of the Russian Revolution, certainly set the tone for the four-legged fiction that soon followed. The terrifying fable begins with Old Major calling the barn animals together to tell them of his pig dream: "Now, comrades, what is the nature of this life of ours? Let us face it: our lives are miserable, laborious, and short ... no animal escapes the cruel knife in the end." 
Major is right about the life of the farm animal, but his real message (and Orwell's) is grander and darker - and reaches far beyond the animal kingdom: "Man is the only creature that consumes without producing," he continues. "He does not give milk, he does not lay eggs, he is too weak to pull the plough, he cannot run fast enough to catch rabbits. Yet he is lord of all the animals." What the animals mean to do, of course, is set things right. But soon enough, they mess everything up. 
Other walking, talking literary beasts that followed in Major's dark shadow include the canine in Mikhail Bulgakov's Heart of a Dog (Harvill Press, 1968), who gains human intelligence after a Moscow professor transplants human glands into the unfortunate canine's body, and the German cats in Art Spiegelman's graphic novel Maus: A Survivor's Tale, which won a Pulitzer Prize Special Award in 1992. 
Today, animal lit is broader in scope and occasionally even benevolent in nature. This variety is evident in the genre's more recent successes - among them, Paul Auster's austere dog tale, Timbuktu (Henry Holt, 1999), Sigrid Nunez's "mock biography" of Virginia Woolf's pet marmoset, Mitz: The Marmoset of Bloomsbury (HarperFlamingo, 1998), and Susan Fromberg Schaeffer's warm enchantment, The Autobiography of Foudini M. Cat (Knopf, 1997). 
Already this year, two wildly different novels featuring animal protagonists - one with dark Orwellian whiskers, the other with a softer, more fragile underbelly - join the menagerie: Verlyn Klinkenborg's Timothy; or, Notes of an Abject Reptile, published in February by Knopf, and Sam Savage's provocative debut novel Firmin: Adventures of a Metropolitan Lowlife, forthcoming next month from Coffee House Press. 
A direct descendent of Orwell's Animal Farm, Savage's Firmin begins as a lovely and harmless tale of a wayward rodent lost in Boston. At first, the incidents of plotted terror are manageable - a struggling mother with thirteen babies but only twelve teats, the endless hunt for food, the keeping safe and warm - but later in the novel, Firmin falls upon a dark fascination in the form of a human named Norman Shine, the owner of a hole-in-the-wall bookstore, Pembroke Books. Firmin takes to feeding himself (metaphorically and literally) on the Great Books, devouring the canon page by page. His rat lust leads him to Moby-Dick, Don Quixote, and Finnegans Wake. "My favorites were the Modern Library editions," Firmin says. "Recite them, then, say them slowly aloud and let them break your heart. Oliver Twist. Huckleberry Finn. The Great Gatsby. Dead Souls. Middlemarch. Alice in Wonderland. Fathers and Sons. The Grapes of Wrath. The Way of All Flesh. An American Tragedy. Peter Pan. The Red and the Black. Lady Chatterley's Lover." 
Firmin takes in the great stories and then, like Quixote himself, the sharp edges of his real life soften, and he regrets staying safely inside the artificial world of books. "The truth is, I have never been right in the head," Firmin admits. "Only, I don't charge windmills. I do worse: I dream of charging windmills, I long to charge windmills, and sometimes even imagine I have charged windmills." 
As the author says of the rat's literary habits, "He begins to read because he is lonely, and he is lonely because he is puny and shunted from his family, a minor freak from the get-go. As he reads he becomes at once less lonely - he has the companionship of books - and more alone - he grows both more freakish and more conscious of his solitude." 
Firmin takes a dark turn as the plot centers on the "renovation," or destruction, of Scollay Square, where Pembroke Books sits. With the impending demise of the bookstore, Firmin's fascination with its owner dims, and he takes up with Jerry Magoon, a down-and-out science fiction writer who lives above the store. Firmin and Magoon become the best of friends - and then, suddenly, the characters stumble into true tragedy. 
"A curious thing happens when we endow animals with human traits, whether dancing dogs in tutus or monkeys in little jackets," says Savage. "They become parodies, not ridiculous animals so much as ridiculous humans. ...  Firmin can deliver the most heartbreaking statements, and because he is a rat, they become simultaneously heartbreaking and ludicrous." 
On the other end of the animal-lit spectrum is Klinkenborg's naturalist treaty Timothy, which is uniquely and utterly un-Orwellian. In Timothy, the reader comes upon the deeply carved and finely imagined caverns of a tortoise's mind. Based upon Gilbert White's observations in his Natural History of Selborne, first published in 1789, Klinkenborg investigates the world in reverse: the tortoise observing the naturalist. 
The novel's narration is oddly animalistic, characterized by simple sentences and poetic stutters: "When autumn pinches, I dig. November darkens, fasting long since begun. ...  No rush. No rush. Ease in again. A last fitting. Air hole open. Stow legs. Retreat under roof of self. Under vault of ribs and spine." 
In Timothy, Klinkenborg does not journey into the natural world simply to shed new light on human life or to poke fun at the politics of people, but, rather, to allow readers to more completely consider that animal world as parallel to our own. "The two great motives of love and hunger yaw back and forth through Selborne, driving human and beast alike," he writes. 
When asked about the separation of humans and animals, Klinkenborg is unambiguous. "They're not separate at all, not in any way. Humans are animals and are subject to the fundamental environmental and population constraints that all other species on this planet are subject to," he says. "What sets us apart is that we love to believe we're not subject to those constraints." 
Whether the latest animal protagonists draw readers' attention to the startling similarities or the cruel differences between man and beast, it is clear that the legacy of Orwell's animal satire remains secure. Contemporary writers like Savage and Klinkenborg continue to use the animal kingdom to expose and investigate the human condition - borrowing from the cat and rat, tortoise and cow, to expose our flaws, fractures, and infinite follies. 
Joe Woodward is the author of Small Matters: A Year in Writing.

NEA Responds to "Reading at Risk"
by Kevin Canfield
NEWS AND TRENDS

In response to its 2004 report "Reading at Risk," which found that significantly fewer people read serious literature now than in years past, the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) recently launched an ambitious program designed to reverse the trend. The Big Read, a joint project of the NEA and the Minneapolis-based nonprofit organization Arts Midwest, follows the template of the One Book program, developed in 1998 by the Washington Center for the Book in Seattle, in which teens and adults in one city are encouraged to read a specific book. 
As part of the pilot phase of the Big Read, which began in February, arts organizations, literary centers, and libraries in ten U.S. cities have each chosen a single book from four selected by the NEA and Arts Midwest: Harper Lee's To Kill a Mockingbird, F. Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby, Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451, and Zora Neale Hurston's Their Eyes Were Watching God. The local organizations, working with the NEA and Arts Midwest, have received grants ranging from fifteen thousand dollars to forty thousand dollars to carry out project-related activities, which include promotional campaigns on television and radio, and public literary events featuring local celebrities. 
The ten cities participating in the pilot phase of the program were selected from a total of forty-five that applied. They are Little Rock, Arkansas (represented by the Arkansas Center for the Book); Enterprise, Oregon (Fishtrap, Inc.); Miami, Florida (Florida Center for the Literary Arts/Florida Center for the Book); Fresno, California (Fresno County Library); Huntsville, Alabama (Huntsville-Madison County Public Library); Buffalo (Just Buffalo Literary Center); Minneapolis (The Loft Literary Center); Boise, Idaho (Log Cabin Literary Center, Inc.); Brookings and Sioux Falls, South Dakota (South Dakota Center for the Book); and Topeka, Kansas (Topeka-Shawnee County Public Library). 
"These ten cities and towns have been really brave in signing on for our maiden voyage," says David Kipen, the former San Francisco Chronicle book editor and critic who was named the NEA's literature director last August. "Mistakes are going to be made; we're going to learn things. So I think it's really gutsy of them." Kipen says the NEA plans to evaluate the program's success after the pilot phase of the Big Read is complete, in May. The goal is to expand the program to a hundred cities by 2007. The list of books from which the cities can choose is also likely to grow. 
The NEA's "Reading at Risk" report, released in July 2004, revealed that the number of readers of literature - novels, short stories, poetry, and plays - was "in dramatic decline with fewer than half of American adults now reading literature." From 1982 to 2002, the study found, the number of literary readers in the United States dropped by ten percentage points, and the decline in the percentage of Americans who read literature appears to be quickening. "This report documents a national crisis," NEA Chairman Dana Gioia said at the time. "The decline in reading among every segment of the adult population reflects a general collapse in advanced literacy." 
Despite this decline, dozens of cities across the country, as well as others in the U.K., Australia, and Canada, have adopted One Book programs in the last six years. The initiatives have been successful in some places, but, for a variety of reasons, less so in others. Kipen says Chicago and Seattle are two cities that embraced their One Book programs, but that the idea did not catch on as well in Los Angeles. "What happens in too many cases," he says, "is that you have cities concerned with picking up the trash on time undertaking an ambitious reading initiative, and unfortunately it doesn't command the full attention of local officials. How could it? And, alas, it fails to live up to its organizers' hopes." 
How, then, does the NEA plan to ensure that the Big Read reaches potential readers? The key component, according to Kipen, is the NEA's partnerships with local arts organizations. "It's all very well to ignore a [program] when it's only coming at you from one direction. But when it's got its tentacles around you - not just from the city fathers but from some combination of the local library, the local arts center, the schools, the chamber of commerce, the newspapers, the public radio station, the public TV station, the commercial TV stations, and heaven knows who else - it's an octopus that becomes much harder to avoid," he says. "Partnerships don't take a huge outlay of money, either, just a bunch of citizens as scared as we are of turning into a nation without readers. When that's the alternative, you'd be surprised how willing folks are to put in a little overtime, whether in my office or around the country." 
Though the NEA won't know precisely what impact the Big Read might have until the next U.S. Census, in 2010, Kipen plans to travel to as many of the participating cities as possible to gather anecdotal results. "I want to see firsthand what works, what doesn't," he says. "I want to see the expression on somebody's face as he's realizing that good books aren't medicine - they're food." 
Kevin Canfield is a journalist in New York City.

</text>
