<text id="F25" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science : Democracy and Equality " Author="Robert Post " PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://ann.sagepub.com/content/603/1/24.full.pdf+html">

What does it mean for a form of government to be autonomous? Democracy is
not the same thing as popular sovereignty, a state of affairs in which the people
exercise ultimate control over their government. Popular sovereignty is compatible
with forms of popular fascism in which a dictator carries the genuine and spontaneous
approval of an entire people.1 Nor is democracy identical to
majoritarianism, in which a majority of the people exercise control over their government.
2 Although it is frequently said "any distinct restraint on majority power,
such as a principle of freedom of speech, is by its nature anti-democratic, antimajoritarian"
(Schauer 1982, 40-41), a majority of the electorate can implement
rules that are plainly inconsistent with democracy, as for example by voting a monarchy
into office. These examples suggest that popular sovereignty and
majoritarianism may be intimately associated with the practice of democracy, but
they themselves do not define democracy. That is why it is not unintelligible to conclude
that particular exercises of popular sovereignty or majoritarianism are
antidemocratic.
Democracy is distinct from popular sovereignty and majoritarianism because
democracy is a normative idea that refers to substantive political values
(Michelman 1998), whereas popular sovereignty and majoritarianism are descriptive
terms that refer to particular decision-making procedures. Implicit in the idea
of democracy are the values that allow us to determine whether in specific circumstances
particular decision-making procedures are actually democratic. Governments,
for example, do not become democratic merely because they hold elections
in which majorities govern. Such elections are currently held in North Korea. To
know whether these elections make North Korea democratic requires an inquiry
into whether these elections are implemented in a way that serves democratic values.
It is a grave mistake to confuse democracy with particular decision-making
procedures and to fail to identify the core values that democracy as a form of
government seeks to instantiate.
The values of autonomy are essential to democracy. In the context of government,
these values are associated with the practice of self-determination (Kelsen 1961, 284-86).We must ask, therefore, what it means for a people to engage in the
practice of self-determination. This practice is often interpreted to mean that a
people be made ultimately responsible for governmental decisions, either by making
such decisions directly or by electing those who do (Meiklejohn 1948). But in
my view this is an insufficient account of the practice of self-government. For
reasons that I shall explain, I think it preferable to say that the practice of selfgovernment
requires that a people have the warranted conviction that they are
engaged in the process of governing themselves.3 The distinction is crucial, for it
emphasizes the difference between making particular decisions and recognizing
particular decisions as one's own. Self-government is about the authorship of decisions,
not about the making of decisions.
We can test this distinction by imagining a situation in which the people in their
collective capacity decide issues but in which individuals within the collectivity feel
hopelessly alienated from these decisions. Suppose, for example, that in StateXcitizens
are provided with interactive computer terminals that they are required to
use in the morning to register their preferences about various issues. Each morning,
an agenda for decision (composed by an elected assembly) is presented on the
terminal. The citizens of State X must decide what color clothes should be worn,
what menu should be served for lunch and dinner, the boundaries of the attendance
zones for the neighborhood school, whether a stop sign should be placed at a
local intersection, and so on. Assume that citizens of State X can get from their
computer whatever information they believe is relevant for their votes, including
information about the likely views of other citizens.
Imagine, further, that State X has no public discourse. There are neither newspapers
nor broadcast media. The state bans political parties and associations. It
proscribes public demonstrations and prohibits individuals from publishing their
views to other citizens. Each citizen must make up his or her mind in isolation.
Decisions in State X, however, are made on the basis of the majority vote of the collectivity,
and all individuals are henceforth required to comply: to wear blue, or to serve chicken for lunch, or to attend a particular school, or to stop at the local intersection.
Individuals in StateXfeel completely alienated from these decisions. They
do not identify with them and instead feel controlled and manipulated by the
external force of the collectivity.
Wouldwe deem StateXan example of a society that engages in self-determination?
Although in State X the people retain their ability, "as a collectivity, to decide their
own fate" (Fiss 1996, 37-38), which is to say to make decisions by majority rule, I
very much doubt that we would characterize State X as a democracy.We are much
more likely to condemn it as a dystopian tyranny. Rousseau long ago diagnosed the
reason for this condemnation: collective decision making is merely oppressive
unless there is some internal connection between the particular wills of individual
citizens and the general will of the collectivity (Rousseau 1968, 58-62).4
Of course, it is implausible to claim, as Rousseau might be thought to claim, that
there can exist a complete identity between the particular wills of individual citizens
and the general will of the democratic state. It is enough that individual citizens
can recognize in that general will the potentiality of their own authorship
(Post 1993b). When this occurs, collective decision making is democratic because
it is experienced as self-determination. But when citizens feel alienated from the
general will, or from the process by which the general will is created, voting on
issues is merely a mechanism for decision making, a mechanism that can easily turn
oppressive and undemocratic.
It follows that the value of democracy can be fulfilled only if there is a continual
mediation between collective self-determination and the individual selfdetermination
of particular citizens.5 If democracy requires that citizens experience
their government as their own, as representing them, they must experience
the state as in some way responsive to their own values and ideas. How is this theoretically
possible under modern conditions of diversity, when the citizens of a state
are heterogeneous and disagree with each other? The focus of analysis must shift
from specific state decisions to the process by which these decisions are authorized.
Citizens must experience that process as responsive to their own values and
ideas.
This is the theory of the American First Amendment, which rests on the idea
that if citizens are free to participate in the formation of public opinion, and if the
decisions of the state are made responsive to public opinion, citizens will be able to
experience their government as their own, even if they hold diverse views and otherwise
disagree. That is why the First Amendment, which is antimajoritarian, is
nevertheless regarded as "the guardian of our democracy."

The First Amendment protects the communicative processes by which the
American people work toward an "agreement" that is "uncoerced, and reached by
citizens in ways consistent with their being viewed as free and equal persons"
(Rawls 1985, 229-30). Of course, under conditions of modern hetereogeneity,
actual agreement is impossible, so the notion of agreement functions merely as a
"regulative idea" (Findlay 1981, 241) for the formation of public opinion. If we use
the term public discourse to refer to the communicative processes by which public
opinion is formed, we can say that public discourse continuously but unsuccessfully
strives to mediate between individual and collective self-determination to
produce "a common will, communicatively shaped and discursively clarified in the
political public sphere" (Habermas 1987, 81).
In a modern democracy, therefore, citizens are free to engage in public discourse
to make the state responsive to their ideas and values, in the hope that even
if the state acts in ways inconsistent with those ideas and values, citizens can nevertheless
maintain their identification with the state. There is much about the constitutional
law of freedom of expression that follows from this formulation, but for
present purposes I shall emphasize only that modern democracies on this account
must regard their citizens, insofar as they engage in public discourse, as equal and
autonomous persons. That is why Jean Piaget (1965, 362-63) was profoundly correct
to observe that "the essence of democracy resides in its attitude toward law as a
product of the collective will, and not as something emanating from a transcendent
will or from the authority established by divine right. It is therefore the essence of
democracy to replace the unilateral respect of authority by the mutual respect of
autonomous wills."
II
We are now in a position to deduce our first postulate about the relationship
between democracy and equality. Democracy requires that persons be
treated equally insofar as they are autonomous participants in the process of selfgovernment.
This form of equality is foundational to democracy because it follows
from the very definition of democracy. Democracy requires an equality of
democratic agency.
Democracy continuously strives to reconcile the self-determination of individual
citizens with the self-government of the state. This means that democracy must
regard each citizen as an autonomous, self-determining person, at least insofar as is
relevant to maintaining a live identification with the self-government of the state.
Every citizen is equal in this regard. To the extent that the state treats citizens
unequally in a relevant manner, say by allowing some citizens greater freedom of
participation in public discourse than others, the state becomes heteronomous
with respect to those citizens who are treated unequally. The state thereby loses its
claim to democratic legitimacy with respect to those citizens. It follows that every
citizen in a democracy is entitled to be treated equally in regard to the forms of
conduct that constitute autonomous democratic participation.
This definition of democratic equality is of course formal and functional. Its precise
content must be established by specifying the forms of democratic participation.
These forms are given to us socially and historically, and different forms will
imply different forms of democratic equality. For example, equality in the context
of voting will be different than equality in the context of public discourse. Voting to
select national or statewide officials is understood to be a method through which
citizens participate in the choice of their leaders. Because all citizens are affected
by this choice, we recognize citizens' equality of agency by the principle of "one
person, one vote." The principle signifies that each citizen is to be regarded as formally
equal to every other in the influence that their agency can contribute to public
decisions.
The purpose of communication within public discourse, by contrast, is not to
make decisions but to empower citizens to participate in public opinion in ways
that will permit them to believe that public opinion will become potentially responsive
to their views. Whereas equality in voting is measured in terms of equality of
influence on ultimate decisions, equality of participation in public discourse cannot
be measured in this way. Because influence in public debate is a matter of persuading
others to one's point of view, the state can equalize influence on public
debate only if it controls the intimate and independent processes by which citizens
evaluate the ideas of others. Such efforts are intrinsically undesirable when performed
by the state, both because ideas are not equal - the very structure of public
debate rests on the premise of distinguishing good ideas from bad ideas - and
because any such governmental efforts likely would verge on the tyrannical.
For these reasons, equality of agency in the context of public discourse is measured
by guaranteeing each citizen the right to express himself in public discourse
in a manner that will allow him to believe that public opinion will be responsive to
his agency. This function cannot be achieved by offering each citizen the identical
quantity of expression because a citizen may well deem a given quantity of expression
as inadequate to her communicative needs and hence become alienated from
public opinion, even if that quantity is equal in amount to that given to every other
citizen.

</text>
