<text id="F26" category="" words="1979" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Voices: The Journal of New York Folklore  -  Calico Indians: Festive Play in Acts of Resistance" Author="Roger D Abrahams " PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning " WebAddress="http://www.nyfolklore.org/pubs/voic32-3-4/calico.html">

Throughout the original colonies, before and after the American Revolution, whites took on the costumes and some of the rituals and social organization of Indians. Groups of young white males bonded together for two main reasons. Settlers deployed Indian devices as a way of organizing themselves in opposition to those denying them title to the lands they had developed. Meanwhile, in urban commercial communities, elites demonstrated their wit and invention by learning how to dress, sing, dance, and even orate in Indian style as members of fraternities that drew on Indian influences. On occasion, the city fraternal organizations were called upon to act as hosts for actual Indian groups as they came to the city in some official capacity. This led to the anomalous situation of play Indians and real Indians ceremonializing with each other. This article describes both kinds of white Indians from New York State.


If we are to credit the reports of early American travelers and letter writers, the citizens of the new nation vigorously maintained European traditions of rough music - both the skimmington and the more uniquely American tarring and feathering and riding on a rail - for quick frontier justice and sometimes to have a little neighborly fun, as well. Unsurprisingly, the settlers were hungry for freehold land. They felt it their god-given right to "improve" the land - legitimated through the "empty lands" or vacuum domicilium argument - cutting down the trees, gathering the stones in the field, erecting fences out of what was gathered, and plowing long straight furrows. When possible, they wanted a new arrival to get started on his own enterprise, knowing that whatever the neighbors could do, it would raise the value of their own land - if they ever were able to achieve ownership.

Through the house-raisings, bees, and other frolics that called neighboring farmers and then they expected to own it. But claiming the land, improving it, and prospering proved extremely difficult, especially in the upper reaches of the Delaware, Susquehanna, and Connecticut rivers. These were lands that had rival claimants: expansive Yorkers, the Jerseyites, pious Pennsylvanians, and wild Yankees from Connecticut. Alan Taylor's Pulitzer prize - winning book, William Cooper's Town: Power and Persuasion on the Frontier of the Early American Republic (1995), tells the story vigorously. More than occasionally, brushfire wars broke out between two or more of the claimant parties. But all agreed that the real enemy were the manor lords, land companies, and landlords, all of whom would deny ownership of the land, even if one side were able to burn down the dwellings and blockade houses of the others. And each party seems to have attempted to enlist the help of an Iroquois leader and his braves. Many of the Indian leaders prevailed upon were indiscriminate as to who they were killing and scalping. This was the situation that led to such historical horror stories as the Battle of Minisink and the Yankee-Pennamite Wars.
The controversy over land was compounded by the different logics of the settlers. Some claimed ownership through title ultimately traceable to monarchical fiat, others through English parliamentary disposition, and still others through hereditary entitlements established before the territory was British or American. In the end, those who felt most strongly were those who held no title whatsoever: the squatters and renters who thought they would be able to hang on to a farm through what today is called "sweat equity," that is, by actual physical improvements to which they could point. And it was these renters and squatters who proved to be the most jealous of their rights and the most active in banding together to assert them. Whites, wearing the hunting outfit of the pioneers, which they had adapted from the Iroquois and Algonquins who constituted most of the indigenous population, learned war tactics from the Indians and went even further, forming themselves into their own quasi-tribal organizations. In times of open skirmishes, they called themselves by many local names: Calico Indians, Shirt Boys, Green Mountain Boys, and White Indians. They made noises to suggest that, like the Iroquois themselves, they would battle to protect their land rights. They met secretly, developed "Indian" names, code words, and shibboleths by which they could recognize each other when they met. Thus, they were playing Indians - but seriously (Deloria 1998).

Sometimes, at the point at which the different state governments pursued these claims, these vigilante groups received encouragement to fight from the landowners and their agents, the speculators. Often the farmers themselves got caught between rival claimants, making it all the more difficult for them to obtain title to their farms. Many of the more prosperous settlers were forced to [pay] a number of states or land company claimants, simply to clear a title. Moreover, when the Revolution began, they found themselves fighting a European war in which they had little interest, understanding that they would inevitably be the losers when their crops and cattle were commandeered. They knew that in these national and international conflicts, it was the small farmer who was going to wind up the loser, no matter who signed the treaties (Kim 1987).
The nation emerged during the period when the very notion of the public citizen came to play a central role in everyday life. An outgrowth of commercial enterprise, "public man" emerged as a person of property and substance. These were men who invested a good deal in projecting power and responsibility by going into public and displaying their roles as reluctant but willing leaders. Public settings - courts, taverns and lodges, and other places of assembly -  provided the arenas in which they demonstrated their mastery over the approved power practices of their day: parades, speeches, debates, and legal and political discussions.

In many kinds of voluntary associations, from the secret and apparently spontaneous gatherings of the Calico Indians to the more formal organizations like various fire brigades and local military regiments, white male Americans freely chose to announce themselves as a new breed of citizen. Clubs and other such organizations broke out all over the colonies in the first generation of the eighteenth century: groups like Benjamin Franklin's Junto and Dr. Alexander Hamilton's Tuesday Club, in addition to the introduction of freemasonry. Many of these clubs developed into the Committees of Correspondence and the Sons of Liberty after the passage of the Stamp Act in 1765. Whether they were carrying out frontier justice, organizing in the face of a perceived common enemy, or simply gathering to have fun, these voluntary groups emerged throughout the colonies well before the formal separation from Great Britain.

Many other bands of costumed or disguised young men mobilized to comment on perceived misbehavior within the community or on failures in equity imposed from outside. In mock parades, parodies of patriotic oratorical events, and especially in hangings and burnings in effigy, rallying around the Liberty Pole, the players made fun as they had fun. By developing a wide range of voluntary associations, from the occasional come-one - come-all work party to the more formal organization of the brigade, the lodge, and the band, early Americans put on display the ideal of freehold property used for agricultural purposes. In the countryside, the community of working players reenacted settlement itself. These gregarious practices soon came to be thought of as both American and traditional.
When the Calico Indians mounted their campaign, they drew on tactics used by the other "Indian" resistance groups. As they explained in their public documents, the Calico Indians were protest masqueraders, like the Mohawks of the Boston Tea Party (Christman 1961, 92). These mobilized bands availed themselves of symbols of disorder - motley costumes and noisemakers - to dramatize a socially confrontational stance. Ordinarily, they came together for holidays, roaming the town and countryside, pausing at doors and gates where they offered a little performance, bringing with them luck and good cheer. Often called "antics and horribles," they keyed the neighborhood that something wild was about to take place, usually in fun. To this day, many small-town festivities are called the parade of the "antiques and horribles" or Callithumpian Bands, or they use the old German term, Belsnicklers.

The ancestors of these apparently spontaneous bands were the youth groups found throughout Europe: the apprentices of the crafts guilds and the novices of the confraternities. By custom, these young men were given a yearly time at which they were encouraged to turn the world upside down. The liberties taken on such occasions included not only seizing and often inverting everyday symbols of power, but making satiric social and political commentary. Through mock trials, effigy hangings and burnings, and performing libels (plays in which the misdeeds of the local gentry were commented upon), they carried the power to taunt, disorient, and entertain wherever they clowned.
These practices seem to have migrated with the English settlers, especially those making common cause in the face of outside officialdom. Historians studying the relationship between riots, rebellions, and revolution in the colonies regard these mobbings as common. For instance, historian Pauline Maier says of eighteenth-century life, "Americans accepted the existence of popular uprisings with remarkable ease." She continues, "In certain circumstances . . . the people would rise up almost as a natural force, as night follows day, and this phenomenon often contributed to the public welfare. The colonists' attitude depended in large part upon a tradition of popular uprisings that also shaped the forms of popular force during the revolutionary era" (Maier 1972, 3).

In New York, as in other colonies, if the groups forming themselves came together spontaneously, the practices themselves were anything but spontaneous inventions. The white Indian bands seized the night and built their scare techniques from the guerrilla tactics learned the hard way by settlers over the years. The secrecy of the white Indian bands, their disguise, and their attacks were rationalized as historically sanctioned resistance exercised by those concerned with the "ancient liberties." Like the Boston Mohawks, far from being dressed in Native American garb, they clothed themselves in sheets and blankets and women's dresses of various sorts, masking or darkening their faces against recognition during the night. Like the Wild Man or Green Man of European celebrations, Indian figures represented something like the spirit of the land. This was a technique widely found in European festive costumes - to appear or to represent the earliest indigenous peoples now lost to the land, or to appear as one or another kind of stranger who has wandered in from the East, as Moors, Turks, or East Indians. The calico cloth in the Calico Indians' name, in fact, was the multicolored, inexpensive cotton fabric originally imported from India and first known as Calcutta cloth or Calicut, suggesting an oriental origin.
As they have been described, only the anonymity afforded by the disguise distinguished the maskers. No two costumes were alike in color, style, or decoration, and their arms were makeshift and varied -  muskets, pistols, spears, hatchets and axes, cheese knives, bits of scythes, and clubs. Some of the chiefs of tribes were distinguishable by long dresses like women's nightgowns. Otherwise the disguise was so complete that anecdotes were told about parents talking for hours with their own sons and struggling sisters being overwhelmed by the unwelcome caresses of their own brothers, without the slightest suspicion of their identity (Christman 1961: 92 - 3).

Whether because of sheeting, netting, or some other facial cover, their voices were muffled in the manner of holiday mummers. Perhaps they also held pieces of wood in their mouths, like the White Indians of Maine. They came to know each other by their disguises, the names of the captains often deriving from the color of the costume they wore: "Yellow Jacket," "Black Hawk," "Red Jacket," etc. The impulse was to make themselves strange, to exoticize in order to intensify their scare tactics. As described by Thomas Slaughter, the Calico Indians saw themselves as "Friends of Liberty," as opposed to the representation of outside authority, "Friends of Order" (1986, 19).

</text>
