<text id="F30" category="" words="2004" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="An Administrator's Guide to Online Education" Author="Kaye Shelton and George Saltsman" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.universitybusiness.com/viewarticle.aspx?articleid=266  http://www.universitybusiness.com/viewarticle.aspx?articleid=266&p=2#0  http://www.universitybusiness.com/viewarticle.aspx?articleid=266&p=3#0">

Unlike most books regarding online education, this book is not about teaching; it is about effectively administrating an online education program. Grounded in existing distance education theory, and drawing from best practices, current research, and an extensive review of current literature, An Administrator's Guide to Online Education systematically identifies and discusses seven key issues that affect the practice of online education today: leadership and strategic planning, policy and operation, faculty, online student services, online student success, technology and the courseware management system, and finally marketing. Throughout the text, the authors provide case studies, examples, policies, and resources from actual institutions, which further enhance the value of this text. An Administrator's Guide to Online Education, encompasses the issues and provides information on how to accomplish one specific task: successful online education administration. 
Faculty Issues in Online Education 
Since online education is a new paradigm, many faculty members are unprepared for the fundamental differences in the roles required for teaching online. A higher level of involvement by administrators in faculty support is needed to ensure success. Seven issues exist related to faculty that administrators must address: faculty buy-in; policies that address faculty concerns; selection of faculty; faculty compensation; an understanding of faculty workloads; faculty support; and faculty satisfaction. This chapter excerpt focuses specifically on three of these most widely discussed issues in online education today: faculty compensation; faculty workload; and faculty selection. 
Faculty Compensation 
Faculty must find reward in teaching online (Kovel-Jarboe, 1997). Most faculty find the intrinsic rewards of online education outweigh the extrinsic rewards (Betts, 1998; Parker, 2003; Rockwell et al., 1999); however, faculty must function in a culture that respects their time, efforts, and intellectual output. This is demonstrated most visibly in compensation and how much consideration online participation is given in the promotion and tenure process (Rockwell et al., 1999; Willis, 1994). 
Compensation and incentives encourage faculty to participate in online activities and reward those that participate. Incentive structures and policy need to be examined as online education moves mainstream (Koval-Jarobe, 1997). Moving the program to the mainstream requires administrators to focus on compensation, incentives, and perks, and how consideration for promotion and tenure reflects participation in online education programs. 
Courseload and Compensation 
Courseload consideration for online instruction is the most common form of compensation (National Education Association, 2000). The National Education Association (NEA, 2000) reported 73 percent of NEA members who taught online courses were compensated as part of their normal courseload. This does not mean that courseload reduction was the exclusive form of compensation, as other enticements such as additional compensation, perks, or other incentives may also be offered. 
At most institutions of higher education in the United States, faculty load is calculated in the number of semester credit hours taught with courseload reductions or equivalencies routinely given for research or other scholarly activities. The issue of load is often raised when an institution requests an instructor to develop and/or teach online education courses. Policy should clearly define the institution's calculation of faculty load for course development and instruction and should also address teaching load for instruction and the initial creation of the online course. Many institutions attempt fair calculation of teaching loads for online instructors by calculating the online course the same as teaching a traditional class. Calculating load for course development is slightly more complex since it is not always limited to a single semester. Schifter (2000) notes that faculty are compensated more for distance course creation than for instruction. Many institutions have adopted a policy of also offering courseload reductions for online course development, but that may not always be enough. 
Of course, how the institution chooses to address these issues will be largely based upon culture, historical context, and institutional priority. The institution should also outline the expectations of faculty to alter or revise the course once it has been developed. The American Council on Education (2000) raised questions regarding not only the creation of the course but also the revision of the course and the amount of time needed to launch the course. In addition to courseload reductions, workload reductions from out-of-class responsibilities may also need to accurately reflect the additional amount of time involved with course creation and modification. 
Royalties from course development may be provided as a form of compensation. Payments, based upon predetermined arrangements, vary from institution to institution with many institutions choosing not to offer royalties at all. Institutional policy must directly address all concerns regarding the distribution of royalties by explicitly stating whether royalties will be provided or not. 
Incentives and Perks 
Incentives and perks are also used to encourage faculty participation. Kovel-Jarboe (1997) noted, "When distance learning is a marginal aspect of campus life, it is tempting to offer incentives (often monetary) to entice faculty to design and deliver distance education offerings" (p. 28). Incentives are most frequently offered in the form of cash stipends. Other incentives institutions offer are listed below: 
Higher pay for teaching an online class (than for a traditional class) 
Reduction in other workloads (committee, governance, administrative) 
Provision/reimbursement for residential broadband or dial-up Internet access 
New computer hardware or software 
Ability to hold online office hours from home 
Teaching or graduate assistant 
Travel 
National conference fees 
Discretionary spending account (as adapted from Schifter, 2000) 
Schifter (2000) found in a study of 160 institutions: the cost of the residential Internet was provided as incentive the most and the provision of a graduate assistant and faculty release time was provided the least.
Promotion and Tenure 
When tenure is awarded to faculty, it is usually done according to formal institutional policy and predefined criteria. The institution's policies toward tenure and promotion communicate the institution's preference for faculty activities, which, in turn, will affect the level of participation by faculty in institutionally approved activities. Rockwell and colleagues (1999) noted that faculty must comprehend how teaching online affects promotion and tenure. Willis (1994) states, "If the institutional reward structure lacks the flexibility to recognize the role played by distance educators, it should be modified before faculty interest and enthusiasm wanes" (p. 288). Consideration of online course development and instruction in the tenure and promotion process is a powerful way to encourage participation; not recognizing this will present a sizable barrier. To be effective, online administrators should strive to make sure faculty are evaluated fairly (Willis, 1993). 
Faculty Workload 
Closely related to faculty courseload is the issue of the daily time required to teach online. Workload is not a discussion of how courses count in faculty load calculations, but the number of hours needed each day to teach online. Many faculty are concerned about workload in online courses and that concern has quickly become one of the largest issues in faculty participation. O'Quinn and Corry (2002) surveyed faculty and division chairs at a community college on 30 factors related to participation in distance education. "The factor which posed the greatest concern to all faculty and division chairs regarding their participation in distance education was the workload that faculty incur as a result of participating in distance education" (O'Quinn &amp; Corry, 2002). 
The common conception is "it takes more time to teach in a virtual classroom than in a regular one" (Young, 2002b, p. A31). Many faculty would quickly agree with this assessment; however, in a recent study published in The Internet and Higher Education, Hislop and Ellis (2004) found "instructors worked an average of six more minutes per student in an online course than in a classroom. In a course with 30 students, that's about three more hours per semester" (as cited in Carnevale, 2004d, p. A31). Hislop believes the misconception may "result of the pacing of online instruction" (as cited in Carnevale, 2004d, p. A31), as the preparation time is significant before the course starts but slows down throughout the duration. Another study, conducted by Melody M. Thompson comparing workload in the online environment at the Penn State World Campus, found similar results in that workload "was comparable to or somewhat less than that for face-to-face courses ... [noting that] "a differential 'chunking' of productive time contributed in some cases to a perception of increased workload" (Thompson, 2004, p. 84). 
 This research and other observations suggest that the type of activities a faculty member might be involved in when teaching an online course are different than traditional classroom activities. Rather than spending time in class prep and lecture, an online instructor's time is spent in the discussion boards and responding to email. A focus group conducted with full-time faculty teaching online for the first time at Abilene Christian University revealed that the majority felt they were spending more time grading and less time in direct instruction (Saltsman, personal communication, August 15, 2004). Drexel professor Gregory W. Hislop agrees, stating, "The hours spent teaching in a classroom tend to come all at once" (as cited in Carnevale, 2004d, p. A31). Unlike traditional class prep and delivery, online coursework is more evenly paced. "The frequent contact with online students can interrupt a professor's research or other projects, making it seem that teaching in cyberspace takes more of the professor's time" (as cited in Carnevale, 2004d, p. A31). 
Class Size 
Teacher-student interaction should be encouraged, as it plays a significant role in student attitudes toward online learning (Tomei, 2004). The learning community approach to online instruction requires increased personal interaction to engage with students and effectively ascertain if they are learning and progressing at a desired rate. Therefore, the time a faculty member spends in interaction per student is higher in an online course than in a traditional setting (Tomei, 2004). The best solution to encourage faculty-student interaction, and to obtain the rewards of lower course attrition and greater student performance, is to keep class sizes small. 
According to The Survey of Distance and Cyberlearning Programs in HigherEducation, 2002-2003 Edition, class sizes range from 2 to 100. As for national statistics on average class size, the literature varies from 12 to 15 (Gibbons &amp; Wentworth, 2001) to 20 to 25 (Primary Research Group, 2003; Sausner, 2003). This could be related to sampling errors, exclusion of other distance modalities, timing of the survey, or it may be related to the inclusion of for-profit institutions into the calculations. Interestingly, some of the for-profit institutions, which constitute a sizable number of online enrollments, have lower student-teacher ratios. The for-profit University of Phoenix caps classes at 13 students and has a typical class size of 11 (Olsen, 2002) and Cappella, another for-profit institution, has an average class size of 12 students (Sausner, 2003). 
The classification of the university and level of the course have more to do with predicting class size than anything. In general, the larger the school, the larger the class size. According to Primary Research Group (2003), "Colleges with more than 8,000 enrolled students (in all programs not just distance leaning) had an average distance learning class size of nearly 36 students, while all other colleges in all other size categories (all smaller) hovered around 20 per class" (p. 24). The same survey also concluded that graduate courses often have lower class sizes than undergraduate courses (Primary Research Group, 2003). 
As far as the ideal class size, for educational outcomes, the smaller the better. Student attitudes are driven by the level of interaction with the instructor (Tomei, 2003) and can affect their satisfaction with the course. Sausner (2003) observed that in the beginning, some institutions thought class size would not need to be limited; however, because the important student-instructor interaction increases, the class sizes should be limited. In fact, Sausner found that 20-25 students per class is the best range, while Tomei (2004) calculated that 12 was the most optimal. The Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education (WICHE) does not address class size in their Best Practices or Electronically Offered Degree and Certificate Programs document, but suggests "the importance of appropriate interaction (synchronous or asynchronous) between instructor and students and among students is reflected in the design of the program and its courses, and in the technical facilities and services provided" (2001, p. 7).

</text>
