<text id="F36" category="" words="2020" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Dance and its music in America, 1528-1789" Author="Keller, Kate Van Winkle " PublicationDate="2007" SampledFrom="Hillsdale, NY : Pendragon Press" WebAddress="http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=acls;cc=acls;idno=heb07727.0001.001;view=toc">

FRENCH EXPLORATION AND SETTLEMENT.
With the French and Spanish continually at war in the first half of the
sixteenth century, French King Francis I saw colonial expansion as a way
to challenge his enemy's power in Europe. In 1524 he sent Giovanni de
Verrazzano to explore the coast of North America from Carolina to Maine.
Ten years later, he sent Jacques Cartier to find a route through the newly
identified land mass to the riches of the Far East. Cartier sailed up the St.
Lawrence as far as the point where Quebec City would be founded and
met Indians eager to trade furs for metal goods, which suggests that
Europeans had been there before.
Cartier made several more exploratory trips and the French established two short-lived settlements in South Carolina and Florida, but it
would be the fortunate choice of Samuel de Champlain to accompany an
expedition in 1604 that established a permanent French presence in North
America. The company was sent to develop the fur trade, explore for
mineral wealth, establish settlements, locate the elusive "Northwest Passage," and, of course, convert the Indians to Roman Catholicism.
Champlain managed to develop good relations with the native peoples
but it would be the Jesuits who arrived in 1625, and the fur trade that
opened full relationships with the Europeans.
In 1663 Louis XIV made Canada a royal province. The fur trade
was established, food supply was nearly self-sufficient and generous land
policies meant that the people who had settled were better off than their
compatriots at home. Although the home government opposed it, Governor-General Louis de Buade, comte de Frontenac, worked to extend
French power into the interior. "Interested almost exclusively in the fur
trade, the French abhorred any idea of displacing the native Indians,
whom they cultivated as suppliers." French traders brought more tribes
into the French trading network and by the early 1670s they had reached
the far end of Lake Superior. In 1673, a party traveled down the Mississippi to the mouth of the Arkansas River, turning back in fear of Spanish
opposition. Nine years later, La Salle would travel to the mouth of the
great river and claim the whole territory for Louis XIV.
As the St. Lawrence Valley was being settled, the Hudson River
Valley was also taking on a European look. By 1614 a fortified trading
post was established near present-day Albany and soon Dutch settlers
arrived to support a growing fur trade with the Iroquois who were also
trading with the French. Between 1675 and 1677 the English Governor of
New York, Edmond Andros, made an alliance with the Iroquois in which
he agreed to support their domination of the Algonkians and they would
join the English against the French incursions from Canada.
THE UPPER MISSISSIPPI VALLEY.
Population of the French territory centered in Quebec (founded in 1608),
Trois-Rivieres (1634), and Ville Marie (later Montreal, 1642). The immense
size of the land claimed by France made it necessary for them to establish
a chain of forts and outposts for protection and communication. In 1688
Father Jacques Marquette founded the first permanent settlement in
Michigan at Sault Ste. Marie in Chippewa country and in 1701 Antoine
Cadillac founded Detroit as an important point for French control of the
fur trade. But these were small outposts in a large region, the domain of
the Indian hunter and the traders or coureurs de bois, of missionaries,
explorers and soldiers. By this time French-claimed territory in North
America occupied three-fourths of the continent, from Louisiana to
Hudson's Bay and from Newfoundland to the unexplored territories
beyond the Great Lakes. John Koegel summarized the more important
French settlements by date of settlement. His list gives a sense of the vast
territory and the distances involved: Biloxi (Fort Maurepas), Mississippi
(1699), Cahokia, Illinois (1699), Detroit, Michigan (1701), Kaskaskia (1675/
1703), Mobile (Port Dauphin), Alabama (1711), Natchez (Fort Rosalie),
Mississippi (1716), New Orleans, Louisiana (1718), Vincennes, Indiana
(1732), Ste. Genevieve (c. 1750) and St. Louis, Missouri (1764).
From the very first contact, reports of Native dances abound in the
historical record, some with more detail than others. One of the best
known reports is from Jonathan Carver who spent time among the Sioux
(now Lakota) people among others from 1766 to 1768.
Dancing is a favourite exercise among the Indians; they never
meet on any public occasion, but this makes a part of the
entertainment. And when they are not engaged in war or
hunting, the youth of both sexes amuse themselves in this
manner every evening.
They always dance, as I have observed, at their feast. In these
as well as all their dances, every man rises in his turn, and moves about with great freedom and boldness; singing as he does so,the exploits of his ancestors. During this the company, who is
seated on the ground in a circle, around the dancer, join with him
in marking the cadence, by an odd tone, which they utter all together, and which sounds, "Heh, heh, heh." These notes, if they
might be so termed, are articulated with a harsh accent, and
strained out with the utmost force of the lungs; so that one would
imagine their strength must soon be exhausted by it; instead of
which, they repeat it with the same violence during the whole of
the entertainment.
The women, particularly those of the western nations, dance
very gracefully. They carry themselves erect, and with their arms
hanging down close to their sides, move first a few yards to the
right, and then back again to the left. This movement they perform without taking any steps as an European would do, but with
their feet conjoined, moving by turns their toes and heels. In this
manner they glide with great agility to a certain distance, and
then return: and let those who join in the dance be ever so numerous, they keep time so exactly with each other that no interruption ensues. During this, at stated periods, they mingle their shrill voices with the hoarser ones of the men who sit around (for it is
to be observed that the sexes never intermix in the same dance)
which, with the music of the drums and chichicouse [rattles], make
an agreeable harmony.
The Indians have several kinds of dance which they use on
different occasions, as the Pipe or Calumet Dance, the War Dance,
the Marriage Dance, and the Dance of the Sacrifice. The movement in every one of these are dissimilar; but it is almost impossible to convey any idea of the points in which they are unlike.
Different nations likewise vary in their manner of dancing.
The Chipeways throw themselves into a greater variety of attitudes than any other people; sometimes they hold their heads
erect, at others they bend them almost to the ground; then recline on one side, and immediately after on the other. The Naudowessies carry themselves more upright, step firmer, and move
more gracefully. But they all accompany their dances with the
disagreeable noise just mentioned.
The Pipe Dance is the principal, and the most pleasing to a
spectator of any of them, being the least frantic, and the movement of it the most graceful. It is but on particular occasions that
it is used; as when ambassadors from an enemy arrive to treat of
peace, or when strangers of eminence pass through their territories.
The War Dance, which they use both before they set out on
their war parties, and on their return from them, strikes terror
into strangers. It is performed, as the others, amidst a circle of the
warriors; a chief generally begins it, who moves from the right to
the left, singing at the same time both of his own exploits, and
those of his ancestors. When he has concluded his account of any
memorable action, he gives a violent blow with his war-club
against a post that is fixed in the ground, near the center of the
assembly for this purpose.
Every one dances in his turn, and recapitulates the wondrous
deeds of his family, till they all at last join in the dance. Then it
becomes truly alarming to any stranger that happens to be among
them, as they throw themselves into every horrible and terrifying posture that can be imagined, rehearsing at the same time the
parts they expect to act against their enemies in the field.... To
heighten the scene, they set up the same hideous yells, cries and
war-whoops they use in time of action; so that it is impossible to
consider them in any other light than as an assembly of demons.
At another time, Carver was encamped on the Mississippi, in Chippewa
country, in the area that would become Wisconsin. He was surprised by
a party of about twenty young men, "the most perfect in their shape, and
by far the handsomest of any I had ever seen... dancing as they
approached, to the music of their drums." They were painted red and
black and Carver thought the dance was a war dance and that they had
been sent by their chief who had threatened all the English in his territory.
Carver invited them into his tent where they continued their dance,
singing and periodically striking the poles of his tent. As they passed
him in their dance, each one placed his right hand over his eyes and
looked Carver directly in the face. When the dance was done and Carver
had given the men gifts, they smoked a pipe of peace and the dancers
left "in a friendly manner."
These accounts and those of others conform to narratives by earlier
French writers who described the dances of the Indians of the Lakes region. A Jesuit missionary compared Indian dancers with those of France in about 1657.
A good dancer in France does not move his arms much, and holds
his body erect, moving his feet so nimbly that, you would say, he
spurns the ground and wishes to stay in the air. The Savages, on
the contrary, bend over in their dances, thrusting out their arms
and moving them violently as if they were kneading bread, while
they strike the ground with their feet so vigorously that one
would say they are determined to make it tremble, or to bury
themselves in it up to the neck.
Jean de Lamberville, Father Marquette, wrote about dances among the
Hurons in Missilimakinac (Michilimackinac) in upper Michigan on Lake
Superior. A large number had gone off hunting and the remaining
residents asked him what dances he prohibited.
I replied in the first place that I would not permit those which God
forbids, such as indecent ones; that, as regards the others, I would
decide about them when I had seen them. Every dance has its own
name; but I did not find any harm in any of them, except that
called "the bear dance." A woman who became impatient in her
illness, in order to satisfy both her God and her imagination,
caused twenty women to be invited. They were covered with
bearskins and wore fine porcelain collars; They growled like
bears; they ate and pretended to hide like bears. Meanwhile, the
sick woman danced, and from time to time told them to throw oil
on the fire, with certain superstitious observances. The men who
acted as singers had great difficulty in carrying out the sick
woman's design, not having yet heard similar airs, for that dance
was not in vogue among the Tionnontateronnons. I availed
myself of this fact to dissuade them from the dance. I did not
forbid others which are of no importance;... I tried to induce
some Huron woman not to be present at any of those dances
[which had "indecencies and exposure of the naked person"],
which generally lasted a good part of the day; but they told me
that they had only that time in which to divert themselves, and
that, moreover, I did not forbid them to dance. The footnote to this passage, marked by the asterisk, describes the Bear dance in more detail from Lalemant's Relation of 1661-62.

</text>
