<text id="G02" category="" words="2020" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Over martinis, in bed, driving somewhere' Yale Review, Volume 94, Issue 2, pages 59 - 68, April 2006" Author="Romulus Linney" PublicationDate="April 2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com.ezproxy.lancs.ac.uk/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9736.2006.00059.x/abstract">

Ellie, you brought Michael Harwood's nobility and warmth to life in your book, as well as the tragedy of his sudden death, which must have sentenced Mary to years of hard life without him, before her own equally cruel death in slow motion. Your description of him made me remember what I had completely forgotten: Michael appearing at my ill-fated play, saying something to me I very much wanted to hear. I was in emotional free fall at the time. When he told me how much he liked the play, it was important for me to hear that from someone I could believe. I could believe Michael Harwood, since it was an extraordinary thing for a man to do for a former lover of his wife.
Writing the letter, what astounded me was how completely I had repressed what else was done for me then. None of it was trauma, all of it was pleasant, seeming only mildly eventful. There was nothing to be traumatized about. Mary Durant and I were both single, open about being together, deceiving no one. We were both living third lives. She had been a faculty wife and mother, then a member of a dazzling Hollywood celebrity set, then a beginning novelist. I had been an actor, then a divorced father, then a beginning novelist. That was our reality then. We knew it and lived it for what it was. But I had to ask myself, how much reality can be entombed in a former happiness, while we are so grimly determined to present to the world the profundities of life and death, as we so profoundly understand them. How pale such ambition can suddenly seem, compared with a forgotten reality, brought to life by a self-piercing restoration of memory.
She took me to a party at Rose Styron's, and to others, from your house in Connecticut and from my place in New York. I met wonderful people. She several times openly preferred me, to my childish male satisfaction, over some other, more aggressive, more successful older men, who were scornful of me, a young cipher. She had a sharp and sometimes impatient wit, which she never turned on me except once, when we decided we should part. She didn't like it that I was chewing gum at the moment. Who could blame her for that? Another flash of her spirit came earlier, in my defense. It happened in my one-room, sixty-four-dollar-a-month 72nd St. New York apartment, second floor back. A high school classmate of mine, the daughter of a once prominent senator, wanted to visit me in New York. She had married a wealthy Southern businessman. She asked to see me in New York when she was there on a visit. She would bring her husband and a friend. I said all right, but thought it a good idea to have Mary there when they came. My high school friend was appalled to see me, a former social companion, her acknowl- edged peer in a posh Washington, D.C., youth, now a poverty- stricken, one-book writer, in shabby bohemian digs. She took pains to describe the mansion she lived in, in South Carolina, and how much money her husband and their friend made every year. The husband was faintly amused and discreetly repelled, while the gentleman friend became first sarcastic and then obnoxious. He evidently fancied himself a Casanova. He had a black eye patch, which he wore it seemed more in vanity, as a costume befitting a man of wide experience, than a cover for a missing eye, which was the case. He had lost the sight of that eagle eye, he told Mary, as he sat down next to her on my Salvation Army sofa, ignoring me, in a racing car accident in France. He then put his hand on Mary's knee. Before I could move, Mary brushed it off, saying, ''You do that again and I'll put out your other eye.'' They left my digs. Mary left me admiring her more than ever.
Again and again. I once ended up in Lenox Hill Hospital with a kidney stone. I was in that awful kind of pain, as bad for a man, they say, as childbirth is for a woman. Just after they gave me morphine, and I was floating on a river of relief, there Mary appeared, absolutely like an angel from heaven. She didn't say a word. She just handed me a Virginia Kirkus review of my second novel, a thank God good one. That book was published about the same time Mary's second novel came out, bonding us both together as, after all, functioning authors. More, there was more. Mary dropped me off at Yaddo later in the summer of 1965. I'd done all right with the two novels but wrote miserably afterward. I was at rock bottom. I was a fake, just plain awful. I suppose I was lamenting my writerly frustrations rather too loudly. In no uncertain terms Mary Durant told me to for God's sake write whatever impossible thing I was going to write about Frederick the Great. I could do it. Just stop reading books about him. I cast aside my fears at my own presumption, writing about such a monumental historical figure. With Mary's injunction ringing in my ears, I went to work the next morning, beginning my life as a playwright. Would I have done that without her? I honestly don't think so. It seemed like such folly. Who was I to attempt such a thing? Even if I could actually do it (in a play?), who in this country could possibly care about him or ever stage such a play? I had left the theater for the novel. I wanted nothing more to do with the squabbles of show business, which I had known all too well as an actor. I was not going there. I would live in the world of prose, where I could write with reason and sanity. Of course, I did the opposite, with some success in this country. When it was later produced in Austria, at the Vienna Burgtheater, I was giddy with surprise and pleasure. I did not remember Mary. I was asked why in the world would an American, from Appalachia, write such a play. Only now have I realized what I should have said: because Mary Durant told me to. I had another answer, all about, you know, the darker realities of my life, and so on, instead of Mary's short and sensible instruction. I had forgotten the woman who told me I was afraid to try what I most wanted to do.
After I wrote this letter to Ellie, I said to myself, wait a minute, what else? Well, my God. Right now? I was at that moment rehearsing a play I had written years ago. The actors were having a good time with it, since it is a durable piece, often performed. One half of it is autobiographical. I had come to believe that the other half was my invention. No, no, no. That other part of that play came from a piece of dialogue given to me by Mary Durant. Two women, she had heard, were lovers in a small town for many years. One had to go away. The other said to her, ''I will live on the floor at your feet. Don't leave me.'' The complete play came from that. I gulped and went to rehearsal, to work with actors on Mary's gift to me forty years ago. From the letter:
In our New York of 1964 and 1965, there was a Chinese restaurant on 72nd Street, just off Broadway. It was shopworn and none too clean, but it had old mahogany wood walls left over from some kind of ancient town house or other. There were beautiful ugly booths with just the right kind of hideous formica tops. It served watered Stock vermouth and weak Gordon's vodka martinis, which Mary and I cherished, because we could look forward to two or three or sometimes four. We collapsed into those booths with the happy sighs of an audience hearing Artur Rubenstein begin a Chopin nocturne. Happiness can come in many forms. For us, almost the equal of Chopin, was a just off Broadway, worn down 72nd Street Chinese restaurant.
In Ellie's book, which I recommend to anyone wanting to better understand this illness, Mary's ordeal is described, clearly and bluntly. She lives now in the dim world of her California nursing home. It was a five-year ordeal for her daughter before she could find the right home. The details as written are not pleasant, but they are firm and they are honest. They render the universality of a sorrow for a lost parent. The book opens with an epigraph by Nelson Algren: ''All was well, for what was dust had when living been loved.''
Mary Durant is in her eighties now, as well off, I understand, as she can be, both lost and loved by her daughter and her son, and now, at long distance, by me.
As two beginning writers, she and I spent our artistic youth together. There was no one else. Yes, of course, I had other friends who were encouraging and helpful, but I was not really close to anyone who knew firsthand what was going on inside me. She did. Along with her wit and grace, and in our mutual affection, we shared this unexpected fresh new existence. I devoured her writing and she mine. Together, for a year and a half, we shared our common excitement in the world we discovered, which we found all by ourselves but where each was as alone as the other.
As everyone knows, one terrible reality of Alzheimer's disease means that communication with loved ones can be crushed to extinction. I knew that though the nursing home was some distance away from her home, Ellie visited her mother often. I was told that for a moment or two, Mary could still communicate, before her a∆icted mind would shut her down. And I remembered something else. The letter: ''There was an old Southern hymn we had both enjoyed in our childhood churches, about all that was left of religion for two agnostic writers. It was Fairest Lord Jesus. We would sing it together often, over martinis, in bed, driving somewhere. I used it in the most performed of my plays. I never see that play or hear that hymn without seeing her again.''
Later, I thought I would record the hymn on tape, singing it as we sang it together, and send the tape to Ellie. I did not expect anything much to happen, but I could hope that perhaps music, especially that song Mary sang with me so often, might get a response. I read somewhere that musicians with Alzheimer's disease remember and can often still play music they had known. In a week or so, I got a phone call from Ellie, saying that indeed, she did play the tape for her mother, whose eyes widened with some recognition. Her attention stayed with it until its end, and for a second afterward, so Ellie said, with me.
Never mind please that when we were together, I was thirty-five and Mary forty-two. Freud didn't know everything. Nabokov would understand. All mother-son suspicions, even if true to some extent, were beside the point, as was everything else when we were talking about our books and our life. Lord Byron knew what love is. ''Friendship with wings,'' he called it, and so it was for us. It flew us together over everything, over doubt, over the future, over the jealousies of snobs and insights of the wise, over the regrets of shared emotional squalors, consequences of our past mistakes. They were left behind us. We were riding an old Volkswagen through perfectly ordinary landscapes, in an unlikely morning. We were full of joy and mischief, standing up to the world, publishing our books, rediscovering our lives, as if nothing like them had ever been lived, and we would live forever.

</text>
