<text id="G08" category="" words="1995" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Albert Vinicio Baez and the promotion of science education in the developing world 1912 - 2007' Prospects, Volume 37, Number 3 / September 2007 " Author="Fernando Reimers" PublicationDate="September 2007" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.springerlink.com/content/0033-1538/37/3/">

Alberto Vinicio Baez was a pioneer in the field of international science education. He was a physicist who played a leading role in UNESCO's efforts to support science education globally. His research in the physics of light led to the development of an X-ray microscope and of imaging optics. He participated in projects to improve science education in high schools in the United States in the 1950s, a period of intense interest on this topic. 
In 1961 he was invited to join UNESCO to establish the Division of Science Education. In this position he wrote numerous papers, organized and participated in regional and international conferences, and studied and supported the development of projects to advance science and technology education in developing countries, with a special focus in secondary schools. The programme established the importance of science education, developed low-cost science kits, films and a structured, high-quality curriculum to support physics teachers in Latin America, chemistry education in Asia, biology education in Africa and mathematics education in the Arab States. 
Baez's chief intellectual contributions to the field of science education centered on the development and dissemination of the ideas that it was necessary to democratize access to high-quality education in developing countries, that science education should focus on developing the capabilities needed to solve practical problems, and on the role of interdisciplinarity and social responsibility as core foundations of science education. He also articulated why high-quality science and technology education to improve living conditions in developing nations would contribute to addressing common global challenges faced by humanity, particularly achieving sustainable forms of human environmental interaction, reducing poverty and uncontrolled demographic expansion, and promoting peace. 
His writings and work to improve science education in developing countries reflect a theory of educational change that recognizes the synergies that result from engaging multiple stakeholders to initiate and sustain innovation and to institutionalize large-scale change. He favoured approaches that brought together scientists and teachers, and designers and learning specialists, to the task of developing curriculum, instructional materials and support systems to create rich educational environments that help students develop creativity, inquiry and the ability to design solutions to practical problems through scientific knowledge and understanding. He conceived of policy and programmes as learning opportunities that should be guided by a clear definition of the intended purposes of science education that would permit progress measurement and comparative analysis. 

Life and career
Albert Baez was born in Puebla, Mexico, in 1912. He immigrated with his family to the United States at the age of 2. His father, Alberto Baez, was a Methodist minister, and his mother, Talia Valderama, became a social worker for the Young Women's Christian Association Organization. 
Baez grew up in Brooklyn, New York. At the age of 7 he returned to Puebla for a year with his family, where his younger sister was born. The time he spent there, where his grandfather Pedro Flores Valderama, a Spanish immigrant, had established an institute to educate Methodist ministers (Instituto Metodista Mexicano), was critical to the formation of his identity. In an interview he gave when he was 77 years old, Dr. Baez remembered that year in Puebla as very important to him: "It gave me the feeling that I had grown up in Mexico, even though I had only spent the first 2 years of my life and then this year, but since it took place at that particular interval in my life, those formative years, I just felt somehow linked with Mexico. I still feel it. So several advantages accrued from all this. One was that I never forgot my Spanish" (Davis 1990, p. 251). 
He attended a manual training high school in New York where he joined the radio club and developed an interest in science and engineering. As a teenager he built electronic devices, including a radio and a television. At a time when very few Hispanics in the United States had the opportunity to access college and were under-represented in the sciences, he earned a bachelor's degree in math and physics from Drew University in 1933, a master's in physics from Syracuse University in 1935 and a doctorate in physics from Stanford in 1950. As a graduate student at Stanford he helped lay the foundation for the newly developing science of X-ray imaging optics. In 1948, working with his advisor, Stanford professor Paul Kirkpatrick, Baez developed the first X-ray reflection microscope, which could examine living cells. Their technique pioneered grazing incidence mirrors to focus X-rays. This X-ray focusing geometry, using two grazing incidence mirrors mounted perpendicular to each other, is known as the Kirkpatrick - Baez geometry. The technique allowed images to be taken that rely on reflections from mirrors at very shallow angles, and did not require specimens to be placed in a vacuum. Berkeley Lab's Center for X-Ray Optics pioneered the use of this system at X-ray synchrotrons. In 1993, the first beamline at the ALS (10.3.1) used a Kirkpatrick - Baez mirror system. Baez was also the person who first suggested the use of Fresnel zone plates with ultraviolet light and soft X-rays, and demonstrated their use in the ultraviolet. Kirkpatrick - Baez-type multi-layer X-ray microscopes have been designed for use in imaging laser-plasma X-ray emission. 
Upon graduation from Stanford he worked briefly with the Cornell Aeronautics Laboratory doing operations research, studying aircraft taking off from carriers. He credited this experience with his subsequent lifelong interest in peace. "I began getting the feeling that this was not the ultimate road to peace, for a physicist to spend the rest of his life designing the operations of war" (Davis 1990, p. 248). In 1951 he accepted a UNESCO appointment at the University of Baghdad in Iraq where he helped establish a physics laboratory. Between 1950 and 1956 he was a professor at the University of Redlands in California, where he continued developing X-ray technology. In 1957 he was appointed visiting professor at Stanford. 
In 1958 Professor Jerrold Zacharias invited him to join him at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) on a project to improve the teaching of science. In 1956 Physics Professors Jerrold Zacharias and Francis Friedman at MIT had launched a project to improve the teaching of physics at the high-school-level Physics Science Studies Committee. This was one of some 20 large-scale projects to develop the K-12 science curriculum sponsored by the National Sciences Foundation to improve the teaching of science by providing students with early opportunities to engage with authentic science. These projects constituted the first attempt of the United States Federal Government to support science education (Duschl 2000). Baez was invited to join the MIT faculty to work on the development of instructional materials that emphasized fundamental principles in physics, encouraging engagement and understanding as opposed to memory drills. This team produced the high-school textbook Physics which appeared in 1960, followed by many subsequent editions. Baez also contributed to the preparation of films, teacher guides, standardized tests, and recommendations for inexpensive experimental apparatus to work in conjunction with the textbook. The films were designed to illustrate phenomena that were too complex, or took too long, for practical experimental demonstration in a classroom. In 1960, working with the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge, Massachusetts, he developed optics for an X-ray telescope. Later that year he moved to the faculty of Harvey Mudd College, a highly selective private college of science, engineering, and mathematics, forming part of the Claremont Colleges in California. 
Between 1961 and 1967 he was Director of UNESCO's Division of Science Teaching. He also served as chairman of the Committee on the Teaching of Science of the International Council of Scientific Unions. 
In 1967 he wrote a paper for the United Nations Economic and Social Council Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development, in which he established the implications of the need for science and technology as engines to support economic and social development. He proposed the need for fundamental scientific literacy: "Science has had such a profound effect on modern life both at the practical and philosophical levels that no man can consider himself in the mainstream of modern thought if he remains a 'scientific illiterate'" (Baez 1967a, p. 1). In this paper Baez also explained that science education constituted an appropriate field of practice and of study to advance a science of teaching and learning, utilizing the most modern tools of educational technology. He explained that the conditions in science classrooms throughout most of the world were not conducive to the appropriate development of scientific skills: "Lack of facilities and materials for experimentation has often encouraged stereotyped and authoritative teaching of science instead of an investigative and experimental approach. In science teaching, the necessity of learning by experimentation is of paramount importance. The greater part of the world still lacks sufficient laboratories and equipment, and as a result the foundations of science (observation and experimentation by the students, followed by interpretation of the results) are often missing in science teaching" (ibid). He proposed an ambitious international agenda focusing on the development of pilot projects in all regions, improving teacher education and establishing an international science teaching center to improve science teaching in developing countries (Baez 1967a). That same year he published a college textbook on physics (Baez 1967b). 
Upon retiring from UNESCO he returned to the United States, where he worked for several years with Encyclopaedia Britannica, producing more than 100 educational films on physics. His work at UNESCO on integrated science led to his interest in environmental education. Between 1979 and 1983 he served as Chairman of the Education Commission of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources. As Chairman of the Commission on Science Education of the American Association for the Advancement of Science he published an influential article outlining his view on the goals of education for the 1970s and how science education was central to achieving them. In this article he articulated that promoting conservation of the environment was a key goal (Baez 1974). He served on the advisory board of Scope, Sequence and Coordination, an organization that developed an innovative high-school curriculum with funding from the National Science Foundation. 
As a lifelong pacifist and Quaker, Baez opposed the Vietnam War and was active in many peace and humanitarian programmes. After his retirement, Dr. Baez occasionally delivered physics lectures and was president of Vivamos Mejor/USA, an organization founded in 1988 to help impoverished villages in Mexico. Its projects include pre-school education, environmental projects, and community and educational activities. In 1991 the International Society for Optical Engineering awarded him and Kirkpatrick the Dennis Gabor Award for pioneering contributions to the development of X-ray imaging microscopes and X-ray imaging telescopes. In 1995 the Hispanic Engineer National Achievement Awards Corporation (HENAAC) established the Albert V. Baez Award for Technical Excellence and Service to Humanity. Dr. Baez himself was inducted into the HENAAC Hall of Fame in 1998. 

Core educational contributions
His educational ideas are formulated in greatest detail in his book "Innovation in Science Education World-Wide", published by UNESCO in 1976. In this book Baez draws on 25 years of experience in the field of science education and on some of the emerging ideas at the time. His core contributions center on the importance of providing all students with high-quality science education, with an emphasis on technology, on developing the ability to solve practical problems, and to inform life decisions. He thought science education should be practical, relevant and appropriate; that it should promote adaptability to change, focused on improving the wellbeing of the poor; and attentive to the interdependence into which the energy and environmental crises were leading humanity; and that it should be capable of continuous adaptation (Baez 1976, pp. 42 - 43). 
Baez was also a strong proponent of interdisciplinary approaches to science education and of the social responsibility of scientists. His writings reflect the perspective of a basic scientist, deeply grounded in the discipline of physics, who is also a comparativist in his analysis of education systems and of approaches to science education.

</text>
