<text id="G11" category="" words="2007" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Stakes of an Anthropology of the United States' CR: The New Centennial Review 7.2 (2007) 231-277" Author="Nicholas De Genova" PublicationDate="Fall 2007" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/new_centennial_review/v007/7.2genova.html">

The Problem of Anthropology 
There is certainly a great need, as Marcus keenly notes in the epigraph to this essay (see also 1998, 242), to coalesce a density of critical and engaged dialogue and debate within the ﬁeld concerned with what might be called the "anthropology" of the United States. Such a convergence is seemingly ever-emergent, yet never quite cohesive or coherent. Historically, despite repeated supposed "discoveries," of apparently newfound anthropological interest in the United States (as Micaela di Leonardo demonstrates persuasively), "there is . . . no such thing as American anthropology's 'turn' to work in the United States" (1998, 28). Yet, if there has in fact been anthropological research situated in the United States, from the very inception of the discipline as an institutionalized academic endeavor, this does not at all resolve the conundrum of an anthropology of the United States. Indeed, numerous admirable - albeit scattered - exceptions (and also some rather more dubious ones, for example Mead [1942]) notwithstanding, the problem is not merely quantitative. For, as Marcus himself has recognized, we must grapple with what might be at stake in the very positing of an anthropology of the United States, rather than an anthropology merely in its national space. As Sherry Ortner astutely notes, anthropological work in the United States has commonly suffered "a chronic tendency to 'ethnicize' the groups under study, to treat them as so many isolated and exotic tribes," in order to satisfy "the classic anthropological desire to see the cultures of these communities as having a certain authenticity in their own terms" (1991, 166 - 67). One of my concerns in this essay, to which I will return below, is to trouble precisely that classically anthropological impulse as such, and to inquire into what it may be about anthropology, as a mode of inquiry, that desires and requires the kinds of objects that are apprehensible as something like "tribes" - which is to say, ostensible communities of shared kinship and ancestry. But for present purposes, it ought to be clear that "the 'ethnicizing' move," in Ortner's suggestive phrase (167), tends to induce anthropologists to produce scholarship that unwittingly colludes in recapitulating the hegemonic image of the United States as an ever-proliferating cacophony of (multi-) "cultural," apparently self-contained groups, without accounting for the more encompassing and systemic genesis of the social relations of difference and inequality that produce those "groups" as such. In so doing, the very possibility of inquiring into that larger social formation, through which those "ethnic" differences are assigned their salience, gets occluded. Such "classically anthropological" dispositions, then, seem doomed to yield only so many more exercises of anthropology merely in the United States. An anthropology of the United States, however, remains exasperatingly elusive. 
Inasmuch as virtually all ethnography is parochially located, in some literal sense, somewhere - in some kind of place or nexus of places, or otherwise in relation to some set of practices, which would have to amount to something less than "the United States" per se - then it is self-evident that the sort of intimate research encounter that has come to distinguish sociocultural anthropology would be always restricted to the claims of an anthropology in the United States. But this in fact has always also been true of all other conventionally conceived anthropologies. Compared to the theoretical myopia that has disﬁgured the anthropological objectiﬁcation of other places, however, as Di Leonardo argues trenchantly, the United States . . . is an even more dense and light-consuming black hole in anthropology. . . . American anthropology . . . relies on an implicit, and therefore entirely untheorized, American "home." . . . It thus proceeds, whether its gaze is focused on the near or the far away, in casual disregard of the "America" known to other scholars. . . .
(1998, 15 - 16) 
The question, therefore, must concern what might be the conceptual ambitions necessary when an anthropology "in" comes to be posited more generally as an anthropology "of." Surely, this is likewise what Marcus is interested in when he suggests that the task would be to "articulate what the United States is as a social and cultural phenomenon." Indeed, in this regard, Marcus is reiterating a central concern of his earlier work with Michael Fischer in Anthropology as Cultural Critique, which memorably called for a renewal of anthropology's critical function and suggested that as "there is no longer a secure, taken-for-granted subject matter for ethnography, it becomes more important to treat domestic patterns with as deep and varied an understanding as that applied abroad" (1986, 140). Marcus and Fischer's appeal for the "repatriation" of anthropology has indubitably been one of the most signiﬁcant and enduringly provocative interventions in the discipline in recent decades. Yet Marcus and Fischer's original proposition for "repatriation" relied upon a certain presupposition about the stability and durability of the distinction between "the domestic" and "the exotic," and therefore about what might be implied by an anthropology "at home" (posited as the "cultural critique" of one's own "culture" or "society"), in contradistinction with a more conventionally conceived anthropology among "exotic others" (e.g. 1986, 113, 138; emphases mine). However, as Amy Kaplan has amply demonstrated in her study of "American" national identity, "the idea of the nation as home . . . is inextricable from the political, economic, and cultural movements of empire, movements that both erect and unsettle the ever-shifting boundaries between the domestic and the foreign, between 'at home' and 'abroad'" (2002, 1). The very notion of an anthropology "at home," then, becomes deeply troubled, while the challenge of an anthropology of the United States nonetheless becomes rather more intriguing and provocative. Moreover, the move to a construction of the United States as a speciﬁcally "cultural" object may have been preemptive - if not, indeed, abortive. This simply raises anew the interminably bedeviled but enduringly vexing condition (if not outright inadequacy) of "culture" as a category of analysis. Far more important, however, it also raises the ever urgent and critical question of who or what can be viably anthropologized. 
Disciplinary Worldliness 
If there is no anthropology of the United States as such, it may very well have been precluded by the discipline of anthropology itself. The lack of "a large community of dense, vital critical discussion of work in the United States" (identiﬁed by Marcus - himself, one of such a prospective community's most prominent members) is surely a predictable effect of the fact that conventional anthropologists have long viewed the prospect that one might conduct ethnographic research in the United States - especially if one is an "American" - with self-assured suspicion, if not forthright contempt. Doesn't that sort of thing fall within the disciplinary purview of sociology, after all? (Ironically, Marcus's essay itself was published, rather inconspicuously, as part of a forum on anthropology in and of France!) Pervasive and seldom examined disciplinary assumptions about what is and what is not properly "anthropological" might seem like little more than long-sedimented intellectual bad habits, or perhaps bad faith, if it were not precisely for their efﬁcaciousness. Such smug but largely unexamined anthropological exoticism serves to police the boundaries of the permissible within the spheres of research funding, accreditation, and scholarship in general and is especially insidious in disciplining practitioners in the rather worldly realms of academic professionalization and promotion. These indeed are among the accumulated codes and practices that Edward Said once memorably referred to as "various modes of being anthropological." He continued, "and if we suspect that as in all scholarly disciplines, the customary way of doing things both narcotizes and insulates the guild member, we are saying something true about all forms of disciplinary worldliness. Anthropology is not an exception" (1989, 213; emphasis Said's). Thus, the veritable absence, historically and presently, of a distinct and viable anthropology of the United States would seem to have something elementary and fundamental to do with the very ways in which anthropology as such has been constituted and sustained as a discipline. Consequently, it is not at all clear that the problem can be adequately posed - let alone satisfactorily resolved - in terms of the conceivable stakes of such a critical "anthropological" inquiry into the United States (in Marcus's phrase) "for the project of anthropology itself." But this tension may be precisely the point from which to begin to examine this conundrum. 
What, indeed, are the distinctive epistemological grounds of an "anthropological" knowledge? What are the premises that distinguish them as identiﬁably "anthropological"? How are these epistemological grounds and conceptual foundations situated in some presumably necessary relation to ethnographic methods? And furthermore, what are the historically speciﬁc, material, and practical conditions of possibility for such investigative endeavors? These are of course very general questions, and are, needless to say, beyond the scope of the present essay to conclusively resolve, but they may be productively illuminated by recourse to this particular line of inquiry concerning the problematic relation between the United States and the anthropological enterprise. In his provocative reﬂections on the subject, Marcus notably suggests that these are among the larger theoretical dilemmas at stake. 
Ultimately, when anthropology comes squarely to face modernity and its complex cultural histories in its own places of origin, it faces not just another place for incorporation in its archive of culture areas but a fundamental question of whether a mere anthropology of the United States, France, or Britain is belatedly possible in the same terms as in the older hopes for an anthropology, say, of India, Polynesia, or Africa. The critiques of the 1980s represented for many a fundamental rupture with this traditional mode of anthropology incorporating new objects of study. Only by the ﬁction of ethnographic study could it continue to consume itself like it had consumed others. And if all the work in the contemporary United States by American anthropologists . . . does not add up to . . . an anthropology of the United States . . . then, after all, in what terms can the collective disciplinary project in which such work occurs now be conceived?
(1999, 419) 
Marcus gently signals the beleaguered status of the concept of "culture" as a distinctly anthropological (disciplinary) object of knowledge, as well as its functionalist foundations in a deﬁnite but enduring myth of ethnography as an intellectual means of production. Implicitly, moreover, Marcus is likewise directing our critical scrutiny to the extravagantly unequal geopolitical positions of the United States - or France, or Britain, in his not inadvertent examples - in relation to their historical or contemporary colonies and targets for imperial intrusion and control. The difference, of course, is decisive. And moreover, truly deﬁning. 
If there is - arguably, but not implausibly - a historical speciﬁcity that makes distinctly "anthropological" claims inseparable from some form of colonial (or imperialist) domination, then it is imperative that we consider precisely whether a critical anthropology of the United States is even possible. This is by no means a trivial or merely polemical question. One need only consider the remarkable prominence and indisputable centrality of American Indians in the intellectual and historical formations of the institutionalized academic discipline of anthropology in the United States, in light of the utter impossibility, contemporaneously, of conceiving of that anthropology - albeit one conducted within the space of the U.S. nation-state - as something that might have been called an anthropology of the United States. 
U.S. Nationalism as a Colonial Formation 
Why, indeed, did the pioneering work in cultural anthropology in the United States treat the subjugation of North America's indigenous peoples as virtually extraneous to the ethnographic objectiﬁcation of their ostensibly self-contained "cultures"? As A. L. Kroeber hauntingly remarked, the genocidal extermination of the Northern California Indians (whom he made his "object" of study) amounted to "a little history . . . of pitiful events," "a matter that has comparatively slight relation to aboriginal civilization," which he took to be the more proper concern of anthropological inquiry (quoted in Scheper-Hughes 2001, 14). In light of a hegemonic commonsense throughout the nineteenth century that American Indians were literally doomed to extinction in the face of the inexorable "progressive" expansion of white "civilization" (Berkhofer 1978; Horsman 1981, 189 - 207; Takaki 1979, 80 - 107), what else, after all, could ever have been the meaning of "salvage ethnography"?

</text>
