<text id="G12" category="" words="2009" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Updated" Author="Updated" PublicationDate="Updated" SampledFrom="Updated" WebAddress="Updated">

Unsurprisingly, Plato praises Fenelon's dialogues for their moral and didactic purity, and as a fellow- moralist and educator celebrates his successor for expunging the form of its Lucianic wit (DD, 18). Indeed, Fenelon and Plato readily agree that the greatest danger for any nation is for it to fall under the spell of an "immoderate Love of Wit, of Paradox, [and] of Refinement" (DD, 20). For all these reasons, it is surprising that Lyttelton can portray Diogenes as favorably as he does, or allow Plato to appear so annoyed by his fellow- philosopher's accusations.
Plato's immediate counter-accusation is that Diogenes only flatters a less worthy object, the despicable mob: "Your cynic railing was to [the Athenian people] the most acceptable flattery" (Works, 386). In a gesture indicating perhaps Lyttelton's own high-minded and conciliatory stance of Whiggish moderation, Plato regards his own philosophy as the only possible compromise between two unacceptable extremes, and rejects both the "speculative, retired philosopher, [and] the cynical revilers of princes and magistrates" (Works, 387). Instead, Plato regards his politeness as merely strategic and instrumental for his larger philosophic aims. From Plato's own perspective, an "honest and prudent complaisance" is simply the best way for a philosopher to intervene effectively into the lives of others, because it enables him to instill certain moral precepts in the monarch (Works, 384, 386). But Diogenes questions whether Plato's complaisance has simply turned the philosopher himself into an instrument of power. Diogenes says,
You seem to think that the business of philosophy is to polish men into slaves; but I say, it is to teach them to assert, with an untamed and gen- erous spirit, their independence and freedom. You profess to instruct those who want to ride their fellow-creatures, how to do it with an easy and gentle rein; but I would have them thrown off, and trampled under the feet of all their deluded or insulted equals, on whose backs they have mounted. Which of us two is the truest friend to mankind? (Works, 387-88) [Lyttelton's emphasis]
According to Diogenes, the difference between the two philosophers hinges upon their choice of allegiances: Plato's polite, courtly philosophy serves only those who wish to "ride" their fellow human beings, while Diogenes wants his philosophy to teach the people to throw them off. Diogenes's radical cosmopolitanism reveals itself in his emphasis upon his loyalty to only the broadest and most general notion of community, "mankind," not any particular ruler or nation. Intriguingly, "polishing" and politeness do not unite men into an extra-national culture, but actually enslave them to a series of petty and provincial masters. Though I would never pretend that Lyttelton himself endorsed such views, Diogenes's Dialogues of the Dead speech here strikingly anticipates the radical positions held by Paine and others twenty-five years later.
In the end, Diogenes and Plato's debate turns upon the issue broached earlier by Fenelon's Alexander, whether the philosopher is obliged by his duty to the truth to expose those "necessary" deceits perpetrated by rulers. As Diogenes tells Plato,
Though the identification of topical references in this dialogue can never be definitive, the polemical tone of this debate, the philosophers' wrangling over their respective definitions of "liberty" and "government" (Works, 388), the distinctly leveling arguments of Diogenes, and the date of publication (1765) all strongly suggest that Lyttelton has John Wilkes's recent political agitation in mind here. Lyttelton psychologically analyzes the motives animating the popular politician who aims to mobilize the people against "superstition and tyranny." Surprisingly, Lyttelton does not allow Diogenes's opposition to tyrants and superstition to be dismissed by his opponent as mere hypocrisy. Unlike Fenelon's still-courtly Diogenes, who denounces Alexander's manipulation of the "despicable people," Lyttelton's Diogenes ultimately extends his rudeness and jeering into a form of quasi-democratic politics. For Lyttelton, Diogenes does not merely address rulers but actually leads "disciples and admirers" of his own to "pull down" their social superiors to their own level. Unlike Plato, he does not address rulers so much as the fickle public opinion represented by the mob. This quasi-democratic reading of Diogenes renders him more respectable in one sense, though politically more dangerous than a mere hypocritical or misanthropic philosopher might otherwise appear.
As we saw earlier in Brown's "Letter," the uncharitable reading of Diogenes easily discovers motives of vanity and affectation beneath his supposed philosophic independence, but Lyttelton is also careful to show that such a reading proceeds from recognizable motives of resentment and competitiveness on the part of Plato. With a final remark telling Diogenes to go rail and jest with fellow satirists Thersites and Aristophanes, Plato rudely ends their conversation. Plato's attack upon Diogenes's "unmannerly rudeness" forces him to become equally rude. By this dialogue's conclusion, "politeness" itself can no longer be sustained as a neutral and apolitical value above and beyond the pettiness of political intrigue or polemics. Though Plato remains the embodiment of a courtly philosopher, he cannot sustain a conversation with Diogenes for long, because Diogenes has impolitely disclosed Plato's willing submission of his philosophy to his rulers and patrons.
By the century's end, Diogenes's final role within the dialogue genre is to deepen and radicalize his now-conventional protest against modernity and politeness, so that his moralizing is directed against the Enlightenment values that had effectively structured the eighteenth-century dialogues of Brown, Lyttelton, and many others. Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell reveals and overturns the underlying historical assumptions and exclusions that had only been implicit before in earlier dialogues. Linked with both North American Tribesmen and the biblical figures Isaiah and Ezekiel, Blake's "Diogenes the Grecian" dissolves the historical/sociological distinctions between past and present, sacred and secular histories, or rude and refined societies, that had allowed earlier dialogue-writers to explore and moralize the double-tracked "parallels" between ancient and modem histories.
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell constitutes a fitting end to this series in the Dialogues of the Dead, because it shows how dramatically the genre changes once certain Enlightenment tropes have lost their force. The relevant passage occurs in the "Memorable Fancy" featuring Isaiah and Ezekiel supping with the Marriage's narrator. Unsurprisingly, Diogenes takes a privileged place in their conversations, and assumes once again the role of the full-fledged ethical hero with an exuberance not seen since Lucian's own Dialogues. No aspect of literary tradition used by Blake ever seems conventional in his hands, but it is still interesting to see how some of the genre's characteristic devices reappear in this work, drastically transformed but still recognizably indebted to the versions of Diogenes and the dialogues pursued throughout this essay: the talkative dead who deflate their historical reputations; the notion of Hell not just as a universe of moral retribution, but as a place of intellectual debate and occasional satiric justice; the universal, and therefore leveling, prospect of death as a reminder of the transience, though not irrelevance, of physical pleasure." Here is Blake's narrator: 
By including Isaiah and Ezekiel, Blake's narrator has infused the dialogues' earlier scenes of philosophic dispute and historical demystification with new elements of Christian history and eschatology. This has the effect of undoing the implicit division of sacred and secular history tacitly maintained by earlier Christian imitators of Lucian; unlike Lucian's own irreverent satires on pagan mythology and philosophy, Christian-era dialogues rarely if ever mingled sacred figures with those from pagan history and mythology. Diverging, moreover, from Lucian's notoriously hostile attitude towards Christian (and Cynic) prophets and ascetics, Blake allows these Biblical prophets to befriend and converse with their pagan counterparts in a leisurely afterlife. Their peaceable, otherworldly exchange of ideas has the welcome effect of clearing up the murky historical record left by previous writers, and allows these figures to undo the "impositions" foisted on the people by figures like Fenelon's Alexander or Lyttelton's Plato. Hence, the surprisingly affable coexistence of the Prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel with their pagan counterpart Diogenes:
Blake's mention of the "North American tribes" here is not unprecedented, since Fontenelle had written a dialogue between Cortez and Montezuma, and Lyttelton included one between Mercury, An English Duellist, and A North American Savage in his own Dialogues. Yet both of these examples are closer to an Enlightenment satirical-relativist stance than Blake's more radical critique of European civilization. Lyttelton's North American Savage may have killed and eaten his enemies, but the Savage "Bloody Bear" is still repulsed by the Duellist "Tom Pushwell's" willingness to murder his own countryman. In a familiar satiric move, "Bloody Bear" presents to the Western reader a defamiliarized image of the European Honor that the Duellist naively worships; this makes the Duellist more savage than "Bloody Bear," but still assigns "Bloody Bear" attributes like cutting the throats of women and children. Blake's more radical stance, however, attributes genuine prophetic powers to the North American tribes, powers comparable to those of Isaiah or Ezekiel. Blake extends the historical incongruities once licensed by Lucian's burlesque treatment of Hell to newer forms of incongruity that mingle not just histories but entire cultures. Blake's prophetic fusion of past and future, however, has the effect of eliminating history from his Hell altogether, and moving the Dialogue of the Dead towards some atemporal form of religious Vision. The topical and historical content of the dialogues, so visible in Brown and Lyttelton, has been absorbed within the prophetic mode.
Thus, after the burlesque or critical treatments of Diogenes in Brown and Lyttelton, Blake's "Diogenes the Grecian" (interestingly, not a "cynic") has become fully emblematic of self-denial, moral integrity, and political independence once again, representing in this instance not so much a philosophic as a prophetic stance. As a prophet, Blake's Diogenes is willing to undergo significant amounts of shame and self-abasement in order to raise other men into a perception of the infinite. Blake's association of Diogenes's rude nakedness with both the Biblical prophets and the "North American tribes" has the effect of undoing the very distinction between primitive and refined societies that Brown and Lyttelton's satire, for example, had been eager to impose. In Brown, the "Primitive Institution" of Cynics and Quakers slid effortlessly into an equally empty and hypocritical foppery devoid of true refinement. In Lyttelton, the Savage "Bloody Bear" remains under the power of Mercury in the afterlife. For Blake, however, "Diogenes the Grecian," like his biblical and tribal counterparts, embodies the only possible protest against a commercial modernity devoted solely to "present ease and gratification" (my emphasis). Brown's ironic treatment of his own historical moment as a cheerful Hell seems far removed from Blake's more desperate and vertiginous treatment of his own historical present, which has only to be scrutinized closely to reveal its affinities with Hell. For Blake, both Lucianic satire and the Cynicism of Diogenes function as the "corrosives, which in Hell are salutary and medicinal, melting apparent surfaces away, and displaying the infinite which was hid" (39). Yet the effect of such corrosives is to render insignificant any historical succession besides the personal one that leads to and from the Fall.
We should note that in these eighteenth-century English Dialogues of the Dead, the figure of Diogenes does not follow a single line of development, but appears fitfully and discontinuously over time, with each new instance multiplying and enriching his array of potential meanings for subsequent users. This discontinuous quality actually makes him an excellent vehicle for writers reflecting upon their own present. Until Blake, writers exploit Diogenes for his usefulness in alluding to a topical figure or event. Consequently, we see Diogenes representing rudeness disguised as foppish over-refinement (Brown); or a philosophical independence equally resistant to politeness and state power, yet ambitious to address the public directly (Lyttelton). In Blake, however, Diogenes holds a prophetic vocation that would strip away the accretions of the present moment to reveal the infinite and atemporal underneath. The figure of Diogenes could operate this nimbly because the anecdotal tradition had long before established his cosmopolitan rudeness and ascetic, almost competitive approach to philosophy. These features had always given him a paradoxical aspect as a moralist or philosopher, while making him an ideal subject for satiric or literary treatments.

</text>
