<text id="G14" category="" words="1984" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'The Anglo-American Vision of Raymond Aron' Antioch Review, Winter2006, Vol. 64 Issue 1, p33-51 " Author="Irving Horowitz" PublicationDate="Winter 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=112&sid=128acdbc-33a3-41cb-bfe9-61f08ddf2a81%40sessionmgr104&bquery=(JN+%22Antioch+Review%22+AND+DT+20060101)&bdata=JmRiPWE5aCZ0eXBlPTEmc2l0ZT1laG9zdC1saXZl">

The exile period in England for Aron corresponded to one of high national fervor tinged by a sense of betrayal by its military and political leadership. The cause of French liberation was central, and it drove out extraneous troublesome considerations, such as how to rally the French people behind de Gaulle and against the false Vichy option of Marshall Petain and his collaboration with the reactionary credo of l'action française. The struggle against Nazism made all other issues secondary. By the same token, the end of the war, and the restoration of France as a sovereign power, served to reintroduce the idea of choice: of being French and Jewish, of being a nationalist and internationalist, of being a citizen of the world or an advocate of Europe as an integrating culture. Aron was plainly troubled by "Gaullist nationalism" and an Axis alliance that, even in a death embrace, sought "to forget rather than understand." In what for Aron was a universe of false options and demands of faith that he could not possibly meet, he increasingly elected to identify his activities with a Europe struggling to be reborn in consciousness as it was with the Marshall Plan in the economy. He became one of those much-feared "cosmopolitans" - often despised by totalitarians of the Left and barely tolerated by the temporarily subdued but no less benign nationalists of the Right in the postwar epoch.
It is important to distinguish Aron's different approaches to the United Kingdom and the United States. It is clear that Aron granted high marks to the British tradition in political liberalism and social democracy. England emerged from the war victorious but wounded. Its parliamentary institutions were intact, but its imperial pretensions had been shattered once and for all in India and other former colonial possessions. Aron could be far more critical of the United States as the next imperial pretender, while holding as a model the British approach to foreign policy and domestic affairs, based on a benevolent welfare model. Again, this was something from which the United States remained remote. The long tradition in France of seeing Americans as wonderful savages with dangerously hegemonic intentions, a position embraced by such polar-opposite types as Alexis de Tocqueville and Georges Sorel, clearly rubbed off on Aron. So while the phrase Anglo-American rolls off the tongue easily, perhaps too readily, from the very start of the Second World War period, Aron drew attention to the strains and tensions within the allied cause. He clearly preferred British reserve to American robustness, not so much in cultural style as in political consequences.
But Aron's concerns, as expressed in his major study, Peace and War, was hardly confined to Montesquieu's aphorism, in The Spirit of the Laws, that "nations ought to do, in peace, the most good to each other, and, in war, the least harm possible, without detriment to their genuine interests." Indeed, in the present context, Aron felt that such a credo "is further from practice now than it has ever been," adding, "it has probably never been very close." In its place, Aron sees dependence on a bipolar world, or at least a world in which Clausewitz's formula of "war as the continuation of policy by other means" is joined at the hip by "policy as the continuation of war by other means." In that harshThe Anglo-American Vision of Raymond Aron 39
reading of post - World War II events and structures, England is viewed as a great nation that was, a nation that "obtained or extorted" legal and diplomatic advantages by being part of a winning coalition but, in fact, was a nation more of prestige than of power. Indeed, since Aron saw France as being in a similar if not the same boat, certain sympathy for a politics of politesse and a series of diplomatic relations based upon noblesse oblige obtains. At least a part of Aron lived in the moral universe of Montesquieu, even if the harsh glare of the empirical universe of Clausewitz was very much in the foreground.
At the time of his major writings, the power of the United States and the Soviet Union seemed incontestable - in every sphere, from demographic to diplomatic. So the language reserved for the United States was definitely influenced by Aron's belief in bipolarity as the operational codebook of the age. Both major powers were termed to be hegemonic, imperial, aggressive, coercive, and interventionist (for Aron, spheres of influence rather than legitimate interests became dominant). On such premises, one might argue that in a unipolar environment, in which there is one major military and, to a lesser extent, economic force, rather than two, the same harsh rhetoric does not disappear; it is simply reserved for the surviving power by the rulers and ruled of every other nation. As a consequence, those who accepted Aron's outlook were, and remain, compelled to look at the antinomy between politics and morality for some sense of operational accountability. And so it has come to pass that those who see issues in strictly geo-political terms view Aron as a source for sharp critiques of the American Project, whatever it may be at the time. Those who see issues in ethical or legitimating terms, in which the rule of law, custom, liberality, rules of evidence, toleration of dissent, and the usual trappings that are part of a free society are considered important, can with equal merit claim Aron as their defender. The harsh, unrelenting assaults by Aron on the totalitarian nature of communist societies, especially the USSR, make it evident that whatever reservations Aron had of the United States, at the moment of choosing sides, he stood with the Americans against the Soviets. That so much of Peace and War is aimed to prevent such an ultimate struggle may be gratifying to the enemies of totalitarianism (and galling to its advocates), but it hardly permits casual slipping over into the idea of Aron as some sort of early supporter of the premises of American principles, political or cultural. That clearly was not part of Aron's agenda.
I would dare to conjecture that Aron's bifurcated vision of the post - World War II world was strongly reinforced by a psychological preference for a Western Europe that lost heavily in two world wars to military and ideological forces greater than even he had imagined as a younger man. The fall from grace of the British Empire made Aron feel keenly positive about potential English expressions of cosmopolitan identification with the New Europe. This was a far more easily accepted position than arguing on behalf of the American belief in its singularity of Western purpose in the postwar struggles against totalitarianism. And so in the depths of Aron's theoretical construct, in his thinking of who and how best to address and deal with the English-speaking intellectual class, he gravitated far more readily to Encounter in London than, say, Partisan Review or Commentary in the United States. The very fact that Melvin Lasky, its senior editor, resided in Germany as well as in England much of the time was important. Indeed, Lasky's Jewish commitments were of a similar, broadly grounded, nonreligious sort. Both men were more comfortable with the cosmopolitan approach than with the more militant posture of American Jews, even those with whom Aron shared a general political belief in liberal values and anti- Communist postures.
This is the larger, if all-too-brief, picture of Aron's distinction between principles and practices he found within the Anglo-American tradition. It is time now to turn to the exact relationships Aron formed, as found in correspondence and related books of his that addressed that strange world across the English Channel and then the Atlantic Ocean with which he was both fascinated and, perhaps, as a proper French citizen, out of sorts or at least out of sync.
I would emphasize once again that these remarks are not intended to provide a complete overview of the life and work of Raymond Aron, but only one thin sliver of that career - one that pertains to how well his ideas and influences have traveled, and just what it means to be a figure of international repute. Aron's career is hardly a blueprint that can be repeated. Claude Helvetius was fond of declaring that great events make for great men. To that one must add that every once in a while a great man makes for great events - not in the Thomas Carlyle sense of dynastic impact on ordinary events; rather, individuals can take a mass of material and give it shape and coherence in fashioning a unified vision of a world that would otherwise appear chaotic if not entirely random. This Aron did.
Perhaps Aron's central essay on the subject of the Anglo-American connection is not specifically on those two English-speaking nations, but rather on Western Europe as a canvas upon which British principles and American systems and values play out. Aron saw Marxism as essentially a Western heresy, a search for a theory of mass freedom that emanated from English, German, and French sources and that gravitated to the Soviet Union, where it became a practice of mass totalitarianism, what he called Sovietism. The high point of that confrontation came in an essay unfortunately translated as "My Defense of Our Decadent Europe." I say unfortunately, because the sense of irony from the French original title (Plaidoyer pour l'Europe decadente) is lacking. This is Aron's most vigorous defense of Western Europe as a whole against the Soviet empire as a whole. It flowed from a long gestation period, one in which Aron made the trek "From Marx to Solzhenitsyn." It remains a masterpiece in the essay form, and a highlight in his efforts to reach the English-speaking world in the pages of Encounter (which, in fact, published the essay at the same time it appeared in France).
The communist world, according to Aron, produced a series of contradictions that led it to the brink of economic disaster and possibly political exhaustion. While he did not predict the end of the USSR, his analysis of the variety of contradictions built into the Soviet system has since become part and parcel of the analysis of that system's change. Even the loosening of controls, the increased trade with the West, and the demands of technology, all experienced by the post-Stalinist leadership, led to prospects of decay if not dissolution. The European world, for all its backsliding and its socialist and social-welfare flirtations from Spain to Sweden, exposed the Soviet regime in ideology as well as economy. It is "the progressive substitution of planning for the market, and of collective for private ownership, that ultimately defeats any prospects of universal appeal or even international victory for communism." It is precisely the "decadence" of Europe - its openness to the new, its appeal to individual conscience - that serves as the basis of Aron's "defense."
In an extremely well-crafted, one might say tormented, essay, which later became a full-scale book, Aron concludes with an explosive defense of Western Europe against the tyrannies of the Soviet Union; he reminds his core audience that "western Europeans dare not seek salvation where they too would only find slavery. The cause is not yet lost or won. The struggle between the totalitarian temptation and liberal ideals continues and will continue as far ahead as we can see. The liberties we enjoy in the West have the fragility of humanity's most precious acquisitions." Aron's reference to "decadent Europe" is predicated on its liberty; even more telling, it is not based on the futuristic appeals of socialism, but on the past and present values of democracy. It was this somewhat unfashionable vision that Aron addressed to Europeans and, above all, to his readers in England, who could appreciate, perhaps better than most others, the implications of a schism between East and West in Europe that had to be healed before the broader, international worth of the open society could be achieved.

</text>
