<text id="G15" category="" words="1999" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Dog Days (Hundstage)' Film Quarterly Sep 2006, Vol. 60, No. 1: 40 - 45. " Author="Justin Vicari" PublicationDate="September 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://caliber.ucpress.net/toc/fq/60/1">

By hurling her own storehouse
of factoids at the hapless Samaritans who agree
to give her rides, the hitchhiker both affirms the universal
discourse that holds society together and at the
same time seems to mock it, revealing it to be a parade
of hopeless banalities.
On the other side of the banal factoid life lies barbarism.
In Dog Days violence is not so much something
transcendently evil or even particularly a source of
power (many of the scenes of violence feel half-hearted,
awkward, almost impotent; and in fact none of the
characters achieves what he really wants by resorting to
violence), but rather a way for the characters' true
"humanity" to return and express itself. Violence is the
only element in life that is not a factoid, memorized,
pre-packaged and dished up for easy consumption. To
an extent, this is also true of Dog Days' occasionally
graphic sex scenes, fumbling and largely unconvincing
attempts to regain a human nature that has been somehow
denatured. These sex scenes are also tinged with
irony in their very matter-of-factness.When we first see
the adulterous wife, for instance, she is having a threeway
at an underground sex club, stark naked, bobbing
up and down like a would-be porn star, but still wearing
her clunky tortoise-shell glasses, a funny indication
that some part of her has not been completely abandoned
to this act.
Seidl gives some of the most appalling nudity in
Dog Days to the "ugliest" of his couples, the old man
and his housekeeper. She bears a vague resemblance to
Linda Hunt and toward the end of the film she performs
an arthritic striptease for the old man, grotesquely
wiping her baggy white-cotton panties all over
her sagging body while he smirks with approval. (Set to
a woozy, 1930s-style tango, these scenes of loopy, repellent
Eros resemble the perverse fantasies solemnly enacted
by the hustlers in Gus Van Sant's My Own Private
Idaho [1991].) Although hysterically incongruous, the
relationship between the old man and the housekeeper
is handled by Seidl with a certain tenderness. In their
most touching moment together, he asks her to put on
his late wife's favorite dress and then plays a game with
her where she has to search for the bouquet of flowers
and box of chocolates he has hidden in the garden.
Such tenderness, however, cannot compete with the
brutality of the world. Ironically, it is the hitchhiker, the
most childlike and least sexual character in Dog Days,
who is ultimately violated. Fearing reprisals from the
co-op residents whose cars have been keyed, the alarmsystems
salesman turns her over to the angry mob, who
take turns torturing her for hours in an empty apartment;
finally, one of the men rapes her. This showdown
between the hitchhiker (a composite of consumerism
and advertising jingles) and the salesman becomes a
metaphor for the destructive energies of capitalism. She
lives by the slogans and catchphrases used to sell products
and hype celebrities, even though it is clear she has
"dropped out" of the culture itself; she has no car of her
own, after all, but is reduced to bumming rides from
other people. In the end, a salesman, a key player in the
economic system, turns on her and brings about her destruction.
Is Seidl suggesting that a market economy always
rises up against its own adherents and hangers-on,
the "little dogs" who get eaten by the bigger ones? We
see that the hitchhiker's life is expendable, no more important
than the old man's Rotweiler, poisoned in the
last scene, possibly also by the salesman, in revenge for
the old man telling him earlier that a guard dog is the
most reliable alarm system of all.
Seidl's critique is further strengthened, visually, by
the fact that capitalism has totally effaced the physical
landscape of Dog Days into an ersatz Westernized festival
of kitsch. This is an anonymous Vienna; Seidl avoids
showing any of the antique architecture that once defined
this capital of the old world. Instead, we see the
crass end results of the "Disneyland-ing" of Europe.
Real estate developments, high-rises, superhighways,
and strip malls all serve as backdrops for scenes of actual
or threatened violence (many of these scenes look as
though they could be taking place in America). Like
worshipped totems losing their influence and becoming
vestigial, the dehumanized (and dehumanizing) architectural
forms of advanced capitalism elicit a tendency
to destruction, graffiti, and vandalism; but this destruction
ends up being visited mainly on the nondescript
people who shuffle across the vacant parking lots, haunt
the shopping plazas, and drive the endless highways.
The fact that the hitchhiker becomes a scapegoat for the
pent-up tensions of the community is dramatized by Seidl in the sudden thunder shower that breaks the heatwave
immediately in the wake of her violation. Although
she has been talking nonstop for almost the entire film,
she loses her voice during and after her ordeal: the hitchhiker's
function as "Greek chorus" is silenced and with it
the sense of guilt and meaning which the classical chorus
was meant to invoke in ancient cathartic drama. The
other bedraggled characters, staring out at the rain, remain
isolated and, for the most part, seem to find little
real relief. And rather than blame this anonymous exurban
wasteland - or indeed the system itself - for their
increasing dehumanization, there is evidence that the
characters come to support it more and more: on his
scales at home, the old man weighs pre-packaged sacks
of coffee from the supermarket and is angered to find
that one of them is a little lighter than the others; he
takes it back to the store, demanding his money back
from the dubious manager. If human variability happens
to slip into the gear-work of mass production, it
ends up being viewed as a cheat, an unfairness, a lie.
What makes the hitchhiker's rape so ironic (and
sad) is how painstakingly Seidl has shown us that all
of her love and human feeling were invested in mass
culture and consumerism. She tries to teach one of
her rides the advertising jingle, "Haka finishes your
kitchen," set to the tune of the French Can-Can, now
purged of any sexual innuendo and transformed into a
nursery-school singsong.Her favorite pop song is a romantic
ballad from the 1960s, "Monja," drenched in
slow reverb  - but over it, Seidl lays tracking shots of a
shopping mall, the true object of the hitchhiker's longing.
Later, Seidl uses similar tracking shots of a neon-lit
strip mall, replete with McDonald's, while we hear the
hitchhiker singing an old German hymnal ("Everlasting
is Thy reign . . ."). If consumerism is shown to be a kind
of modern belief system, the focus of fanatical devotion,
we see that religion itself has degenerated into another
form of consumerism."I like the Virgin Mary and
the baby Jesus," the hitchhiker says. "I've got a statuette
at home and 'Lordes' water. The bottle looks like the
Virgin Mary, and you can unscrew her head. And the
'Lordes' water is inside.""You mean Lourdes," her driver
corrects her, but the distinction hardly seems to matter
to the hitchhiker's enjoyment of this "holy object" as a
tchotchke, or the absurdity of a society's attempt to
mass-produce "miracles."
Real transports of the spirit never get very far,
bogged down in tawdriness and animosity. There is a
flurry of scenes in the middle of Dog Days where many
of the characters begin to sing to each other, as a way of
attempting to connect or, more often, to spar, to take
back personal identity against the threat of hostile encroachment.
The adulterous wife and her lover (Christian
Bakonyi) begin to seduce each other by duetting a
Greek drinking song; the manic husband drowns them
out by shouting a nonsense ditty: "The little horse goes
hop, hop, hop!" Likewise, as part of their escalating violence
against the middle-aged teacher, Wickerl and
Lucky demand that she sing "La Cucaracha"; instead,
she sings the love aria from Carmen, in a surprisingly
strong soprano. The men drown her out, bellowing and
gyrating in an obscene dance. I do not think it is coincidental
that Seidl has so many of his characters
singing; his use of frail amateur voices, easily drowned
out, offers a harsher vision of loneliness and isolation
than the celebrated group-song montage in Paul
Thomas Anderson's Magnolia (1999), but the idea is
similar: we all yearn to connect on a pure, spiritual
level, but ultimately cannot achieve this. If it is true that
people can become more fragile and childlike when
they sing, more emotionally open, then Seidl demonstrates
that this childlike fragility (in the hitchhiker, especially)
becomes an immediate target. The fractured,
wandering a capella voices of the characters in Dog
Days are the discordant music of subjectivity that has
lost itself and gone astray, trying to sound its way home
in the dark like a bat.
Fearful of being too vulnerable in a heartless world,
love always turns cruel in Dog Days, even sadomasochistic,
and can only express itself as tenderness under
extreme duress.At one point the husband, at the end of
his rope, holds a gun on his wife's lover, but not to harm
him; he orders the astonished lover to drink a beer with
him, as if the two men were buddies. Later, Lucky,
ashamed at having helped Wickerl beat and violate the
teacher, holds a gun on this couple and forces her to berate
him, slap him, and finally burn his hand with a cigarette;
but instead of enjoying this act of turning the
tables on her abuser, she breaks down sobbing and
comforts Wickerl, telling him she loves him. In fact, this questionable moment where a woman affirms the right
of her boyfriend to abuse her is one of the few moments
in Dog Days that could conceivably be described
as "romantic."
But even this love, as Seidl has already shown, is really
just a substitute for a deeper,more primal bond, that
between the teacher and her elderly mother. When we
first see her arriving at her apartment, the middle-aged
woman plays back her answering-machine messages,
the first of which is from her mother, a rambling litany
of aches, complaints, recriminations ("Why don't you
call me?"); while this message plays, we see the teacher
impassively going to the bathroom with the door open,
changing her clothes. Then, with a harsh electronic
bleep, the mother's voice gives way to the second message,
Wickerl proclaiming the teacher as "my favorite
tush!" - a crudity that erases the cringe-inducing guilt
of the mother's voice while at the same time reifying it in
a further lowering of the woman's self-esteem. It is a
compact mini-essay on Freud (perhaps the most famous
of Austria's native sons, after all): the painful emotions
that surround the relationship with the mother get
deferred into the "easier" romantic attachment with the
man, but because of the psychical remainder left over
from the mother, we see that this romantic attachment
soon becomes difficult and painful as well.
Freud is not the only historic Austrian evoked in
the teacher's apartment: her walls are decorated with
Gustav Klimt prints. The most famous of the Viennese
Secessionists, Klimt painted pictures full of sexual angst
and malevolence, where sensual arousal goes hand in
hand with terror, torture, and pain. Klimt is the painter
par excellence of the sadomasochistic imagination.
When Lucky first returns to the teacher's apartment
after her violation, he tells her that at first he enjoyed
abusing her, fascinated "to see how some people can act
toward other people." This is almost a description of
Seidl's own philosophy, and the mixture of pain and
pleasure that attends upon watching Dog Days. But
what has grown out of this morbid fascination is a feeling
of love for his victim: to her astonishment, Lucky
attempts to kiss her. She pushes him away and he tells
her that, for him, love is pain: "it hurts" when you fall in
love and then when you fall out of it again.

</text>
