<text id="G17" category="" words="2013" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Toni Morrison's Paradise: Black Cultural Citizenship in the American Empire.' American Literature, Sep2006, Vol. 78 Issue 3, p585-612" Author="Holly Flint" PublicationDate="September 2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=119&sid=3e8eb01e-302a-4c89-97fa-5d25e0a3ba6d%40sessionmgr111&bquery=%28JN+%22American+Literature%22+AND+DT+20060901%29&bdata=JmRiPWE5aCZ0eXBlPTEmc2l0ZT1laG9zdC1saXZl">

In 1980 historian William Appleman Williams warned that the only way to create viable American identities, communities,
and cultures would be to understand and acknowledge
our imperial past so that we can become ''citizens - not imperial
overlords - of the world.''1 In the years since Williams's politically
charged statement, scholars have taken the first steps toward examining
American literature as part of what Amy Kaplan and Donald
Pease refer to as the ''cultures of United States imperialism.''2 Moreover,
the broader field of American studies has seen a renewed interest
in issues involving contemporary citizenship, particularly as they
relate to minority rights. Most recently, the term cultural citizenship
has begun to circulate in reference to the relationship between one's
identity (race, class, gender, language, nationality) and the nonlegal
aspects of one's citizenship (access to resources, involvement in the
labor force, participation in public discourse, relationship to the environment,
education).3 These developments in the fields of American
literature and American studies are extremely useful for reading Toni
Morrison's Paradise because they give the novel renewed exigency at
the same time that they alter how we understand the novel's black
characters and their relationship to (white) America.
Like many others, I read Paradise as both a history and a critique of
history; however, I situate the novel specifically within the context of
westward expansion and the subsequent establishment of an American
empire.4 As a critic, I understand homesteading to be a euphemism
for settler colonialism. Like many other instances of colonialism
throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, American settler colonialism was shaped by both federal imperial policies (at
home and abroad) and by race, class, and gender ideologies generated
within domestic culture. My essay works from these assumptions
to analyze how Morrison's residents of Ruby, Oklahoma, as cultural
citizens, participate in their local, national, and global communities.
U.S. imperial culture affects the viability of their participation, which
the novel calls into question with its framework of murder and self-destruction.
Furthermore, the much-debated final chapter, in which
Morrison depicts the afterlives of the murdered women in the convent,
provides a glimpse of the alternative, magical forms of cultural
citizenship that Paradise offers for consideration. My reading of the
novel answers two large questions: What forms of cultural citizenship
does Paradise imagine when it retells the story of American settler
colonialism from a black perspective? And what happens when we
read Paradise as a text that envisions an American landscape in which
an individual's cultural citizenship is tied to his or her ability to recognize
the effects of U.S. imperialism?
More Than a New Western History
Almost all of Ruby's black residents, some more so than others, descend
from the novel's original ex-slave families who, in 1890, set out
from Louisiana in search of a land where they might begin their own
reconstruction. As a community, these families moved west in search
of new cultural, legal, and economic identities. Although most of the
novel's events occur between 1965 and 1976, they are shaped by the
original exodus - its motives, accomplishments, and failures. Thus,
the families' participation in the homestead movement of the late nineteenth
century figures as a horizon against which one reads the novel's
twentieth-century story line, much in the same way that the frontier
has been a backdrop to standard twentieth-century American history.
Morrison's characters, however, are by no means the standard
(white) settlers. Modeled after black Americans who participated in
the Exoduster movement (1877 - 79), the residents of Ruby descend
from a group of black homesteaders who, in the wake of Reconstruction's
failure, moved west in search of the sort of social freedoms and
opportunities promised them by the Emancipation Proclamation. The
actual Exoduster movement, so named because emancipated slaves
left the South in a manner similar to the great Exodus from Egypt, began in Tennessee. Its leader was Benjamin ''Pap'' Singleton, an
ex-slave from Nashville who founded the Edgefield Real Estate and
Homestead Association in an attempt to facilitate black homesteading
in Kansas. As a result of the Exoduster movement, approximately
twenty-thousand black Americans settled in Kansas during the second
half of the 1870s.5 Even though several differences set the characters
of Morrison's novel apart from their historical referents (for
example, Morrison's exodus happens more than a decade after the
actual Exoduster movement, and her characters settle in Oklahoma
instead of the more popular Kansas), one major similarity beyond
the obvious connects the two. Morrison's homesteaders are led by
Zechariah ''Coffee'' Morgan, also known as Big Papa, who seems to
be modeled directly after Benjamin ''Pap'' Singleton and his leadership
of the historical Exodusters. (Singleton later called himself the
''father'' of the Exoduster movement.) Given that much of Paradise
imagines the problems inherent in such a patriarchal leadership, it
seems reasonable to assume that Morrison fictionally represents an
often overlooked chapter of African American history so that she may
reexamine the issue of black patriarchy and its relationship to (white)
American society through its most influential imperial narrative to
date: the ongoing story of America's manifest destiny.
Before exploring this larger ideological framework and its impact on
Morrison's characters, I begin by examining the novel's participation
in a much more regional debate. By grounding Paradise in the history
of the Exoduster movement, Morrison challenges both the method
and content of the standard history of the West, thus making the
novel a participant in a current academic debate between old and new
Western American history. Since the 1980s, scholars who dub themselves
''New Western Historians'' have questioned the late-nineteenth century's
narrative of the West, especially Frederick Jackson Turner's
analysis of the frontier. These historians have argued for ''New Western''
histories that pull aside Turner's vision of the noble frontiersman
setting forth to civilize the wilderness to reveal instead a West already
peopled by Native Americans, African Americans, Mexicans, French
and Spanish colonial traders, and Chinese immigrants. In order to
make room for these histories, New Western historians have worked
to expose Turner's narrative for what it is: not a history of the American West
but a history written by and for the (white) American public.
Standard Western American history produced in the wake of Turner's foundational narrative tends to figure the West as a vast, empty
landscape. Not insignificant is the fact that this emptiness was commonly
viewed as bordered by white settlements in the Midwest and
California, threatened by tribes of purportedly violent Native Americans,
yet ''destined'' to become part of the sovereign United States.
With some reflection, one comes to realize that in this standard American
history the West functions all at once as a geographic utopia, a
battleground for the American way of life, and an imperial dreamscape.
Deborah Popper, Frank Popper, and Robert Lang have traced
these functions of the West as they pertain to Turner's thesis, which
successfully supported ''old'' Western American history throughout
most of the twentieth century. Their essay ''From Maps to Myth''
unveils the fact that Turner's thesis stemmed from neither his archival
research nor his field work but from his ability to write a narrative
about the West's political and cultural significance to the American
way of life, without his audience suspecting that he had conflated two
previously distinct definitions of the term frontier. In its first sense,
frontier, as defined by U.S. Census officials, describes a region as being
only partially settled. In this definition, frontier participates in a three-part
population scale, including ''[1] wilderness or vacant land - that
is, unsettled land - with less than two people per square mile . . . ;
[2] frontier or partial settlement, with between two and six people
per square mile; and [3] fully settled places, with six or more people
per square mile.''6 Unfortunately, as the authors point out, until 1890
(only three years before Turner first presented his frontier thesis), the
category people, which determines this first meaning of frontier, only
included U.S. citizens and tax-paying Native Americans (''MM,'' 93).
Already, forms of legal and cultural citizenship were shaping narratives
of the American West.
The second definition of the frontier offered by Census officials
refers to the ''line [that] delimited the western edge of all continuous
east-to-west settlements; it split frontier from wilderness by dividing
places with more than two people per square mile from those with
fewer'' (''MM,'' 92 - 93). To Turner's great benefit, in 1890 the Census
declared this term obsolete. Once the official frontier line west
of the Mississippi had been superseded by white American settlements
in California, and the frontier dotted with a handful of small
towns throughout Kansas and other territories, the Census officials
declared that ''at present the unsettled land has been so broken into by isolated bodies of settlement that there can hardly be said to be
a frontier line.''7 As the frontier line became fragmented, it seemed
only a matter of time until the West would be ''fully settled,'' a prospect
that delighted Census officials who felt that the cultural status
of the United States abroad depended upon its ability to claim urban
development at home (''MM,'' 94). Popper, Lang, and Popper argue
that Turner similarly looked forward to an urban American landscape
although he sought to subdue fears that rural culture would be out
of place in this new America. By joining the first definition of frontier
to the Census's claim that the frontier line had vanished, Turner
conflated the two terms, declared the frontier a moot point, and transformed
it into a bildungsroman, which, he argued, the American character
would pass through to come out fully formed and exceptional.
In short, ''Turner invoked the Census's profane land category to preserve
a sacred metaphor; geographic logic gave way to national symbolism''
(''MM,'' 96).
And so in 1893, when Turner first presented his findings to the
American Historical Association in Chicago and then later in 1896
when he published the essay ''The Problems of the West'' in the Atlantic
Monthly, he declared to (white) America that as homesteaders
fulfilled the U.S. destiny to settle the American West, the American
character would be forever marked by such qualities as hard work,
perseverance, determination, and a capitalist drive, all of which helped
quiet urban America's fears regarding the socialist politics that some
leaders of the Populist and Farmers Alliance movements were promoting
at the time (''MM,'' 96).8 For the most part, Turner's brand
of Western American history reigned for the next one hundred years,
despite its dated political motivations. In 1987, however, Patricia Nelson
Limerick opened fire on Turner's methodology, if not his view
of the American character, when she argued that the word frontier
should be replaced by the more accurate term conquest. Instead of
viewing the land as once unpeopled and therefore properly used by
white men (and women) to its fullest potential - an argument similar
to the one that helped rationalize the first British empire in North
America - Limerick argued that American historians should view the
West as a land of conquest.9
It might appear that Limerick kicked off the debate over old and
new Western history; however, scholars of African American, Native
American, Chinese American, and Mexican American history began the first campaigns against Turner's legacy in the 1960s. Their efforts
to uncover, retrieve, and retell narratives about minorities in the West
implicitly challenged the cultural assumption that the frontier was
unpopulated and thus a region without a history, an aim made explicit
by later New Western historians. Upon closer inspection, however, it
becomes apparent that what marked Limerick's argument as new was
not that it challenged Turner's content but that it directly questioned,
if not rejected, his overall methodology and assumptions. The project
of New Western historians is not simply to insert nonwhites into Western
American history and culture but to shift the grounds of the discourse
itself: to understand the West not as Turner's process of settlement - 
now over but with far-reaching cultural effects - but as a place,
a geographic region with its own histories, populations, and cultures.10
By dissecting the American West from Turner's unilateral view of U.S.
culture, New Western historians have been able to contextualize their
research within both the specifics of the West and the generalities of
the American cultural landscape.

</text>
