<text id="G18" category="" words="1996" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Race and Real Estate' 'Does the Death Penalty Deter?' 'Ungodless Nation' 'Turning down the heat' Wilson Quarterly, Summer2006, Vol. 30 Issue 3" Author="-" PublicationDate="Spring 2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=106&sid=792ffd1f-0fe3-40a2-9e45-19122904cdc9%40sessionmgr113&bquery=(JN+%22Wilson+Quarterly%22+AND+DT+20060601)&bdata=JmRiPWE5aCZ0eXBlPTEmc2l0ZT1laG9zdC1saXZl">

AMERICA'S MODERN LOVE affair with real estate probably began in 1934, when Congress created the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). Even though the nation was then in the grip of the Great Depression, the number of housing starts soared, rising from 93,000 in 1933 to 619,000 in 1941.
Before the FHA, Americans needed substantial amounts of money--up to a third of the value of a home--to secure a mortgage. And what they got were, in effect, "balloon" mortgages; after five to seven years, buyers had to secure new loans or, in many cases, were forced to sell their homes.
The FHA revolutionized home finance by extending guarantees to qualified buyers, allowing them to borrow from banks at low rates for increasingly longer terms with down payments of only 10 percent. But the revolution bypassed an important group: African Americans. Whites were given a generation's head start on accumulating wealth through homeownership. Today, the median white household has 10 times as much wealth as the median black household.
The FHA, says Adam Gordon, a third-year law student and senior editor at The Yale Law Journal, established underwriting guidelines that were based on the racial makeup of a neighborhood. Areas with a greater proportion of whites, in the FHA model, were deemed to have stable, relatively high property values, while predominately black neighborhoods were assumed to have low values. This loan-granting model severely limited access to FHA mortgages for black Americans. In 1960, nonwhites held only 2.5 percent of FHA-insured loans.
This story is well known to scholars. What's disputed is how much difference the FHA policies actually made. If there was sufficient demand among black home buyers, some scholars argue, private mortgage insurers would have stepped in to serve those excluded by the FHA. Gordon believes he has the explanation for why this did not happen: Because private lenders adopted the same flawed FHA lending model, their discriminatory criteria "effectively became binding law."
In November 1962, President John F. Kennedy signed an executive order directing the FHA to make its loans available regardless of "race, color, creed, or national origin." That order, and later reforms, such as the Fair Housing Act of 1968, put blacks on nearly equal terms with whites when buying a home, but three decades of discrimination had already prevented many blacks from "becoming homeowners and building assets."
Gordon argues that further remedies are needed. Among the options are stepped-up attacks on exclusionary zoning and "mobility grants" for blacks in the form of direct payments--in effect, reparations--or mortgage subsidies. The straightforward anti-discrimination steps taken so far fail "to adequately address  ...  the past disparity in wealth building" and its consequences--the segregated, depressed neighborhoods "that the FHA helped create."

AT THE HEART OF THE DEBATE about whether the United States should retain capital punishment is the question of whether it deters murder. Some argue that executing murderers may actually cause more murders by desensitizing society at large to killing. But over the years, several studies have shown that killing convicted murderers does deter future murders. After reanalyzing the data used in the most prominent of these studies, however, Yale law professor John J. Donohue and Wharton business professor Justin Wolfers conclude that none of them demonstrates a clear deterrent effect.
Donohue and Wolfers tested the findings of original studies by covering a different time period, introducing comparison groups, changing the variables, and using other alternative analytical techniques. The fundamental difficulty with all these studies is that executions occur so rarely in the United States, they write. Thus, the number of homicides the death penalty can plausibly have caused or deterred cannot be reliably disentangled from the large year-to-year changes in the homicide rate caused by other factors.
One of the most often cited capital punishment studies is by economist Isaac Ehrlich, who changed the American debate with a 1975 analysis of national time-series data that led him to claim that each execution saved eight lives.The Supreme Court had ruled three years earlier that existing death penalty statutes were unconstitutional, but a year after
Ehrlich released his study, the Court ended the death penalty moratorium in Gregg v. Georgia. Ehrlich's results have been questioned over the years. Though his study covered the years 1935 to 1969, his conclusion that the death penalty is a deterrent relied heavily on an upsurge in the homicide rate after 1962, combined with a fall in the execution rate during the same period. A 1978 National Academy of Sciences report pointed out that this "simple pairing" of more murders and fewer executions between 1963 and 1969 explained his results. For all of his sophisticated econometric analyses, Ehrlich did not fully take into account other influences on the homicide rate.
In a 2004 study, Hashem Dezhbakhsh and Joanna M. Shepherd analyzed the same kind of data Ehrlich considered for the period 1960 to 2000 and suggested that around 150 fewer homicides occur per execution. But this study included the same distorting mid-1960s period. And Dezhbakhsh and Shepherd's ease was also helped by the fact that homicide rates were higher during the death penalty moratorium in the mid-1970s than during the early or late years of the decade. The obvious implication that lifting the death penalty explains the difference, however, is contradicted by the fact that there was also an upsurge in murders in states where the death penalty laws did not change.
Another problem with studies such as these two is that their conclusions don't hold up when examined against comparison cases, say Donohue and Wolfers. Canada hasn't executed anyone since 1962, though narrow death penalty statutes remained on the books until 1998. Yet Canada's homicide rate has moved in virtual lockstep with that of the United States. And within the United States, homicide rates in the six states that had no death penalty between 1960 and 2000 moved in close concert with those of states that did have death penalty statutes in effect during at least some portion of that period.
Despite efforts to control for a range of social and economic trends, say Donohue and Wolfers, the studies failed to capture some of the factors that influence homicide rates. Of the half-dozen or so studies that Donohue and Wolfers scrutinized, none produced statistically significant evidence of deterrence upon re-examination.
Noting the impact of such studies on public policy, the authors caution against rushing to change the law based on any study that hasn't stood the test of time and rigorous scientific validation.

IN AN ERA OF INCREASING religious tolerance, only one group of Americans approaches something like pariah status: atheists.
In a survey of more than 2,000 people, nearly 40 percent said that atheists, much more so than Muslims and homosexuals, did not agree "at all" with their vision of American society, report Penny Edgell, Joseph Gerteis, and Douglas Hartmann, all sociologists at the University of Minnesota. Just under half of those polled said that they would disapprove if one of their children wanted to marry an atheist. A third said they would disapprove of a Muslim spouse.
Churchgoers, conservative Protestants, and people who say that religion is highly salient to their lives are less likely to approve of intermarriage with nonbelievers and more likely to say that atheists do not share their vision of American society. White Americans, males, and college graduates are somewhat more accepting of atheists than are nonwhites, females, and people without college degrees. Not surprisingly, the lowest rate of rejection of atheists is among those who do not go to church or claim a religious identity, and who report that religion is "not at all" salient to them. Yet even 17 percent of these survey respondents say that atheists do not at all share their vision of America, and one-tenth indicate that they would disapprove of their child marrying an atheist.
It may come as a surprise that nonbelievers are actually hard to find. Only about one percent of Americans self-identify as atheists, though the real number may be up to three percent. And the members of this small band would be hard to identify, since there are no visible signs of nonbelief.
The attitude toward these godless few is telling, write the authors. "If we are correct, then the boundary between the religious and the nonreligious is not about religious affiliation per se. It is about the historic place of religion in American civic culture and the understanding that religion provides the 'habits of the heart' that form the basis of the good society. It is about an understanding that Americans share something more than rules and procedures, but rather that our understandings of right and wrong and good citizenship are also shared."

THE GLOBAL WARMING DEBATE is gridlocked in part because the problem seems almost too big and costly to solve. That's foolish, argues Gregg Easterbrook: "Greenhouse gases are an air pollution problem, and all air pollution problems of the past have cost significantly less to fix than projected, while declining faster than expected."
Easterbrook, a visiting fellow at the Brookings Institution, detailed that history in his 1995 book A Moment on the Earth. He also criticized environmentalists (with whom he was sympathetic) fur inducing gloom about what could be accomplished in the future by ignoring the great gains America had already made in reducing pollution. At the time, he was somewhat skeptical of claims about human-caused global warming, but no longer. The question now is what to do about it.
Critics of the Kyoto Protocol, ratified by more than 160 countries but not the United States, are right, Easterbrook says. Even if the treaty were perfectly enforced, "atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases in 2050 would be only about one percent less than without the treaty." (The Bush administration's unsung multinational methane reduction pact of 2003, Easterbrook adds, "may do more to slow global warming than perfect compliance with the Kyoto treaty.") And perfect compliance is a pipe dream: "Most nations that have ratified the Kyoto treaty are merrily ignoring it." Canada's greenhouse gas emissions are 24 percent above the Kyoto-mandated level, for instance.
Easterbrook's optimism comes from U.S. experience in reducing ordinary air pollution during the past 30 years."Today, any make or model new car purchased in the United States emits about one percent the amount of smog-forming compounds per mile as a car of 1970, and the cost of the anti-smog technology is less than $100 per vehicle." Remember acid rain? After Congress enacted an emissions permit trading plan in 1991, the output of harmful sulfur compounds dropped by more than a third, and "Appalachian forests are currently in their best health since Europeans first laid eyes on them," The reductions cost only $200 per ton of emissions cut, not the $2,000 originally projected.
The lesson: "Cream a profit incentive for greenhouse gas reduction, and human ingenuity will rapidly be applied to the problem." That means eschewing detailed government regulation and creating "a market-based system of auctioned or traded greenhouse gas permits." Major emitters of gases such as carbon dioxide would be issued permits allowing them to release certain quantifies of the gases. If they produced less, they would be entitled to sell leftover permits to producers who emitted more than their quota. Everybody would have a strong financial incentive to reduce emissions.
That would speed the adoption of new technologies, from the familiar wind and solar power alternatives to the less known. General Electric, for example, has developed coal-fired power plants that emit no greenhouse gases. More important, such incentives would unleash the human power of invention, with results we can't even imagine now.
What about the developing world, with its soaring output of greenhouse gases? In a global system that gave credits for cutting emissions in places such as China, where old and antiquated technologies could be quickly updated, the gains could be huge.
The United States led the world in finding ways to tame smog and acid rain, Easterbrook declares, "and we should be first to overcome global warming."

</text>
