<text id="G19" category="" words="2011" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Aesthetic Experience: From Analysis to Eros' Journal of Aesthetics & Art Criticism, Spring2006, Vol. 64 Issue 2, p217-229" Author="Richard Shusterman" PublicationDate="Spring 2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=106&sid=81803a3c-b7ba-4ede-867c-b261e952d0f2%40sessionmgr112&bquery=(JN+%22Journal+of+Aesthetics+%26+Art+Criticism%22+AND+DT+20060401)&bdata=JmRiPWE5aCZ0eXBlPTEmc2l0ZT1laG9zdC1saXZl">

The same contrast of actively self-possessed experience and a more passive self-surrender also recalls the historical opposition of Aristotelian and Platonic views of pleasure. If Plato charged that our strongest pleasures (typically those of bodily sensations) imply a lack, passivity, or loss of control in the subject, Aristotle offered an account of pleasure that stressed the active, complete, and self-strengthening dimension of enjoyment.
Enjoying a game of chess is an activity that we can fully enjoy throughout the game and not only when it is over. Our enjoyment does not imply that we initially lacked something and are passively carried away by the feelings we get from playing; instead,	enjoying	chess	promotes	the	subject' s ability to stay focused and concentrate on the game. In attempting to defend the pleasure of aesthetic experience, I have often emphasized the Aristotelian account and stressed the activity of the subject in all sensory perception. But the Platonic view of pleasure as captivating sensations that overcome the subject and take her out of herself (ekstasis) also needs recognition. There are pleasures of self-abandonment to sensations as well as self-affirming enjoyment of activity. Intense self-absorption in an activity can also yield its own sense of self-abandonment in which one is no longer conscious of the acting self but only of the activity.
Aesthetic experience, on my view, can embrace these different moments. Enjoying a sad movie means appreciating the poignancy of the film, but it can also include appreciating our feelings of emotion that result from appreciating its poignancy, even if those turbulent sensations (perhaps even of weeping) may disturb for a moment our self-composure and our self-controlled cognitive attention to the movie. An experiential model of learning that appreciates receptivity as well as self-assertive grasping should convince us that there can be cognitive lessons learned through self-abandonment that cannot be obtained through vigilant self-control. Transformative knowledge through passionate and intensely pleasurable self-surrender is the cognitive claim of mystical fusion, but it is also suggested in our most earthy sense of coupling that forms the ancient biblical paradigm of experiential knowledge -  the carnal knowledge of sex.
Can sexual experience, then, provide aesthetic experience? "No," is the standard reply of analytic	aesthetics.	Despite	our	culture' s	increasing interest and gains in sexual freedom, expression, and creativity, Anglo-American philosophers typically presume that aesthetic experience should be sharply distinguished from experiences of sex (and drugs). Gary Iseminger, for example, in his lucid and well-informed article for the Oxford Companion to Aesthetics, argues that one of four key desiderata for a theory of aesthetic experience is a definition that will clearly distinguish this experience from sexual experience and drug-induced experience, thus ensuring that also the notion of aesthetic pleasure "does not apply to the pleasures of sex and drugs." Iseminger's concern	echoes	Roger	Scruton' s	anxiety	that aesthetic experience not be reduced to emotional intoxication characteristic of "certain drugs" and "pornography." Similarly, Monroe Beardsley, when faced with the criticism that his earlier definitions of aesthetic experience could logically include sexual experience, felt compelled once again to revise his theory so as to affirm their difference rather than recognizing that sex can be aesthetic. Moreover, these stark rejections of aesthetic sexuality never seem to be based on substantive analyses or detailed argumentation about the nature of erotic experience.
Why should this worry about sex and drugs be so prominently insistent? Are we so prone to grant them undeserved aesthetic status, and what great harm would arise from recognizing that some erotic or drug-induced experience could be aesthetic? Why is there no similarly urgent worry about distinguishing aesthetic experience from experiences of bird watching, wine tasting, sun bathing, window shopping, flânerie, or of observing sports such as diving, figure skating, or gymnastics? The answer, I believe, is a combination of old prejudices and repressive fears that have recently been intensified by new cultural developments and demons. Without trying here to define sexual experience, we can at least note that it seems structurally different from most drug-induced experience in ways that approximate the experience of art. While one's sexual partner is the intentional object that structures one's experience of sex, the pill one takes to initiate a drug experience does not typically form the object of that experience (though the joint that one rolls and smokes may sometimes form part of it).
The contemporary academic presumption that sexual experience should be excluded from the realm of aesthetic experience has deep historical roots in enduring platonistic and religious sentiments that underlie much of the idealism of modern aesthetics. Defining aesthetic pleasure as disinterested and intellectual in order to distinguish it sharply from the agreeable sensations of sensual experience and the satisfactions of appetite, Immanuel Kant could build on Shaftesbury's earlier insistence on the disinterested contemplation of beauty as explicitly contrasted to sexual desire. Still earlier, in the founding text that gave aesthetics its disciplinary name, Alexander Baumgarten warns against sex as something that corrupts aesthetic sensibility. As Kant and Baumgarten express the German pietism of their times, so Shaftesbury was deeply influenced by neoplatonist idealism that traditionally disdained and feared the body. If Nietzsche is right that the dramatic arts emerged from the sexually charged Dionysian rituals, then aesthetic experience has a distinctly erotic past and perhaps some residual sexual energies that might be uncomfortable to acknowledge in trying to develop aesthetics into a rigorous, rationalistic philosophical form of knowledge. If Herbert Marcuse is right that "the erotic quality of the Beautiful" challenges "the prevailing reality principle of domination" with the emancipatory power of the pleasure principle, then philosophers devoted to the hegemony of established cultural realities should have further reason to be wary of accepting the erotic within the aesthetic domain.
Because aesthetics is considered a rather soft discipline that has trouble matching the scientific rigor and explanatory power of other academic fields (including other fields of philosophy), it is understandable that contemporary aestheticians would be especially worried about the challenges to aesthetic rationality that sex and drugs seem to introduce. In Anglo-American theory, the need to exclude sex and drugs from the aesthetic domain may have been rendered even more pressing by the fact that extremely influential French philosophers, such as Georges Bataille and Michel Foucault, have emphasized radical practices of sex and drugs as means of achieving limit experiences whose overwhelming aesthetic powers are alleged to challenge the boundaries of conventional thinking, thus transforming our philosophical perspective and even our very sense of self (which is both a product and a reproducer of established social institutions, practices, and ideologies).
Of course, the aesthetic neglect of sex is not primarily	the	fault	of	today' s	philosophers, whose thinking largely reflects the entrenched presuppositions of our intellectual heritage and our enduring cultural traditions. Western modernity, as Foucault argues, has tended to treat sex on a distinctly medical rather than aesthetic model, developing a massive scientia sexualis but still very little in the way of the elaborate ars erotica that is found in Asian culture. One contemporary expression of this bias is the mammoth wave of incessantly advertised drugs for improving sex in terms of chemically induced physical instrumentalities (for example, longer and harder erections and better lubrication), while comparatively nothing is offered to improve sexual experience through greater erotic artistry and heightened aesthetic sensibility. Foucault's advocacy of consensual S/M and homosexual eroticism expresses his aim of expanding the creative palette of sexual options, which - because sexuality forms a central part of one's identity - would in turn expand our possible modes of aesthetic self-fashioning in what he calls "the aesthetics of existence."	W e	need	not	share	Foucault' s specific preferences to appreciate his point about the aesthetic dimension of erotics.
The genealogy of aesthetics' neglect of sex deserves much more attention; so does the analysis of what constitutes sexual or erotic experience. However, given our ordinary understanding of the erotic, and using our extended analysis of the concept of aesthetic experience, we can conclude with a tentative assessment of whether sex can provide such experience. In one sense of this ambiguous question, that of the imaginative contemplation of sex, there seems excellent reason to answer affirmatively because the visual and verbal representations of erotic desire and activity clearly form an important part of many artworks that move us aesthetically rather than pornographically or voyeuristically. In such works, the representation of sexuality is depicted, structured, and deployed in ways governed by certain distinctively formal aims or aesthetic criteria and meanings. We can likewise imagine live or filmed erotic theatre that would be scripted and directed toward realizing such formal or aesthetic qualities, even if the vast majority of such sexual dramatizations ignore or subordinate such aims to the pursuit of primarily prurient intentions, and even if it may be very difficult for most observers to take the detached, distanced, disinterested attitude to watching sex that some theorists demand of aesthetic experience. The demand for disinterested, distanced detachment (a vague and controversial demand that pragmatist and Nietzschean aesthetics contests) implies that the hardest case to make for sexual experience as aesthetic would be our actual engagement in erotic activity rather than our imaginatively perceiving it done by others. But rather than entangling ourselves in polemics about distance, let us consider consensual sexual experience in terms of the features we identified as central to the more dominant conceptions of aesthetic experience.
Sex can certainly be pursued, enjoyed, and highly valued for its own sake rather than for its role in producing children, in acquiring material or social gains, or in forging psychological bonds of intimacy. (In this sense of being appreciated for itself rather than for its instrumentality in serving other interests or ulterior motives, sex could even be said to involve disinterested, albeit desiring, enjoyment.) Sex can be enjoyed both in terms of its Aristotelian sense of fulfilling, absorbing, undistracted activity and in terms of the attendant pleasurable sensations it gives; it powerfully displays the phenomenological dimension of being subjectively savored but also intentionally directed at an object (typically another human subject) that structures the experience, shapes its quality, and gives it important dimensions of meaning commensurate with the properties and significance of that object. A cognitive experience providing knowledge of one's own body and mind and also those of one's sexual partners, the sexual act typically displays a distinctive unity both of coherence and completion, a sense of something developing consistently and powerfully toward a fulfilling consummation. It also stands out distinctively from the flow of ordinary hum-drum experience. Sexual experience involves a wide range of affect, some of which is unrivalled in its intensity, and it displays both moments of active self-assertive grasping and self-surrendering absorption.
Can sexual experience, then, be aesthetic? It seems to capture all the key elements emphasized by the major conceptions of aesthetic experience. In order to exclude sex from aesthetic experience, Iseminger	argues	that	"sexual	partners ... are not works of art" and that "the incorporation of thought into the imaginative experience" also "distinguishes	aesthetic	experience	from sexual experience." These arguments, however, wrongly presume that only works of art can form the object of aesthetic experience and that our sexual experience does not involve imaginative thought and discriminating sensibility. If the most blind and primitive sexual encounters require no cognitive sensitivity (which is also absent in blind encounters with artworks), good love making calls for an imaginative, perceptive "thinking desire."
Of course, whether we allow sexual experience to count as aesthetic experience depends ultimately on the conceptions of aesthetic experience and sexual experience we adopt. But I am convinced that unless we limit aesthetic experience narrowly to the experience of artworks and conversely confine sexual experience to unimaginative, thoughtlessly mechanical, and insensitive copulation, we should clearly recognize that sexual experience can be aesthetic, even though current academic doxa and much traditional aesthetic dogma insistently deny it. Such a conclusion has more than theoretical consequences. It can inspire us to greater aesthetic appreciation of our sexual experience and, consequently, to more artistic and aesthetically rewarding performance in our erotic behavior, which surely forms one important dimension of the art of living.

</text>
