<text id="G22" category="" words="2021" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Out of Control' Ethics, Jan2006, Vol. 116 Issue 2, p285-301, 17p" Author="George Sher" PublicationDate="January 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=113&sid=b1a14277-51bb-4a3e-9ee1-f5820818260f%40sessionmgr114&bquery=%28JN+%22Ethics%22+AND+DT+20060101%29&bdata=JmRiPWE5aCZ0eXBlPTEmc2l0ZT1laG9zdC1saXZl">

Although I shall not belabor the point, I think it is clear that each
pattern can be instanced in numerous other ways. For example, in addition
to bad reasoning and insensitivity to morally relevant considerations,
the factors that prevent agents from recognizing that they are
acting wrongly can include their inability to envision alternative courses
of action and the fact that their conceptual schemes are too impoverished
to support the relevant classifications; in addition to fear and
panic, the emotions that cloud people's judgment can include anxiety,
depression, and exhilaration. I also think it is clear that the different
patterns can themselves interact - that, for example, an unwilled lapse
in attention may itself be what leads someone to judge poorly or to fail
to recognize a morally relevant consideration. If all of this does not
show that clear-eyed decisions to act wrongly are actually rare, it does
at least suggest that the proportion of unwitting to witting instances of
wrongdoing within the domain of apparently responsible action is much
higher than it initially appears.
IV
But does it really follow that we must reject either the thesis that responsibility
presupposes control or the view that the relevant agents are
responsible for what they do? Can't we somehow square the fact that
none of the agents in our examples are aware that their acts or omissions
are wrong with the intuition that each one exercises enough control
over his act to qualify as responsible for it? In the remainder of this
article, I will examine two possible strategies for achieving this reconciliation:
first, to relocate each agent's knowing wrong choice to some
earlier point in his history, and, second, to deny that the form of control
that is relevant to responsibility requires that one be aware that one is
acting wrongly.
The first suggestion, that what makes an agent responsible for an unwitting wrongful choice is always some previous wrongful choice that
was not unwitting, is already familiar. We encountered a version of it
when we asked whether Alessandra had chosen to allow herself to be
distracted, whether Julian had chosen to daydream, and whether Wren
had chosen to let herself fall asleep. In this initial version, the suggestion
was found not to be credible. However, even if we cannot locate the
fateful choice at the moment immediately before the agent becomes
incapable of recognizing his act or omission as wrong, we may still be
able to locate it at some yet earlier moment.
Interestingly, proposals of this sort can be extracted from two quite
different bodies of literature. One, predictably, is the literature on culpable
ignorance. It is often said that a necessary (though not a sufficient)
condition for culpability for an act that one does not recognize as wrong
is the prior wrongful performance of what Holly Smith has called a
"benighting act" - that is, an act in which the agent "fails to improve
(or positively impairs) his cognitive position" in a way that creates a risk
of precisely the type of wrongdoing that later occurs.7 Taking our cue
from this, we might suppose that the wrongful choices that render the
agents in our examples responsible consist precisely of such benighting
acts. The other body of literature that might be adapted to provide a
way of relocating the moment of knowing wrongful choice is the literature
on character formation. Inspired by Aristotle, many philosophers
have pointed out that we are at least to some extent able to shape
our characters - that, among other things, we become good by practicing
virtue and avoiding vice, bad by doing the reverse.8 This suggests
that the wrongful choices that render our agents responsible may be
those through which they solidified the habits that subsequently prevented
them from realizing that what they were doing was wrong.
Because there are always innumerable past acts and omissions but
for which a wrongdoer would not have failed to realize that he was not
acting as he should, each of these proposals has some initial credibility.
However, problems emerge as soon as we try to flesh the proposals out.
One obvious problem is that in the majority of our nine examples, the
agent's lack of awareness that he is acting wrongly simply does not
appear to be traceable to any prior wrongful act or omission. A further
problem is that, even where there has been previous wrongdoing, the
agent's responsibility does not appear to depend on his previously having known that he was acting wrongly. For ease of exposition, I will
develop these objections first as they pertain to wrongful benighting
acts and then as they pertain to wrongful failures to develop good habits
and traits.
To see that the majority of our cases involve no previous wrongful
benighting acts, we need only remind ourselves of how unpredictable
many of the relevant situations are. For example, when Alessandra arrives
at the school, the dispute that she encounters is not one that she
could have anticipated. Because she has no reason to expect to be
distracted, she also has no reason to take precautions against being
distracted. Thus, on its most natural reconstruction, there is no point
in Hot Dog at which Alessandra has negligently failed to do something
that would have prevented her from forgetting Sheba. Nor, similarly,
does the most natural reconstruction of Jackknife involve any wrongful
benighting act on Father Poteet's part, for, because he had no reason
to mistrust his judgment, he also had no reason to take precautions
against its failing. And, although I shall not bother to argue the point,
I think we would be just as hard-pressed to attribute wrongful benighting
acts to Julian in On the Rocks, to Wren in Caught off Guard, or to amerika
in Bad Weather.9
The other four examples are different. It is clear enough that Joliet
should have investigated before shooting the intruder and that Scout
should have tried to find out whether babies can tolerate alcohol. It
may also be true that Ryland should have stopped to think before telling
her anecdote and that Sylvain should have reflected before agreeing to
allow his student to earn extra credit. Still, even if all four unwitting
wrong acts can be traced to previous wrongful benighting acts, it hardly
follows that any of the agents must have recognized that the relevant
previous act was either benighting or wrongful. Given Joliet's panic, it
seems unlikely that she even thought of investigating the identity of the
intruder, much less realized that she was acting wrongly by not doing so. Nevertheless, even if she never was aware that she was not acting as
she should, she remains responsible for shooting her son. Mutatis mutandis,
the same is true of Scout in Colicky Baby, of Ryland in Bad Joke,
and of Sylvain in Bad Policy. Thus, even if we assume that each agent
did previously perform a wrongful benighting act, the four cases will
remain counterexamples to the claim that agents are only responsible
for their unwitting wrong acts if those acts can be traced to previous
benighting acts which in their turn were witting as well as wrongful.
So far, I have argued only that we cannot accommodate our intuitions
about the nine cases by saying that what the agents are really
responsible for is their earlier wrongful benighting acts. But neither,
similarly, can we accommodate those intuitions by saying that what the
agents are really responsible for is their earlier wrongful failures to
cultivate habits or traits that subsequently would have prevented them
from acting wrongly. This suggestion, too, fails partly because most of
our cases are best interpreted as involving no such failures and partly
because even the remaining cases do not compel us to assume that the
failures were witting.
To see that the majority of our cases involve no previous wrongful
failures to cultivate good habits and traits, we must note, first, that agents
are at best obligated to prevent the development of habits and traits
that are markedly worse than normal - that they do not act wrongly by
not trying to become moral saints. This is significant because, in the
majority of our examples, the relevant wrongful acts are not best understood
as stemming from habits or traits that are markedly worse than
normal. There is no particular reason to suppose that Alessandra, Wren,
and Julian are any more irresponsible than the average person or that
Joliet and Father Poteet are unusually indifferent to the safety of others.
Because we need not suppose that any of these agents has been remiss
in not developing his character, we draw a blank when we look for
wrongfully forgone opportunities for self-improvement in which to locate
their responsibility for their later wrong acts. Should Alessandra
have been taking Gingko Biloba to improve her memory? Was Father
Poteet remiss in not sharpening his reflexes on video games? Should
Joliet have been on Paxil?
Here again, the remaining cases are different. As described, Scout
sounds unusually irresponsible, Ryland sounds unusually insensitive, Sylvain
sounds like he lacks a basic sense of fairness, and amerika sounds
like he has lost his moral compass. Hence, in Colicky Baby, Bad Joke, Bad
Policy, and Bad Weather, there is at least theoretical room for the claim
that what the agent is really responsible for is wrongfully having allowed
himself to develop the vice that his unwitting wrong act manifests. Yet
even if we waive the objection that each incipient vice was itself a barrier
to the agent's recognition of the need to take steps to prevent its further development - that, for example, the very self-involvement that now
makes Ryland so insensitive is also likely to have made her unaware of
the need for sensitivity training - this strategy for relocating what the
agents are really responsible for will remain far-fetched. The basic problem
is that the relation between the way a person lives and the character
he will end up having is transparent only in retrospect. Our characters
develop slowly and by accretion, and their development is influenced
not only by the decisions we make and the situations into which we
enter but also by our innate tendencies and by the innumerable unchosen
exigencies with which life presents us. Because we lack an unobstructed
view of either our potentialities or what the future holds, we
rarely if ever make decisions with the clear understanding that they will
cause us to end up with traits or habits that are markedly worse than
normal.10 Thus, even if we grant that Ryland, Scout, Sylvain, and amerika
have been remiss in not taking steps to prevent the development of
their bad traits, it will remain implausible to suppose that their wrongful
failures to take those steps have themselves been witting.
V
The gist of the discussion so far is that agents often seem responsible
for wrong acts that they have neither knowingly chosen to perform nor
knowingly and wrongfully chosen to risk performing. Thus, if we interpret
"X's wrong act was within his control" to imply that X either (a)
chose to perform the act despite his awareness that he should not do
so or (b) knowingly and wrongfully assumed the risk of performing such
an act unwittingly, then our examples will show that we often take agents
to be responsible for wrong acts that were not within their control.
These judgments are troubling because they appear to conflict with the
widely held principle that a lack of control excuses an agent from responsibility.
This is the principle that explains why we would not hold
Alessandra responsible for abandoning Sheba if she were kidnapped or
suffered a seizure and why we would not hold Scout responsible if she
fed the baby orange juice that her sister had laced with vodka without
telling her. As these examples suggest and many others confirm, some
version of this principle is itself central to our moral thought.
How should we react to the tension between our intuitions that the
agents in our nine examples are responsible for their wrong acts despite
their lack of control and the principle that agents are responsible only
for wrong acts over which they have exercised control?

</text>
