<text id="G27" category="" words="1998" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Manufacturing War' Minnesota Review 65-66, Spring 2006" Author="Clifford T. Manlove" PublicationDate="Spring 2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.theminnesotareview.org/journal/ns6566/manlove_clifford_t_ns6566_stf1.shtml">

The militaristic moral and political economy of Oceania in Orwell's 1984 is a product of totalitarianism. It also describes, some argue, the "post-9-11" era and the "Global War on Terror" (GWT). In calling for a global response to 9-11, George W. Bush has made an ultimatum, an international invitation to join a war that must target dozens of countries to be "won." This universal challenge to fight the "evil" seeking to destroy "civilization" is essentially an annunciation of "World War." Perhaps the name "WW III" has not stuck because this new kind of war looks nothing like its Cold War-era predictions. WW III was to be unwinnable and something akin to Armageddon.
The cultivation of a xenophobic war-time affect among the American population since 9-11 is also evidence of a true world war. Having a population with a "mentality appropriate to a state of war" emboldens the Bush administration to boast that finding WMDs in Iraq is irrelevant, despite world-wide skepticism. It emboldens Bush to repackage illegal domestic wiretaps as "terrorist surveillance" and to speak of this extra-legal NSA program with pride. Given the global scope of the battleground in the War on Terror, it was only natural for the Bush administration to do its best to make al Qaeda part of its case for war in Iraq, regardless of the evidence. Thus, rather than the "Second Gulf War," the current war in Iraq is but a front in the GWT. This both lowers expectations for success - limited success on a front need not prevent overall success - and legitimates the GWT as a whole. Linking the current war in Iraq to 9-11 also reinforces the definition of the GWT as a World War. It is precisely the vast, global nature of 9-11 and its roots that make the event perfect for conspiracy theory.
Among the many books that have been published on 9-11 in less than five years, only a few argue that 9-11 was more than a devastating terror attack and a declaration of war. While much that has been published on the subject of "9-11" deals with biography, with the history or roots of the largest terrorist attack ever on U.S. soil, or with how the attack was actually conducted, only a few books on 9-11 have sought to define the event as resulting from conspiracy, not merely a matter of terror, neglect, incompetence, or systemic imperfections. There are three main themes or types of conspiracy theory among those few books in the emerging 9-11 genre that seriously consider the idea of conspiracy. First, 9-11 is a pretext for the U.S. government to consolidate domestic power. Second, 9-11 is the result of a U.S. governmental and corporate conspiracy to control Central Asian oil. And, third, 9-11 involves a conspiracy by the U.S. and Saudi Arabia to control the Middle East. It should also be said that none of the three types of conspiracy theory sees fears of globalization or cultural hegemony as being a cause or goal of any 9-11 conspiracy: globalization and global struggle actually benefit both the West and radical Islamism. (It should be noted that none of these conspiracy theories buys into the notion of a Zionist conspiracy, which is perhaps a fourth type of conspiracy theory that some have offered in the wake of 9-11, though not in book-length form.)
Three books, published less than a year after 9-11, stand out among those theorizing conspiracy. In 9-11 (2001), a collection of interviews, Noam Chomsky places 9-11 within a broader conspiracy between government and multinational corporations that he has explored in many books, most notably in Manufacturing Consent.Forbidden Truth (2002), by investigative journalists Jean-Charles Brisard and Guillaume Dasquié, argues that disputes over rights to Central Asian petroleum and gas fueled 9-11. Nafeez Mosaddeq Ahmed's The War on Freedom (2002) is at once a reference work about the events surrounding 9-11, and an argument about the conspiracy behind the failure to prevent the actual attacks. A "political scientist and human rights activist," Ahmed argues that 9-11 is being used as a pretext for domestic repression. These three books underscore a political pattern: the left sees the war as about much more than meets the eye; whereas the right sees no conspiracy.
The three also represent major ways to define the scope of a conspiracy. Perhaps because he is a social scientist, Chomsky takes the long view, putting 9-11, which he compares to the War of 1812, into the broader context of 200 years of American history and "governmentality." Perhaps out of journalistic habit, Brisard and Dasquiè keep narrowly focused on the connections between 9-11, the Middle East, and Central Asia. Their bottom line is that U.S. oil consumption and craving are responsible for 9-11. In the manner of a think-tank scholar, Ahmed documents a lengthy and broad historical narrative stretching from 1986 into 2002. After documenting the events leading up to 9-11, and arguing that it should have been easily prevented, Ahmed argues that it has "benefited" the government, and the weapons and oil industries.
A number of 9-11 conspiracy theorists have made the connection between the events of 9-11 and the burning of the Reichstag by the Nazi Party as a pretext for eliminating German communists and cracking down on other domestic dissent. Chomsky and Ahmed emphasize this broader purpose behind the conspiracy, while Brisard and Dasquiè view 9-11 as either a defensive or a retributive strike by Afghanistan. Chomsky and Ahmed, however, disagree on the complicity of U.S. intelligence agencies in allowing or fomenting 9-11. Chomsky counts 9-11 as one of many U.S. intelligence failures; Ahmed presents an array of evidence showing that U.S. intelligence was aware of 9-11 preparations. The "9-11 as Pretext" narrative has two levels: first, broader conspiratorial aims of U.S. hegemony, and second the complex machinery necessary to allow the actual events of 11 September 2001 to occur. Chomsky tends to focus on the first level; Ahmed the second.
In a series of interviews given in the first few weeks following 9-11, Chomsky puts it into the broader matrix of corporate-governmental conspiracy that he has spent much of his scholarly career carefully documenting and recounting. He remarks on the failure of the U.S. intelligence community (used primarily to support business and military interests rather than "Homeland security"), and argues that 9-11 should be investigated and pursued as a crime rather than as a war. Unlike Chomsky, who claims that 9-11 resulted from incompetence, Ahmed argues, "The tragic catastrophe of 11th September, which apparently was permitted to occur by the Bush administration ... allowed the U.S. to expand, consolidate and empower its hegemony, both at home and abroad, to an unprecedented level" (18). Several U.S. intelligence services - the CIA chief among them - played pivotal roles in allowing 9-11 and using it as a pretext for war (Ahmed 23-4, 34-5).
Chomsky's broader historical scope leads him to discuss the long-term implications of 9-11 as pretext: "Such terrorist atrocities are a gift to the harshest and most repressive elements on all sides, and are sure to be exploited - already have been in fact - to accelerate the agenda of militarization, regimentation, reversal of social democratic programs, transfer of wealth to narrow sectors, and undermining democracy in any meaningful form" (19). The goal of a conspiracy behind 9-11 is to purify America, solidify its boundaries, militarize its culture, and mobilize its population for a wartime economy. Although the absolute idea of a visual or accentual racial purity in America has dimmed - the idea of an "American Race," as Theodore Roosevelt might have spoken of at the beginning of the twentieth century - the Global War on Terror is meant as a purification of America's ideals of rugged individualism, the free market, and patriotism. This new American race might be more diverse in its appearance and speech, but it also makes the ideal of the "American" an absolute and necessary goal for global progress.
All three books point to the crucial issue of long-term U.S. involvement by the Reagan, Bush I, and Clinton administrations in seeking to stabilize and economically exploit Central Asia, and Afghanistan in particular, as a factor leading to 9-11. Each also tries to contextualize this within the history of the "Great Game" between Russia and Great Britain in the nineteenth century to dominate Central Asia. Unlike Chomsky, Ahmed and Brisard and Dasquiè view Afghanistan and Central Asia as the primary target of the conspiracy. Brisard and Dasquiè put it bluntly, "What we do know for sure is that from February 5 to August 2, 2001, the United States engaged in private and risky discussions with the Taliban concerning geostrategic oil interests, among other things... The suicide attacks of September 11 were possibly the outcome of this initiative" (xxxiv). While Brisard and Disquiè are strictly interested in a conspiracy surrounding the projected oil and gas reserves of Central Asia, Ahmed sees the U.S. goal of Central Asian hegemony as being more a means of maintaining exclusive world power. While Chomsky clearly understands the place of Afghanistan in 9-11, he sees the U.S. bombing of Khartoum, Sudan in 1998 as being much more instrumental in leading to 9-11 (52-3). Indeed, this bombing is one of the colossal intelligence failures that Chomsky argues is leading directly to humanitarian disasters bordering on genocide (45-6).
Each book also points to American collusion with Saudi Arabia as being instrumental in leading to the events of 9-11. Saudi complicity in 9-11 remains a widely held suspicion among many Americans. While Chomsky and Ahmed analyze the broader Saudi governmental and cultural influences on the 9-11 conspiracy, Brisard and Dasquié's thesis itself hinges on a direct Saudi role in 9-11, and long-term U.S. complicity with the Saudi royal family. At the heart of this narrative is the long relationship between various U.S. administrations and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to develop and exploit the oil resources of the Arabian peninsula, culminating in efforts by the Clinton and Bush administrations to arrange for the building of an oil pipeline in Afghanistan, with the cooperation of the Taliban regime. The second Bush administration plays a particularly large part in the "Saudi Connection" version of 9-11, according to Brisard and Dasquié and Ahmed, because of its numerous connections to several multinational oil companies. Chomsky, on the other hand, tends to downplay the role of either the Bush administration or the Saudi royal family in 9-11. And unlike Ahmed - who puts bin Laden into a broader historical context - Brisard and Dasquié focus their entire argument on links between the Saudi royal family and bin Laden, arguing that the two continue to share deep ideological and economic ties.
The importance of Osama bin Laden to the 9-11 conspiracy varies considerably among the three books. Ahmed and Chomsky tend to minimize his importance outside that of symbolism, while Brisard and Dasquié judge his individual role to be pivotal (evidenced by the subtitle of their book). In this sense, Osama bin Laden and al-Qaeda are the perfect "official" enemy (Chomsky classifies U.S. enemies as either "official" or not); if they could be associated with any state other than Saudi Arabia, it would be the regime that controlled most of Afghanistan. Osama bin Laden and al-Qaeda are used to put a face on an enemy that is not only faceless, but appears to be stateless, transnational, and certainly "monstrous" (Puar and Rai 118-20). This simultaneously allows a diffusion of the possible targets for political and military action - leading to world war - and permits an indefinite prolongation of hostilities against an implacable enemy (Rumsfeld's "long war"). As a result, ideology - politics and religion - also plays a large role in the "Saudi Connection" narrative, though not in a symmetrical manner, according to Chomsky and Ahmed. Unlike Brisard and Dasquié, who describe bin Laden as being motivated by financial power rather than spiritual or political power (103-11), Chomsky and Ahmed describe bin Laden's motivation as largely religious (Chomsky 31-2, 59; Ahmed 19-54, 78). Each of the books uses the several failed attempts to capture bin Laden as evidence of conspiracy.
How is a war named?

</text>
