<text id="G30" category="" words="1996" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The History of Ideas: Precept and Practice, 1950-2000 and Beyond' ournal of the History of Ideas, Jan2006, Vol. 67 Issue 1, p1-32" Author="Anthony Grafton" PublicationDate="January 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=106&sid=1d471cc2-3f52-4e2d-af66-f5bb99471b89%40sessionmgr104&bquery=(JN+%22Journal+of+the+History+of+Ideas%22+AND+DT+20060101)&bdata=JmRiPWE5aCZ0eXBlPTEmc2l0ZT1laG9zdC1saXZl">

These courses attracted faculty from a variety of disciplines. They were often, perhaps usually, team taught. And they were enriched by formal presentations in which a member of the course staff presented particular texts or problems to his or her colleagues. Western Civilization - or as Columbia called it, Contemporary Civilization - became something like a way of life. It also served, at Columbia, as the foundation for the Humanities Colloquium - an intensive, two-year study of great books, in which a staff that included Jacques Barzun and Lionel Trilling debated, before their students, the virtues of historical and non-historical approaches to texts. Crane Brinton's legendary course on Men and Ideas at Harvard pushed large numbers of students in another direction, towards the question of how ideas generated action. The existence of these courses meant that students from many, though hardly all, of the better colleges and universities were prepared, even conditioned, to see intellectual history as a vital field - one which they found it easy to enter, and whose practices came to them with a feeling of naturalness. Historians whose own careers took radically different directions in the 1950s and 1960s have paid eloquent tribute, in recent years, to the interdisciplinary surveys of western civilization that set them on the path to scholarship.
The history of ideas, moreover, was an established field of scholarly inquiry long before Lovejoy published his first articles on evolution in Popular Science Monthly, or the first new historians began setting up their courses in the field. Donald Kelley has traced, in a powerful and erudite book, the ancestry of the history of ideas - a chain of scholars, philosophers, scientists, and social reformers that leads all the way back from the new research universities of the nineteenth century to classical antiquity. Greek philosophers drew up doxographical histories of philosophy, painted polemical portraits of their predecessors and occasionally pursued systematic inquiries into the growth of astronomy or anatomy. Medieval scholars drew up genealogies and - in the remarkable case of Roger Bacon - mounted formal inquiries into the reasons why certain older thinkers had produced solid and useful results. Renaissance humanists compiled what they called "literary histories" - rich, complex, and sometimes perversely polemical inquiries into the history of disciplines from history itself to astronomy and mathematics. Francis Bacon found this form of humanistic scholarship so stimulating that he urged his readers to compile, working century by century, histories of the different arts and disciplines and the conditions that had made them flourish or decline. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, finally, histories of philosophy, science, literature, and social thought became a central occupation of thinkers as influential as Victor Cousin and Hippolyte Taine, and the writing of proper histories often came to be seen as a prerequisite for the larger reform of intellectual life.
These enterprises varied radically in character and method. Even in nineteenth-century Germany, perhaps the west's locus classicus for the development of historical approaches to all forms of knowledge, the formal history of philosophy took root only gradually, as university teaching began to adopt the seminar method of close collective reading of older texts, and flourished in a wild variety of forms, many of them devoid of the Hegelian inspiration once thought to have made philosophy historical. Much work in this field went on in lecture-rooms rather than studies, moreover, as philosophers offered formal courses on the history of their subject, which have only begun to be studied. The same is true for any number of other disciplines that became articulately self-conscious, in the nineteenth century, from philology to physics, and whose disciplinary histories in many cases have not yet attracted their historians. Nonetheless it is striking to see how widely the history of ideas was written and taught, long before anyone thought of including it in the discipline of history.
In the last sunny decades of nineteenth-century liberal culture, histories of ideas - as well as histories of philosophy - flourished widely, especially in the English-speaking world. John Draper and Andrew Dickson White used history to examine the millennial conflict between science and religion, in massive books that retain a certain relevance now. As the liberal consensus neared its strange death, the history of ideas became a central concern of British intellectuals like the Carlyles, Leslie Stephen, and J.B. Bury, whose books had no rivals on the Continent. In the years when modernity seemed to have created a civilization and technology that would carry all before it, the history of the ideas that underpinned the modern world came to seem as urgent as the history of battles and constitutions - perhaps more so, for a wide, non-scholarly readership. Momigliano, writing in the 1970s, recalled that as a student in the 1920s, he had regarded the history of ideas as a British specialty. He found it puzzling, accordingly, that when he reached Oxford in 1939, "It was enough to mention the word 'idea' to be given the address of the Warburg Institute." By the outbreak of World War II, intellectual historians like Herbert Butterfield were isolated, at least among the British professionals. A generation before the intellectual map had looked quite different. When reforming American advocates of a "new history" like Charles Beard began their campaign against the political narratives of an older, positivist historiography, after the First World War, they imported these excellent foreign products - as Beard did when he reprinted Bury's history of the idea of progress with a long, admiring introduction. 
The sense that the history of ideas formed part of a progressive approach to history and society - and the effort to use the method to work out not only, as Lovejoy did, the development of metaphysics and aesthetics, but also the paths by which ideas had shaped, and could reshape, the political and social order - did not dissipate with the reform currents of the early 1920s. Writers like Vernon Parrington and, later on, the brilliant outsider Richard Hofstader, used the history of ideas to understand where  energies came from - and to trace the fault lines within the world of the American intellect. As late as the 1960s, courses on intellectual history at major American universities - for example, the famous survey courses offered by George Mosse at the University of Wisconsin - still served as primary rallying points for hundreds of students critical of the existing order in society and the state - even when, as in Mosse's case, the content of the course remained solidly in the realm of ideas, and the instructor resolutely intent on revealing to his students the flaws and contradictions that made their own programs useless. To that extent, the relation between intellectual history and social protest was not simple, or unidirectional, even in the heyday of social history.
Three more existing streams of thought and practice flowed into the history of ideas and helped to fertilize the soil its practitioners cultivated. One was decidedly foreign. From the middle of the nineteenth century onwards, German scholars had experimented with a range of new models for the study of cultures. Jacob Burckhardt and his many disciples and critics devised new ways to portray past cultures as wholes, offering new contexts for the study of past ideas and thinkers. Aby Warburg and his followers created equally novel ways to trace traditions over the centuries of western history, following the disappearances and reappearances of symbols and explicating their transformations, and their larger meanings, in a richly interdisciplinary way. In the same period, a range of medievalists in and outside Germany turned Burckhardt's weapons against him, creating histories of the medieval centuries that, like Burckhardt's history of the Renaissance, emphasized the realm of culture and ideas even as they argued that medieval men and women had been far more realistic, less shackled to authority, than Burckhardt realized.
These debates moved to North America and settled comfortably there even before the nineteenth century ended. Pioneering medievalists like Charles Homer Haskins and Lynn Thorndike attacked the same questions, wielding vast reserves of new material drawn from European libraries and archives. The Journal of the History of Ideas provided, among other things, a platform for the debate and pursuit of these already existing issues - one that soon came to be so crowded as to resemble The Raft of the Medusa rather than a peaceful School of Athens. Of all American enterprises in the history of ideas, Thorndike'sHistory of Magic and Experimental Science proved perhaps the largest in scale. It drew its intellectual inspiration directly from the European debate about the Middle Ages and the Renaissance.
The stream of new methods and materials from abroad continued to grow, moreover, during the early decades of Lovejoy's career, as European scholarship moved in new directions and then, more rapidly, as European scholars began to make their forced translatio studii to the United States. Friedrich Meinecke offered new models for understanding the history of major intellectual formations like historicism. Werner Jaeger showed how to write the biography of a great thinker, Aristotle, who had left no letters and the development of whose mind could be established only by internal analysis of his texts. In the 1950s and 1960s, younger members of these foreign schools, uprooted from their German homes by Hitler, transformed the humanities in America as they themselves were transplanted into them - or at least came to write in English. Erwin Panofsky made a version of Warburg's method elegantly accessible to generations of young scholars, by no means all of them in art history. His former colleagues at the Warburg Institute, now reestablished in London, developed their method in a whole series of different ways, not without engaging in polemics. Meanwhile Felix Gilbert and other German émigrés offered a sharper, more archival form of Meinecke's method to students of both European and American ideas, and Hans Baron brilliantly deployed the methods of the Leipzig school of cultural history to transform the study of Renaissance humanism. Leo Spitzer and Erich Auerbach imparted different versions of German philology and hermeneutics to American graduate students. Jaeger's severely analytical method of intellectual biography, with its fierce concentration on finding the inconsistencies and fissures in apparently finished, coherent works, gave Gilbert, Baron, Hexter, and many others a new way to study Machiavelli, whose work became a seedbed for new methods. These scholars saw the redating and decomposition of classic and apparently coherent texts like The Prince and The Discourses as a way to transform what seemed to be fissures and contradictions - like the intense, brain-exploding contrast between the pragmatic absolutism and immoralism of the Prince and the republicanism of theDiscourses - into the evidence for intellectual development, usually in response to particular outside circumstances, biographical and political. Hexter famously applied the same method to Thomas More, and gradually the intellectual biography - an approach that fused a concentration on context and development with close attention to the texts that had formed the center of past intellectuals' lives - established itself as a standard approach, distinct from the straight biography of an intellectual and rooted in the study of texts. The stream of models and stimuli from abroad never dried up. Even Great Britain - which no longer saw itself, in the 1950s, as friendly to the history of ideas - harbored the brilliant Isaiah Berlin, who had more pupils and disciples in the United States than at home, as well as younger scholars like John Burrow, whose 1966 Evolution and Society: A Study in Victorian Social Theory became a model for American historians of social thought.
In the same years, the massive programs of translation and paperback publication supported by the Bollingen Foundation and the new publishers of upscale paperbacks, above all Harper, made the work of these scholars, and some of their teachers, accessible to a broad American public. Momigliano recalled that he realized, soon after arriving at University College London, that the most distinguished and penetrating intellectual historians within the institution were the historians of science, scholars like Michael Polanyi whose insights did not derive from formal training as historians and who did not teach in the department of history. Disciplinary boundaries were lower in the United States than in Great Britain - low enough that students, as well as faculty members, could often see over them.

</text>
