<text id="G56" category="" words="2047" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Nursing Radicalism: Some Lessons from a Post-War Girls' Series' American Literary History, Volume 19, Number 2, Summer 2007" Author="Julia Mickenberg" PublicationDate="Summer 2007" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.swetswise.com/FullTextProxy/swproxy?url=http%3A%2F%2Falh.oxfordjournals.org%2Fcgi%2Freprint%2F19%2F2%2F491.pdf&ts=1292120131886&cs=2837280453&userName=5613949.ipdirect&emCondId=5613922&articleID=33365325&yevoID=2060089&titleID=9278&referer=1&re">

Series books, according to their critics, are not "literature"; they are "products in book form" (Lanes 113). The commercial nature of series, "books as merchandise," is their defining characteristic, and it plays into every aspect of their "communications circuit" (Darnton 30 - 31), as well as the texts themselves.8 Kathy Martin cannot be understood apart from the realm of commerce. Yet it is significant that serial novels like these are "the most read and the most frequently published," as Antonio Gramsci once pointed out (qtd in Denning 67). The value-laden notions traditionally associated with series books, terms such as "hack" writer or "mass market," and adjectives like "commercial," or even "juvenile," cloud our understandings of how these books may represent a serious political, if not literary, undertaking. Adolescent girls, for their part, might have read these books to learn about nursing, or for the promise of romance or adventure, but they may have taken away ideas about race relations, economic injustice, environmental degradation, and imperialism.
Discussing the evolution of the dime novel, a precursor to the series book, Michael Denning suggests that "the tendency of the industry was to shift from selling an 'author,' who was a free laborer, to selling a 'character,' a trademark whose stories could be written by a host of anonymous hack writers whose celebrity could be protected in court." He thus speaks of the "subordination of the author" (20). Like most series, the Kathy Martin books were rapidly produced by anonymous writers, and the publisher retained the rights to the characters. The authors, however, were far from "subordinate."
Over the course of her career, Sterne had worked as a teacher, a textbook consultant, and as a children's book editor.9 Her first books were published in the 1930s, but she began writing full time in the 1950s. The seriousness of purpose evident in books like her narrative of the Amistad slave rebellion, The Long Black Schooner (1950), or her biography of the African-American educator and activist, Mary McLeod Bethune (1957), suggests that she aspired to literary distinction among juvenile authors. Even so, she moved relatively easily between the worlds of "hack" writer and respected author. Before taking on the Kathy Martin series in 1958, Sterne had done several Disney tie-ins, a 1953 version of the Bible for "family reading," and a 1956 adaptation of Louisa May Alcott's Little Women (1868 - 69), among other projects for Golden Press. Her daughter Barbara had collaborated with her on many of these things and had written several books of her own.
Correspondence makes it clear that Sterne cared most about her "civil rights" writing, and the Kathy books certainly subsidized these more "serious" literary efforts. However, putting the series in this light should not diminish its significance as a political gesture. As a former editor, Sterne must have understood Lynch's concerns about propriety, but may have consciously resisted the formulaic, commercial imperative at the core of Lynch's chastising. She wrote these books for the money, but never just for the money.
Children's book publishers have traditionally been divided between trade and mass-market presses, the former oriented toward school and public library sales, and the latter "to sales through discount, department, and bookstores" (Haugland 50). This split was especially pronounced prior to the paperback revolution in the 1960s and 1970s that made trade children's books widely affordable. Citing a study in the mid-1970s that surveyed a "library-oriented" and a "mass-market-oriented publisher and their clients," Ann Haugland notes that "the two groups had very different conceptions of what a children's book ought to be" (50). The former firmly believed that children's literature should be "innovative, unusual, reflective of an author's unique aesthetic vision and definitely not 'formulaic'" (51). Editors at the mass-market publisher, in contrast, emphasized "the importance of standard categories and the subjects and approaches that previous sales had shown to be popular with children and those who bought books for them" (51). Instead of starting with an author's manuscript and helping to shape it into a book, a "merchandise book" editor "often starts with a particular and fairly accurately calculated market firmly in mind, then tailors his books to reach it" (Lanes 115).
As the top-selling fiction series of a press that is virtually synonymous with "mass market," the Kathy books most certainly were "commercial." They were formulaic; they were quickly written, based on outlines that needed approval from the publisher; they were printed on cheap newsprint stock; and they sold for a dollar, with advertisements for other Golden series on the back of them. Their production and marketing probably drew upon the strategies that Golden Books had employed for its more established lines, as well as those used by publishers for the Stratemeyer syndicate, which perfected techniques for efficiently creating and widely marketing what became known as "fifty-cent juveniles," including the Nancy Drew books. Key to series' sales was the incentive to own a complete collection: In theory, once readers were hooked, any book in a series could sell - hence production rates had to be brisk to keep up with the demand for new books. We do not have exact sales figures for the Kathy books, but for hardcover books priced at a dollar to make a profit, they had to be sold in huge quantities. Moreover, because readers often shared series books among friends, the Kathy books may have circulated even more widely than sales would suggest.
Mass-market series like the Kathy Martin books were not reviewed in the usual outlets, they did not win awards, and they were kept out of most libraries. Indeed, they represent a debased genre among books already at the bottom of a literary hierarchy: juvenile and adolescent literature. Yet these books were commercially successful because their creators were highly attuned to audience desire. Moreover, the medium held certain attractions to prospective authors besides the promise of an income. Because editors were often the only direct mediators between authors and audiences of series books, authors found a level of relative freedom in the genre, despite the confines of that form. Lack of critical attention was accompanied by a lack of policing. Indeed, Sterne was under fairly close surveillance by the FBI during the years she wrote the Kathy Martin books, but the books are never mentioned in her file of over 300 pages.
Although (or perhaps, because) the Kathy Martin books were unavailable in most libraries and dismissed as trash by "cultured" adults, young people treasured them. Indeed, Kathleen Chamberlain suggests that young readers "may have been so devoted to series" because "the books formed a way for children to assert their own power and authority by reading those works of which they knew many adults disapproved" ("Wise" 206). As with romance readers of the 1970s and 1980s whom Janice Radway has studied, reading Kathy Martin and other series may likewise be seen as a "declaration of independence" on the part of adolescent girls who had little control over other aspects of their lives (Radway 11). Inscribing their names on the inside covers, girls marked their ownership of and devotion to the Kathy books; purchase one of the books today and you will likely find its previous owner's name. Proud child owners insured that series books would remain a profitable branch of juvenile publishing despite a lack of "institutional" market share, and loyal readers of the Kathy books, whose fan letters in careful cursive writing call the books "so interesting and encouraging" (Nancarrow) and show great devotion to both Kathy Martin as a character and to "Josephine James" as an author, provided an additional kind of compensation. Like the women in Radway's study, readers of the Kathy Martin books "understood themselves to be reading particular and individual authors, whose special marks of style they could recount in detail, rather than identical, factory-produced commodities" (Radway 11). Kathy's creators spoke very directly and personally to adolescent girls of all classes, rather than writing for librarians who told girls what to read. In the end, one might say the challenge for Sterne and Lindsay was to write books that were both formulaic and reflective of a "unique aesthetic vision" - the payback being wide readership.
The authors' relationship to their pseudonym further challenges the "anonymous hack" norm for series authors. Describing themselves as a mother - daughter team with "common interest in a nursing career," Sterne and Lindsay are quoted on the jacket of the first book explaining that their close collaboration led them to adopt a single name - a name, incidentally, that the authors chose themselves. Although they initially asked Sterne and Lindsay to use a pseudonym, the editors ultimately offered them the option of using their own names. Sterne and Lindsay stuck with Josephine James, but still kept a level of authorial control that made the books their own, and their true identities were an open secret.
Sterne and Lindsay's "common interest in a nursing career" was something of a fiction, but it suggested that the series grew out of the authors' creative impulses rather than from a commercial imperative devised by the publisher (Lindsay had a year of pre-med training but never pursued it, while Sterne once wrote a book, Amarantha Gay, M.D. [1933], about a woman doctor). Arguably, it was hard not to have some "interest" in nursing, given its visibility at this time: In addition to stories in women's magazines pointing to nurses as "a major national need" (Hickey) and the nursing profession as the site of the "nation's number 1 womanpower shortage" (Nelson), Scholastic regularly ran features on careers in nursing around this time. Publishers quickly became attuned to this trend. During and after World War II, when "'career girls' really come into their own as series heroines" (Chamberlain, "'Every'" 107), nursing series ranked most prominently among the various career series that provided girls with a taste of life as nurses, stewardesses, reporters, advertising copy-writers, actresses, and television news anchors. During the war there was "Cherry Ames, nurse; Penny Marsh, nurse; Nancy Naylor, flying nurse; Nancy Dale, Army nurse; and Ann Barlett, Navy Nurse"; after the war, they were joined by Jean Craig, Nancy Kimball, and Kathy Martin (107).
Far from growing out of Sterne and Lindsay's "common interest in a nursing career," the Kathy Martin series began after an editor at Golden proposed the idea to Sterne in 1958 in the process of launching the press's new line of series fiction. The market had apparently proven that every publisher of series fiction needed at least one series devoted to nursing; Kathy Martin served this function when Golden Press added Fiction for Boys and Girls to its Little Golden Books, Giant Golden Books, Little Golden Records, and various other products.
While series publishers traditionally encouraged the use of pseudonyms to make individual authors expendable, in this case the editors acknowledged that the level of authorial control distinguished the Kathy series from its peers. As editor Pete Borden put it, "Almost any writer worth his salt could pick up a story idea and produce a Brains Benton story in two weeks." In contrast, "Kathy stories are hand-grown. Hand-growing accounts for their success." When another writer was added to the team to speed production, the person chosen was a relative of Sterne and Lindsay with no experience writing children's books, again pointing to the authors' control over the creative process.
Examining the Kathy books' production also complicates the typical assumption that mass-market editors are geared, above all else, toward making a profit. Trade editors such as Margaret McElderry and Ursula Nordstrom have been characterized as part of a "strong, often subversive matriarchal" tradition within a patriarchal business society (Hearne 755). However, the same adjectives are rarely applied to mass market editors, whose skill at producing books that sell well is usually the only one highlighted. However, if Josephine James deserves a second look, so do her handlers. Despite the conflict over content evident in Lynch's complaints about a storyline that had seemed too "grim," for the editors as well as the authors more than commerce was at stake. Indeed, there are several indications that the editors shared, or at least supported, the authors' political convictions. For instance, when editors agreed to let Hartman -  who was in political trouble - join the Josephine James team, Sterne and Lindsay were told he did not have to sign his name to the contracts.

</text>
