<text id="G57" category="" words="2019" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="&quot;Monkeying with the Bible&quot;: Edgar J. Goodspeed's &quot;American Translation&quot;' Religion and American Culture: A Journal of Interpretation, Vol. 16, No. 1 (Winter, 2006), pp. 55-93" Author="Edgar J. Goodspeed, R. Bryan Bademan" PublicationDate="Winter 2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="http://www.jstor.org/stable/i388439">

Criticisms that pointed to Goodspeed's theological agenda were relatively scarce, suggesting that the majority of his opponents did not feel much antipathy toward the University of Chicago or understand that institution's contest with fundamentalist
Protestantism or, far more likely, that his opponents were not primarily fundamentalists. Rather, it seems, they were composed of moderate members of the broad Protestant mainstream, individuals with strong loyalties to traditional religious practices and texts. In fact, it appears that Goodspeed's ability to conciliate the conservative viewpoint with arguments about "original languages" saved him the wrath of many a suspicious conservative. After all, fundamentalists and other conservative evangelicals were the Protestants with the most interest in remaining faithful to the original biblical languages and conveying that biblical message to new generations. While a handful of fundamentalists worried that Goodspeed was using the Bible as a Trojan horse for theological modernism, others championed this alleged religious subversiveness of Goodspeed's work. The religious skeptic and former Presbyterian minister Mangasar Magurditch Mangasarian of the Cordon Club, a "truth-seeking," "rationalist" association, praised Goodspeed for treating the "Holy Bible" as he would any other book. For him, Goodspeed's work "fully succeeded in destroying [the Bible] as the 'Word of God.'" Mangasarian fundamentally agreed with much of Machen's analysis.
But rather than denouncing Goodspeed for his mishandling of the Word of God, Mangasarian celebrated him as a latter-day Thomas Jefferson, the president who famously excised supernatural occurrences from the gospel accounts. He suggested that the reaction to the American Translation occurred because Goodspeed "had in a number of instances destroyed ... certain cherished dogmas founded on texts which have now disappeared .... If every new translation is going to trim the Christian creed, what certainty is there left for believers?" Only enough, he proposed, for them to become truth-seeking members of the Cordon Club.
A later review by Mencken, in 1926, further explicated the corrosiveness of Goodspeed's work for popular religious devotion. Having rewritten the Declaration of Independence in American slang
and formally praised American English for its vigor and originality, Mencken's tongue-in-cheek denunciation of Goodspeed's attempt to Americanize the Bible was, of course, highly ironic. In his editorial "Holy Writ," he rebuked Goodspeed and his translator peers, warning them that they would suffer hell for their pious efforts. Mencken criticized his rendering of the Lord's Prayer and his excision of part of John 8 (which contained the story of Jesus' encounter with the woman caught in adultery, omitted because of its absence in the earliest manuscripts) in light of the loss of poetic phraseology. To Mencken's lights, modern language translators had no "religious feeling." By seeking to articulate religious meaning rationally, they were left, in the end, with nothing: "Religion is most potent to sway the mind, indeed, when the evidences of its objective truth are most vague and unconvincing - when it is apprehended, not as fact at all, but as sheer poetry, the very negation of fact." Christianity, according to Mencken, owed all its modern successes to the poetic quality of its sacred canon. Since poetry does not convince but, rather, gains its appeal by depriving people of the wish to be convinced, it alone could support religion in the modern era. Inasmuch as modern-language	translators tried to objectivize and de-poeticize the Scriptures, they were undermining Christianity in ways comparable to fundamentalists. If Mencken disliked Goodspeed's translation (and it's unclear how far we should take his review), the aversion likely stemmed more from his opposition to the liberal Protestant establishment's increasing cultural authority than
Goodspeed's bad literary style. Yet, his well-known antipathy for fundamentalism - expressed here as well-kept	him equally at odds with conservatives. In his characteristic form, therefore, Mencken
composed a critique that would offend as many readers as possible. 
The initial hostility and lingering uneasiness surrounding Goodspeed's New Testament suggest that few people in the 1920s shared the full range of his cultural and intellectual assumptions. Scholars who shared his theory of language did not always agree that modern English was good for America. Conservatives who admired his attempt to get back to the original Greek often worried that his theological views were working their way into the text. Clergy who might otherwise have favored the translation for readability found themselves defending the traditional biblical associations of the KJV in the interests of the laity. And, yet, nearly all parties involved in the debate shared a broad commitment to the growth and development of American biblical civilization.
Goodspeed intended his translation to advance biblical civilization by providing a modern religious vernacular closely correlated both with the original biblical languages and contemporary English usage. He rooted this conviction in his understanding of the particular linguistic situation in which the Greek texts had been composed; the New Testament texts were written in the Greek of the commoner, not the intellectual. This approach, Goodspeed believed, would be refreshingly novel for contemporary readers who might assume that the Bible was an old-fashioned book having little to do with the details of everyday life. He thus argued for the relevance of the Bible and
employed a characteristically evangelical tactic in advancing his theologically modernist assumptions. His critics, however, emphasized the positive aspects of the distinction between religious language and the language of everyday life. The KJV's English, they maintained, elevated religious language - and	thus religion itself - above	the crass, market-driven commercialism of the 1920s. The debate thus centered on the proper location and character of religiously authoritative texts in a stable democracy. Goodspeed saw the biblical texts taking modern form for the sake of uplift and progress, while his critics believed that such texts needed to be partitioned off or separated from ordinary life for the sake of a vital continuity in religious culture.
And, in fact, Goodspeed saw the debate in these terms. In a speech titled "Why Translate the Bible?" given to eager, mostly Protestant audiences across the country, the Chicago professor argued that "the great danger in democracy is vulgarity; in art, in literature, in drama, in speech, in social customs, even in religion." Goodspeed almost defensively insisted that he was no cultural leveler, no friend of "Bolshevism." What protected a democracy was cultural achievement, or "Humanism," "the sense of taste, restraint, good will, elevation, poise, fairness, understanding, socialibility [sic].""In his view, the Bible and religious language, in order to have any beneficial cultural
influence, must become part of the best of the cultural vernacular as it is. And such a state of affairs could only be achieved when the best of science, in this case contemporary biblical criticism, was applied to the Bible. Only in this way could the Bible's message be truly decipherable and thus applicable to human circumstances.
Conservatives, too, had culture's preservation in mind. But they believed that American culture needed religion and religious language to perform its work from without. The magnificence and other-worldliness of the KJV, in their view, stabilized a culture that might suffer from internal collapse. The 1920s, after all, brought the "Red Scare," a severely restricted policy on immigration, the era of the prohibition amendment, and violent race riots in the American heartland. Critics who attacked Goodspeed's project for its affinities with slang, the vaudeville stage, commercialism, jazz, populist religion, and the prize ring were articulating deep cultural insecurities. Religion, for them, was a force that acted upon culture, not a current within it.
Again, given Goodspeed's firm reputation as a theological modernist and the "conservative" quality of the reaction, one might be tempted to view this debate as just another episode in the contest between fundamentalist and modernist forms of American Protestantism. But, in fact, the debate over the American Translation obscures the clear line that scholars have often drawn between these parties.
Conservatives on the question of religious language could be found on both sides of the fundamentalist-modernist divide, as could progressives. For instance, Henry Sloan Coffin, a leading modernist minister, wrote Goodspeed expressing general approbation for the theological agenda that inspired the work but then concluded with this reservation: "I am still old fashioned enough not to want to see new translations used in the pulpit, as I think the old so magnificent and so rich both in language and association." Yet, many theologically conservative Protestants appreciated Goodspeed's attempt to capture the original Greek in the most accurate way possible, despite the fact that a few of them worried that his ideological commitments were affecting his translation. Such boundary blurring baffled religious editors from the outset of the controversy. The liberal-leaning Congregationalist, for example, had a difficult time coming to terms with the stance
of the Chicago Tribune in its "Monkeying" editorial: "The dear old Tribune strikes back at the doctor [Goodspeed] with an editorial that almost makes us believe that the rightful place of the Tribune is in the camp of the Fundamentalists. This hardly agrees, however, with the attacks the paper has been making on W.J.B."The author was, of course, referring to William Jennings Bryan, one-time presidential hopeful, a vocal fundamentalist, and, later, a prosecuting attorney in the Scopes "Monkey" Trial. Tellingly, very few fundamentalists or modernists spoke as such in their commentary on the translation's merits or demerits, even when it was common knowledge that it was a product of the modernist-affiliated University of Chicago Press.
If the silence of the fundamentalists tells us something of the religious climate of the time, the very vocal presence of a cohort of intellectuals and journalists, men and women who had less invested in
the question of religious authority than in expressing the Bible's special influence on Western and American civilization, is even more telling. Even though these pundits were highly dismissive of fundamentalist views of culture and the Bible, they did not hold any special place in their outlook for theological modernists, whose views of culture they deemed equally bankrupt. Such writers, many of them nominally Protestant, held that the otherworldly majesty of the King James Version was a cultural inheritance warranting preservation. They, therefore, advanced a notion of the KJV's cultural inspiration, stressing its privileged genealogy and formative role in shaping Western institutions. That these thinkers were among Goodspeed's most vocal and influential critics suggests that scholars need to move beyond the strictly theological in comprehending the early-twentieth-century Protestant mainstream. Again, the debate that Goodspeed sparked when he released the American Translation demonstrates that Americans were not simply divided on how to translate the Bible but that they also held varied and often contradictory understandings of the nature and cultural function of religion.
Goodspeed's New Testament went through a number of editions and press runs by 1927, when his colleague, J. M. Powis Smith, released the complementary Old Testament version of the American Translation. A few years later, both testaments were released together in The Bible: An American Translation (1931).92 By the middle of the century, Goodspeed's work had sold more than a million copies in its various incarnations, making it the University of Chicago Press's all-time bestseller.93 Yet, despite this impressive sales record, most remained convinced that the translation was unfit for steady public consumption, quite contrary to Goodspeed's wishes. In 1941, when the University of Chicago Press pursued relations with the Gideons International in hopes that they might disburse the Goodspeed New Testament, the Gideons refused the offer due to what they termed the "old-fashioned" nature of their operation. The organization sided with Goodspeed's conservative critics, arguing that "the Bible is a different book from all editions; we do not believe in modernizing it to the extent that it will look just like another book."
Around mid-century, however, the tide turned. When Goodspeed set out to write his memoir As I Rememberin 1953, "the international verdict had gone so sweepingly in my favor," he said, that he
felt obligated to apologize for revisiting the controversy. The challenge to the predominance of KJV that occupied so much of Goodspeed's life was finally taking root. Since then modern-language translations and translations appealing to special interest groups have continued to proliferate, especially among evangelicals, suggesting a complex genealogy for Goodspeed's unique configuration of cultural and theological commitments-indeed,	one that calls into question the alleged conservatism of contemporary Protestant evangelicalism.

</text>
