<text id="G61" category="" words="1992" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="F. Scott Fitzgerald, Modernist Studies, and the Fin-de-Siècle Crisis in Masculinity' American Literature, Volume 78, Number 2, June 2006" Author="Greg Forter" PublicationDate="June 2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://americanliterature.dukejournals.org/cgi/reprint/78/2/293">

This essay brings together two fields in American studies that have rarely been placed in dialogue but have urgent things to teach each other. The first of these is the new men's history. By this I mean that strand of recent historiography devoted to revealing the historically variable character of male identity in the United States - to showing that despite the persistence of male domination and sexism over time, what counts as manly at a given moment is contingent and subject to historical revision. The most important practitioners in this field share a central intuition. Each has pointed to the years 1890 through 1920 as the decisive moment in the emergence of modern gender, when a shift from competitive to monopoly capitalism reshaped the prevailing sex-gender system and gave birth to something like our current distinction between masculinity and femininity.1
The second field, American modernism, is concerned with the same period. Since the mid-1980s, it too has seen a surge of interest in the category of manhood. Scholars have attended in particular to the variously conflicted constructions of masculinity among male modernists in an effort to render more nuanced our understanding of male modernists' gender politics. Perhaps the most striking example of this new emphasis is the work on Hemingway. Where scholars in the past often left unquestioned (or even celebrated) the popular myth of Hemingway's manly prowess, a host of books and articles now shows that the author's efforts to conform to that myth masked a deep ambivalence toward it.2 Articles on other modernist figures, including Ezra Pound, T. S. Eliot, F. Scott Fitzgerald, and William Faulkner, explore similar forms of ambivalence toward normative male identity while showing how this ambivalence complicated these authors' portrayal of women as well.3 The quantity of such work alone suggests the growth of a vigorous new field of literary study adjacent to the one being mapped by historians of U.S. manhood.
Yet I am struck by how rarely the new work on male modernists engages the historians' arguments.4 Many of the revisionary studies of Hemingway and Fitzgerald are so closely focused on psychofamilial matters that they neglect the historical forces that might have shaped these authors' lives.5 Other studies focus on only one aspect of the historical transformations - such as World War I or the New Woman - in ways that have the unfortunate effect of reducing a complex historical process to one of its constitutive strands.6 Critics who venture synthetic accounts of canonical modernism's gender politics are more apt to advance broadly historical arguments. They suggest, for example, that the emergence of aesthetic impersonality in this period reflected authors' need to find an adequately virile mode of expression in response to widespread fears about the ''feminine'' character of modern culture.7 But even here, the historical causes of such anxiety - why it emerged when, where, and in whom it did - often remain insufficiently elaborated.
My central contention in what follows is that these limitations stem from a methodological lacuna. We have lacked an adequate language for linking the intimate, subjective experience of gender in the fin-de-siècle United States with the historical forces that produced objective possibilities for gendered identity. This lack, I argue, can best be filled by pursuing a specific methodological opening - namely, the development of a revitalized and historically sensitive psychobiography. The guiding assumption of such an inquiry is that the modern bourgeois family is the key institution mediating objective and subjective dimensions of gender; a method attentive to this institution is therefore crucial to generating demonstrable claims about the relation between historical forces and aesthetic innovation. If we are to do more, that is, than assert a causal link between modernist form and the social transformations that gave rise to modern manhood -  if we are to trace the mediations by which those transformations were experienced subjectively, and at the requisite psychic depth for them to shape aesthetic choices - we need to turn our attention to an author's childhood and infantile experiences.8 We need to understand those transformations as more than objective, external phenomena that influenced adult authors whose gender identity was fully formed. We must try as well to examine how these transformations were lived by an author's parents, as well as how this parental experience was (often unconsciously) communicated to the child.
Methodologically, then, my essay seeks to recover psychobiographical inquiry from the scorn with which contemporary scholars tend to regard it. It aims to counter the crude ahistoricism by which conventional psychobiographers have tended to find the same story (classically, an oedipal one) in all their chosen subjects. The story I tell does indeed have its oedipal turns, but I assume throughout that the Oedipus complex becomes the dominant way of forming gender only under specific historical conditions - conditions that, as John Demos has shown, were precisely those prevailing in the United States at the turn of the twentieth century.9 A psychobiography of the kind I propose will thus of necessity be one alert to the ways in which its own procedures are implicated in the story it tells. Because the theory and techniques of psychoanalysis were developed by analyzing men and women of the modern West, psychoanalysis may be a theory of modern, Western subjectivity rather than of subjectivity as such, and its mode of inquiry may be best suited to analyzing the phenomena of capitalist modernity.
But this is emphatically not to claim that psychoanalysis is just a discourse that produces a deep subjective realm that it then appears to discover - and which it helps unwittingly to discipline. Such a view has become fashionable in recent efforts to historicize psychoanalysis.10 Those subscribing to it tend to see each intelligible instance of an era's speech (art, advertising, social theory, advice manuals) as equally performative and identically coercive; they equate the description of new phenomena with their ideologically motivated ''invention,'' deriding all of an era's self-understandings as pretenses of objectivity, forms of illegitimate transcendence that assume an outside to the history one inhabits. For me, this way of thinking is politically crippling and phenomenologically falsifying. One need not be forced to choose between seeing historical actors as completely immersed in discursive currents for which they serve as unwitting conduits or seeing them as transcending their historical embeddedness to reflect upon their moment from a chimerical outside. One can choose, instead, to believe that people inhabit their historical moment in ways that, depending on their particular histories and capacities, enable them to conceptualize and reflect critically upon some phenomena while fully immersing them in others. On this understanding, psychoanalysis is perhaps best understood as both a product of its inventor's era (with some of its attendant blindnesses) and a uniquely trenchant theory for understanding the forms of subjectivity - especially of gendered subjectivity - of that very age.
My analysis focuses on Fitzgerald partly because the feminist scholarship concerning him is still in an embryonic stage, which makes tracing his biography in gendered terms of considerable interest.11 Fitzgerald's case is also, however, compelling in its own right. One way his story helps enrich gender historians' accounts is in its revelation of an unusually stark version of the ambivalence toward normative manhood mentioned earlier. This ambivalence, which historians of masculinity rarely record, resulted in part from the new gender order's denigration of imaginative writing as feminine - a denigration that made it hard for male writers to subscribe unreservedly to that order. It bears noting at the outset, however, that even those who were not imaginative writers may well have been more ambivalent than historians' accounts suggest. We are fortunate in the case of most writers to have a richer record on which to draw. I begin with three historians of manhood: E. Anthony Rotundo, Michael Kimmel, and Gail Bederman. Rotundo and Kimmel weave broadly compatible narratives about the emergence of modern conceptions of manliness in the United States, narratives similar enough to allow me to describe them together. I will then proceed to complicate those histories by examining the distinctiveness of Bederman's account, before suggesting that her exploration, too, has limits that my reading of Fitzgerald seeks to redress.
For both Rotundo and Kimmel, masculinity was in crisis during the years 1890 to 1920, due to a breakdown in gendered roles that had been largely naturalized in the middle years of the nineteenth century. Manhood, these writers argue, was characterized in that earlier period by a dynamic interplay of qualities that would separately have been seen as a gendered binary. On one hand, to be a man was to create oneself in the capitalist marketplace - to achieve economic autonomy, self-sufficiency, and ownership of productive property. The qualities that enabled such success were an aggressive assertiveness and competitive vigor thought of as innately male. Successful manhood was imagined, in other words, as the realization of an instinct for domination that was rooted in the male body, the expression of which could alone enable the economic and psychic autonomy so central to American conceptions of success.
On the other hand, this aggressive competitiveness was viewed with suspicion for its threat to social cohesion. Were it given full rein beyond the manly sphere of work, the dominative will would make social order impossible to maintain. This instinct, therefore, had to be countered by a range of softer virtues - moral compassion, self-restraint, emotional sensitivity. These virtues were thought to be natural to women in the same way that competitive aggression was thought of as natural to men; the virtues could, in fact, be transmitted to men only by women in the domestic sphere. The division of spheres was in this sense a mechanism for socializing men by giving them a place to develop their compassionate interiors - to cultivate feelings and dispositions that could not be safely indulged at work but were indispensable to men's roles as citizens, fathers, and husbands. ''From this point of view, the social fabric was torn every day in the world and mended every night at home,'' writes Rotundo. ''Men's sphere depleted virtue, women's sphere renewed it'' ( AM, 23).
Around the turn of the century, however, a range of developments disturbed the relative stability of this division. These developments had primarily to do with transformations in the economic sphere, where the promise of autonomous self-making was increasingly thwarted by a monopoly capitalism that reduced men to dependents in a large bureaucratic structure. ''The number of salaried, non-propertied workers (virtually all white-collar) multiplied eight times between 1870 and 1910,'' writes Rotundo. ''Twenty percent of the total male work force was white-collar by 1910'' ( AM, 248). This new kind of employment ''offered neither autonomy nor ownership of productive	property. '' 12	The	result	was	a	sense	of	dependence	and	disempowerment that many men described as emasculation. Kimmel quotes one observer, for example, who claimed that to '''put a man upon wages is to put him in the position of a dependent' and that the longer he holds that position, the more his capacities atrophy and 'the less of a man . . . he becomes''' (MA, 84). Similarly, Anthony Ludovici ''observed the 'steady degeneration of men' brought on by the 'spectacle of men working at tasks which every woman knows she could easily undertake.'''13
According to Kimmel and Rotundo, American men responded to this disempowerment in a range of related ways. There was, to begin with, a discursive shift, a move away from the term manhood, defined in opposition to boyhood, and toward the term masculinity, defined in opposition to femininity (MA, 119 - 20; MC, 16 - 18). A man now was not one who had successfully grown up so much as one who was persuasively not a woman - a shift that bespoke a heightened need to police the borders between male and female identities. (This need was intensified by first-wave feminists' claims to the sexual and political rights of men as well as by the emergence of gay subcultures whose ''inverts'' raised the visible specter of a femininity lurking in all men.)14 More significant than this discursive transformation was a wholesale revaluation of the gendered division of spheres so central to nineteenth-century life.

</text>
