<text id="G64" category="" words="1981" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Melville Essays the Romance: Comedy and Being in Frankenstein, "The Big Bear of Arkansas," and Moby-Dick' NINETEENTH-CENTURY LITERATURE 61 (3): 277-310 DEC 2006 " Author="John Bryant" PublicationDate="December 2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="http://lib-metalib.lancs.ac.uk/V/123BBM852CJ18FB5K9AQFPADSGLQ7AKNNK1AK25PB9R3HL1V5S-05541?func=quick-3&short-format=002&set_number=013277&set_entry=000051&format=999">

The first framing joke is Ishmael's jaunty insistency, based on the authority of one Charley Coffin, that the whale is not a mammal but a fish. Although the whale manifests all of the features of a mammal, including a warm heart, lungs, eyelids, ears, and above all "penem intrantem feminam mammis lactantem" (Moby-Dick, p. 136), these facts have nothing over Charley's incredulity: he knows a fish when he sees one. His assertion that Linnaean anatomy is "humbug" broadly hints that Yankee skepticism is only the latest form of American gullibility. Of course, the clinching mammalian fact that no Yankee could call humbug is concealed in Latin mumbo jumbo, which Melville snatched from his copy of The Penny Cyclopedia and which means that the fishy whale has a "penis that enters the female, who gives milk from teats." These details are hidden in plain sight, in foreign words that call attention to themselves as words. Moreover, as science and common sense seem simultaneously to deconstruct, the difference between one natural species and another is reduced to matters of sexual function. The whale is not so much mammal or fish; it is a sexual being.
Given the social dynamics of this wordy joke, Melville could be certain that, despite Ishmael's comic adoption of Charley's benighted skepticism, his educated reader would be laughing with Ishmael and at Charley. Ishmael has other fish to fry. In his second joke, Linnaeus is discarded for bibliography - that is, natural morphology cannot account for the whale, but book making can - and yet his bibliographical approach also falls apart. As with his recourse to Charley's facile authority, Ishmael willfully pursues appearance rather than reality. He will classify whales by their "externals" (their looks, size, and weight) rather than by their inner anatomical structure. And he will rank the different whales in terms of the bibliographer's system of identifying books by their size. He is inspired to do this by a pun: whales are big; they have volume; books come in volumes. Whales, then, are books. And books come in sizes based on the number of times a full sheet of paper is folded in order to create pages: one fold yields the largest book, the Folio; two folds, the Quarto; three, the Octavo; other folds, the Duodecimo.
Ishmael's bookish system is more enticing for the educated reader: the fish joke merely derides the working class; the book joke promises to elaborate a new culture, never mind how facetious. For what we know of Ishmael - he is moody, exuberant, but not yet the great essayer of whales that he will become in his later cetological chapters - this new joke seems counterintuitive: Ishmael is no "skimmer of pages," but instead is someone drawn to depths and connections, not superficial differentiation. And despite the good pun, the comic reduction of whale to book seems to diminish the mammalian link to humankind; its merely volumetric standard robs the whale of its massy substantiality. Moreover, we know the limits of punning. The initial wit is gratifying but quickly depleted by repeated extensions of the conceit. By the time Ishmael reaches "Duodecimo," he is himself wearied of the punning and tosses all remaining whales into a cetological "Miscellaneous" pile, calling them "altogether obsolete" (Moby-Dick, p. 145). We, too, are bewildered by the process, and readers invariably complain that "Cetology" is the point at which Moby-Dick becomes work not pleasure. But this strategy of exhaustion, this affliction of the Montypythonic running of an absurdity into the ground, seems to be the planned diversion of a con artist whose design is to take us out of ourselves and into a fake system that must fail and thus leave us floating, without any generic nomenclature, in the unclassifiable realm of Being. Where do these whales fit; what are these strange things, these others?
In romancing his whale, Melville makes the most familiar aspects of the unfamiliar beast far more strange than they need to be, and, as with Montaigne, who always begins in left field, Melville is essaying toward an unexpected leap to an "unaccustomed viewpoint." Eventually, this meretricious "otherness" foisted upon whales becomes the route by which we return to a recognition of their sameness to us. The unexpected ruse in Ishmael's bibliographical con game is that the whale is we.
Our identification with the whale is through our shared (in this instance male) sexuality. But the revelation comes only as the bibliographical nomenclature deconstructs. How the absurd systemization deconstructs is itself absurd. In a footnote (Moby-Dick, p. 141), Ishmael explains that he omits the Quarto as a class of whales because, although it is smaller than the Folio and bigger than the Octavo, it does not exhibit the same proportions as those two. (Quartos are squarish; the others rectangular.) Assuming that all whales are similarly shaped, Ishmael effectively makes the Quarto "obsolete." But what Ishmael knows (because subsequent cetological chapters tell us so) is that whales do have different shapes, and that the square-nosed Sperm whale differs radically from all other shovel-nosed whales. Moreover, the Sperm whale is rated as the largest of whales, the first among Folios, when, in fact, it is a middling-sized whale: once again a Quarto if ever a Quarto whale there be.
Ishmael's punning classification system is a willful deformation of natural facts that we know he knows. The satire on scientific systemization seems to be turning on Ishmael, deflating the brio of his daring snub of science, making him the butt of his own joke, the fool of his own con. He exits the chapter in exhaustion, with a grandiose excuse: his system is incomplete like the unfinished Cologne Cathedral; but this incompletion, he insists, is the hallmark of greatness, for such "erections" like all "grand ones, true ones, ever leave the copestone to posterity" (Moby-Dick, p. 145). In fact, Ishmael's argument for the validity of incompletion, while a fundamental in his notion of symbolism that will come crashing down in chapter 42, "The Whiteness of the Whale," is here only a diversion from a sexual joke already completed in his complete-enough bibliographical system. It is an experiment in the rearrangement of natural things for the purpose of transforming whales into human beings. Taken as a thing completed, Ishmael's bibliographical cetology employs an alpha and omega logic wherein the last creatures classified embody the first. In our end is our beginning. Tying these extremes together is a jokey sexuality that reinforces the creative activity found in both. Casting aside the Quarto classification, Ishmael purposefully and erroneously makes his Sperm whale into a Folio whale, and, in fact, the largest within that preeminent classification. (In fact, the Blue whale, called "obsolete," is the largest.) The first among the last (Duodecimo) classification is the diminutive Huzza Porpoise. In describing the Sperm whale, Ishmael focuses exclusively upon the etymology of its odd name: sperm. Ancients believed the rich oil (spermaceti) bailed out of the whale's head was, in fact, the male's "quickening humor" (Moby-Dick, p. 138), the seminal fluid of creation. In Ishmael's book system, the Sperm whale is removed from its proper Linnaean middle class to a new vaulted position at the top of the order of being because its name symbolizes the "humor" that initiates gestation or creation itself. At the end of Ishmael's oddly ordered cetology is the Sperm whale's "miniature," the Huzza Porpoise - not really a whale, and not the real name for the common porpoise, but a fanciful rendering of that "hilarious" animal suited to Melville's symbolizing, a sportive creature whose "godly gamesomeness" makes it the more accessible, genially comic version of the more sublimely creative Sperm whale (Moby-Dick, pp. 134 - 44). Although diminished in size, this jolly little phallus transforms a physical essence (sperm) into something metaphysical: a divinely ejaculative, enthused playfulness that is the tried-out essence of creativity itself. By illogically prioritizing the mythic Sperm whale above larger whales, and by linking it to a smaller comic double (an image of the writer), Ishmael pushes language beyond scientific analysis into symbolic argumentation. He implicitly redefines "volume" to mean not merely "space" or "book" but rather "the capacity to create." In Ishmael's cetological essayings, the whale from beginning to end is a symbol of creativity: the impregnation of the imagination and the sire of gamesome thought.
Ishmael uses tall-tale, con-game joking and diversions to transform scientific fact into symbol. In the process, he essays familiar forms into something strange, doubled, sexual, and creative, and yet despite the genial hoaxing (or perhaps because of it), he manages to achieve a sincere voice. His facetious incompletion is merely the consequence of a kind of linguistic jury-rigging that puts his essaying on a settled course, one that brings us to a circle of identity that embodies being itself: whale word sex self. The method is crucial to his romancing. By denying the whale its mammalian status, Ishmael makes it into an alien "fish," and yet this absurdity only calls attention to how human it really is, especially in sexual terms: it breeds and nurses like male and female homo sapiens. What ties us to this "other" consciousness is our sexuality, our mutual creative urge. Through a comic sexualizing of the whale, Ishmael establishes a voice that compresses fact into symbol, and all creation into the self.
Melville's essaying is most evident when we compare Ishmael's whimsically subversive leaps to his more devastating plunge in "Cetology's" tragic double, "The Whiteness of the Whale," in which Nature becomes "a dumb blankness, full of meaning" and "a colorless, all-color of atheism" (Moby-Dick, p. 195). Here, empirical fact becomes symbol, but the symbol crushes in upon itself, signaling the deconstructive nature of language. Ishmael's extension of creativity into nihilism recalls the failure of Victor Frankenstein's own creativity, which through his monster's ungovernable despair yields an ominous self-revelation: "I, too, can create desolation" (Frankenstein, p. 143). Like Victor, Ishmael seeks the causes of things, in particular the cause of fear in whiteness; he breaks through the mask of that symbol to go past solid fact into the speculative realm of causation. Unlike Ahab, however, who presupposes the existence of some "principal" behind the mask, Ishmael stumbles upon an appalling vacuity. In essaying a symbol, a process so playful and rejuvenative in "Cetology," he discovers a blinding chaos in "Whiteness" that Shelley's monster never articulates. And indeed, he essays over the verge. But this is only one turn in Ishmael's "random way," a negative turn that will initiate positive cetological counterturns ("The Fountain" and "The Blanket") even as it anticipates further fiery negations of whaling ("The Grand Armada" and "The Try-Works"). Just as Ishmael goes deeper than Victor or Ahab, he also rises higher, surviving his vertiginous romancing through a comic containment of the sublime. In the end, Ishmael follows both the Montaignean and Hawthornean models: he careers toward absurdity, but finally keeps to the bank. More like the silence at the end of Thorpe's "Big Bear" than the "talk" of Shelley's histrionic monster, Ishmael's shifting versions of self add up to a tense repose of creation and doubt. Melville's essaying of symbol is his deepest extension of his essaying of Gothic and tall-tale structure.
Ishmael is the culmination of Melville's earlier attempts (from Typee to White-Jacket) to project a first-person voice of genial desperation. What is curious is that once Melville achieved this voice, he set it aside. Nowhere in the subsequent fictions -  not even in the first-person tales - do we find a full return to this speaker. In Moby-Dick, Melville essays Ishmael; he tries him out, and, in doing so, moves on. This is not to suggest that Melville lost the Ishmaelean voice that he had so vigorously worked for, only that it was no longer a version of himself that he found useful. In this phase of romancing, he had discovered "a personality," "in the midst of the personified impersonal" of Being (Moby-Dick, p. 507); he had "landed in Africa."

</text>
