<text id="G65" category="" words="1989" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Buried Alive: Gothic Homelessness, Black Women's Sexuality, and (Living) Death in Ann Petry's The Street' African American Review, Volume 40, Number 3" Author="Evie Shockley" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://lib-metalib.lancs.ac.uk/V/123BBM852CJ18FB5K9AQFPADSGLQ7AKNNK1AK25PB9R3HL1V5S-49977?func=quick-3&short-format=002&set_number=012755&set_entry=000084&format=999">

Her enjoyment of the two beers that she orders is nearly overwhelmed by her compulsive calculations of how much the drinks are cutting into her tight budget. The scene unfolds as if purposefully to reiterate the previously established connections between class, sexuality, race, and gender, which are marked here again by the trope of live burial. Boots appears behind her - initially attracted by the mournful tone in her voice when she sings along with the juke-box, then by her beauty - and offers to pay for her drinks. She fights an internal battle before replying. Lutie is certain that if she makes it clear up front "that there wasn't any inducement he could offer that would make her sleep with him," he will "disappear" (149). But the thought of going back to do her laundry in "the three rooms with the silence and the walls pressing in" is more than she can bear (150). She allows him to pick up her check, thinking that "the walls had beaten her or she had beaten the walls. Whichever way she cared to look at it" (150). That is to say, first, that the literal walls of her apartment, oppressive and dull, have forced her into an encounter with a man that is sure to end in disappointment (when he "disappear[s]"). But we are also to understand this seemingly self-contradictory statement to suggest that Lutie, by giving him an opening to pursue her, has managed to escape halfway the figurative walls entombing her sexuality, to feed her desire just enough to keep it alive a while longer. This ambivalent success becomes more promising in her eyes, however, when Boots suggests that Lutie could make a good living singing and invites her to sing with his band the following night.
Lutie is aware that Boots is tempting her with this opportunity for a chance to seduce her and that she will have to work hard to get what she wants from him - a steady gig as his band's vocalist - without giving him what he wants from her. But her commitment to domestic values is unwavering; indeed, in keeping with the philosophy of environmental determinism that underwrites the novel, her commitment gets stronger the longer she lives on "the street." The less she can afford (economically) to conform her lodgings and her life with Bub to the ideals for "home" and "family," the less she can afford (ideologically) to relinquish the performance of asexual ("true") womanhood. She should not need a healthy bank account to maintain her sexual integrity, she believes, regardless of the racial presumptions working against her. But, in fact, Petry's narrative makes a very explicit connection between class (and racial) identity and sexuality. The novel repeatedly depicts attacks, physical and otherwise, on Lutie's determined asexuality, offenses and indignities that the narrator assures us Lutie would not have had to suffer with such frequency had she not been a poor, African American woman. Lindon Barrett's analysis of the novel deconstructs the legal and economic discourses that inscribe "the bodies of African American women" with "the sign 'whore' " (122). Barrett incisively explores the way that the legal status of "slave" and the economic status of "prostitute" cooperate on the space of the black female body so as to signify a woman who both chooses to make herself sexually available and has no right to choose not to (121-22). Petry represents this discursive situation, according to Barrett, by investing most of the novel's characters with "the notion that access to Lutie's genitalia is almost as uncomplicated a matter as the purchasing of groceries or a newspaper or any other number of routine transactions" (122).
Thus, Lutie suffers increasingly from gothic homelessness while she remains on "the street": whereas the heteronormative "home" is rhetorically impermeable to any threat to a "lady's virtue," Lutie's accommodations seem day by day to invite more and greater sexual threats and attacks. She is solicited at the doorstep by Mrs. Hedges, her downstairs neighbor, on behalf of "a nice white gentleman" (84). This massive, inscrutable, blank-eyed woman, who unnerves Lutie terribly, is used to taking advantage of the financial worries that plague the numerous separated, single mothers on the street, by recruiting them for the brothel she runs in her first-floor apartment. The building "super," Jones, violates Lutie figuratively: he befriends Bub to gain access to her bedroom when she is not at home and takes the opportunity to fetishize her clothes, making "great smudges of dirt and tight, small wrinkles" with his hungry hands on her white blouse (208-09). Later he attacks her physically, attempting to drag her down to the basement and rape her. Ironically, it is the powerful Mrs. Hedges who saves Lutie from this violation - her motivation being that Lutie has been claimed by the "nice white gentleman" whom Mrs. Hedges represents and is therefore off-limits to Jones. All of these episodes take place in or on the threshold of Lutie's dwelling, emphasizing the extent of her gothic homelessness: she has no "proper home," no domestic "safe haven" that is invulnerable to those who do not belong to her "family." Or rather, as it cannot rightly be said that either Jones or Mrs. Hedges does not belong in the building - they live there, too - Lutie's terror may just as accurately be deemed a response to becoming a part of a frightening "family," a "home"-less family very different from the kind she wants. Petry metaphorically constructs both the super and the brothel owner as gothic figures: Jones as a vampire or devil and Mrs. Hedges as an other-worldly "monstrosity" (241). In the case of the former, a subplot of the novel describes the disintegration of the threadbare relationship between Jones and Min, a woman who moves in with him to escape the burden of paying rent. A "root doctor" counsels the worried Min to hang a cross on the wall above their bed. Jones's instinctive and inexplicable fear of this cross prevents the generally abusive man from laying a hand on her - and marks him figuratively as a vampire (358-59). Mrs. Hedges, on the other hand, is described as "a creature that had strayed from some other planet" (237). Her large size, combined with the "mass of ... terrible scars" that have covered her body since she barely escaped a burning building, evoke	"sheer	 horror ...  - undisguised, uncontrollable" in those who see her (247). I want to highlight the connection between these two gothic figures. Both vampires and monsters fall into the category referred to in the gothic tradition as the "living dead." Vampires have given up their mortal lives in exchange for a parasitic immortality siphoned nightly from the veins of the living; monsters symbolize not only inhuman, but also "unnatural" life, in the tradition of Frankenstein's creature (whose body was cobbled together and reanimated through an ungodly use of scientific knowledge). Petry uses these figures of living death to dramatize metaphorically the process by which Lutie, as a result of her live burial in the same "tomb" with such characters, is gradually (or suddenly and violently, one might argue) transformed into a member of this ghastly gothic "family." The street itself is figured as actively vampiric: "Lutie thought. No one could live on a street like this and stay decent. It would get them sooner or later, for it sucked the humanity out of people - slowly, surely, inevitably" (229; italics added). Petry's gothic double here voices the fear that the novelist bravely explores in her fiction: the terrifying possibility, even probability, that Petry could far too easily be Lutie, that she is protected from suffering Lutie's fate by not much more than the family, husband, and saleable professional skills that provide or enable her to procure an address far (or far enough) from the hell of 116* Street.
With these lines, Petry inscribes explicitly in her novel the conclusion that she had come to after a few years of living and working in Harlem: that, " 'simply and easily[,] the environment can change the course of a person's life' " (Petry, "Talks" 71). Petry's conclusion conflicts fundamentally with the philosophy of self-determination in which her parents had raised her to believe. As I noted earlier, Petry was taught as a child to take Benjamin Franklin's recipe for success for her own. When we recognize Lutie as Petry's doppelganger, we are not taken aback - as some critics have been - to find that Lutie has also absorbed "Franklin's optimistic guidelines for achievement" into her understanding of self and world (Holladay 7). Lutie is frequently taken to task for this characteristic that she shares with Petry - for seeing Franklin as a feasible model for her upward mobility. Nellie McKay is typical of many scholars of the novel when she criticizes Lutie for having "so assimilated and accepted the [Puritan] values [of hard work, thrift, and morality] her grandmother touted that they became thought barriers that prevented her from realizing the true nature of her situation as a black woman in a white patriarchal society" (133).^^ Keith Clark's reading goes even further, asserting that Lutie's "obtuseness," "gullibility," and "naivete" are so incredible (as characteristics of an African American woman in 194O's Harlem) that she should be understood as an " 'anti-heroine' " and the novel as a satire (503). By contrast, I submit that Petry is far from ridiculing her doppelganger; rather, the author's gesture requires her readers to recognize that the existence of a woman like Lutie is entirely possible.
Petry herself, at Lutie's age, was living proof that a young woman could hold and live by the values that domestic ideology prescribes and that underwrite the American Dream, even while being well aware of the existence and power of oppressive forces like racism, classism, and sexism. Petry's family folklore included a profusion of references to the evils of racism and other such obstacles. Her maternal grandfather had been a fugitive slave, whose "nursery song" offered some grim advice: "Run, little baby, run / or patterrollers / goin' come, / run, little baby, run" (Petry, "Ann Petry" 255). Her aunt, Anna Louise James, had been the only woman in her class in the Brooklyn College of Pharmacy and was refused membership in the Connecticut Pharmaceutical Association specifically on the grounds of her sex ("Aim Petry" 261). But exceptionalism is a seductive doctrine, and Petry's family, even while sharing their experiences of oppression with her, did everything in their power to shelter her from the direct effects of racism and to encourage her to believe that her own discipline, thrift, and effort - essential qualities of the ideal domestic woman -  were the key factors in her ability to achieve her goals. To see Lutie's experience as not the same as Petry's, but sufficiently similar to produce in her a like mindset, we must read closely and, as much as possible, without the obfuscating lens of stereotypes of the ghetto. Though the first seven years of Lutie's life are barely hinted at, we learn, importantly, that her home life was more domestic in this period before her mother's death than afterwards. Only subsequently did her father begin bootlegging in preference to the ongoing, futile search for steady employment (80). But his defection was balanced by her grandmother's vocal disapproval, and the remainder of Lutie's childhood was spent in the domestic security that her Granny's constant, soothing presence provided (404). Upon Granny's recommendation, as a means of ensuring that Lutie remained protected from the sexual advances of dubious men, she was married at 17 years old, as soon as she was out of high school (76). Petry constructs Lutie's past with light but careful strokes that make her quite a plausible character. And perhaps more important for Petry than whether a woman like Lutie was possible in 1940's Harlem was the question of whether it was possible for such a woman, upon reaching young adulthood in that grim arena, to come to any other end than the violent, tragic fate that her heroine meets in The Street.

</text>
