<text id="G71" category="" words="2001" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="At the Galleries.&quot; Hudson Review, Fall2006, Vol. 59 Issue 3, p456-462" Author="Karen Wilkin" PublicationDate="Fall 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=106&sid=0fde2d21-fa1c-43ff-b24d-6b944bef2b7e%40sessionmgr112&bquery=(JN+%22Hudson+Review%22+AND+DT+20060901)&bdata=JmRiPWE5aCZ0eXBlPTEmc2l0ZT1laG9zdC1saXZl">

For some time, Nozkowski has concentrated on quirky images on intimately scaled, rectangular canvases, like specimen records from an exotic realm that exists only in terms of the language of painting. Nozkowski presents us with an utterly convincing universe constructed of shapes, drips, strokes, delicate lines, grids, networks, clusters, scrolls, and more. Many of the recent pictures rang changes on repetitive, all-over patterns or systems, like grids run amok or, in some instances, exotic fabrics, without, however, looking like anything but surprising arrangements of paint on canvas. In one delicious image, Nozkowski deployed groups of angular shapes, large and small, against a brilliant blue ground, with an overscaled, curvaceous yellow shape, front and center. The floating patterns remained steadfastly abstract but also recalled Inca textiles, old IBM punch cards, Indonesian ikats, battalions drawn up before an encounter, and more - including Matisse's use of fabrics as intermediaries between perception and invention. In another deceptively simple picture, Nozkowski seemed to dissect and codify the act of spreading paint, presenting rows of gently curving, "combed" lines that shifted almost imperceptibly from yellow to red.
These insistent motifs made Nozkowski's new pictures more frontal than in the past, since his inventively worked expanses announced literal surface more than they intimated ambiguous spaces. Each painting had a different scale. A brushy, bright blue "pierced" composition, like a close-up view of an irregular grid, seemed brusquely intimate; a delicate network of balls and lines hovered discreetly in the middle distance. Like all of Nozkowski's images, his new works are at once achingly evocative and eccentric, even funny. As wordless documents of the painter's antic, well-furnished mind, the pictures conjure up inchoate longings, nostalgia for things you can't quite remember or never knew, and they do so wholly in terms of exquisite surfaces and a ravishing touch. Then they sandbag you with their sly wit. Nozkowski's marvelous paintings make you look hard and long, and if you put in the time, they yield wonderful surprises.
Materially and conceptually, Bruce Gagnier's (idiosyncratic, authoritative) figure sculptures, at Lori Bookstein Fine Art, were polar opposites of Marioni's and Nozkowski's abstract paintings; aesthetically, they claimed similar terrain. Gagnier's slightly smaller than life-size nudes -  about three-quarter scale - are both fascinating and hard work. They make clear their author's deep knowledge and love of such masters as Donatello and Michelangelo, but they're devoid of sentimental desire for the past. The wrenched anatomy and passionately worked surfaces of Gagnier's figures locate them unmistakably in the present, with all its accumulated historical baggage and anxiety.
As you moved around the standing nudes, their profiles kept changing unexpectedly, an unusual phenomenon in figure sculpture, since our ingrained familiarity with the body almost always cancels the possibility of surprise. But Gagnier twists and torques anatomy, as if making the traces of movement into tangible forms. A pulled-out arm, an outthrust hip, a dropped shoulder, a lengthened torso appeared not to be liberties taken for the sake of expression but rather seemed to be inevitable records of gestures or diagrams of the transfer of weight. Everything seemed impelled by internal forces - which are not the same as internal anatomical structures. Coarsely inflected surfaces bore witness to Gagnier's additive process, a time-honored system of modeling with small balls of material, like a three-dimensional equivalent of Michelangelo's nerviest drawings. By laying bare his method, however traditional, Gagnier emphasized the immediacy of sculpture-making and, therefore, its modernism. Combined with his exaggerated, stretched poses and unstable profiles, his rough-hewn forms suggested that the images before you were only momentary coalitions of matter, frozen trajectories in space made temporarily visible.
Gagnier also showed paintings of standing nudes and clothed "portrait" busts, which similarly announced his fascination with the past, without, unfortunately, the tension, stubbornness, or strangeness of the sculptures. Fortunately, it wasn't difficult to ignore these lesser efforts, since Gagnier's ferocious, uncompromising sculptures, with their dry, matte surfaces, were insistent in their demands for attention. Uningratiating, uneasy, and, as it turns out, unforgettable, they richly rewarded time spent with them.
Linda Schrank's elegant abstractions at Stephen Rosenberg and Susanna Heller's wacky urban landscapes at Magnan Projects posited very different ideas of picture-making, but both did so with conviction and originality. At first acquaintance, Schrank's recent panels seemed to be loose accretions of opposing swipes, rather like casual, layered grids. Very quickly, they began to unravel and to declare themselves as palimpsests of rhythmic marks, at a range of different scales, warped out of true, but loosely disciplined by the dominant square of the support. A kind of basket-weave structure, now more visible, now less, kept everything together, but flexed and swayed, as if responding to shifts in tension determined from outside the borders of the image or distorted by internal pressures. Broad translucent bands cancelled out notes of more opaque color, creating a luminous, golden haze, while dark, repetitive, scraped-through dots, lozenges and staccato bars provided counterpoint and established new, more elusive spatial zones. It all seemed relaxed and spontaneous, but when you tried to penetrate Schrank's dense tangles of strokes and sweeps, you discovered that you were quickly repelled and turned back to the painted surface.
For all the aggressive materiality of Schrank's recent paintings, their lush, radiant hues and sense of unifying warmth - or coolness, in some of the works on paper - had associations with the art of the past. But just when it seemed as if these dense, deceptive pictures were woven out of the artist's fragmented recollections of the old and modern masters she most reveres, the floating dots and lozenges triggered thoughts of the photomechanical and the commercial, further destabilizing associations and rendering Schrank's paintings even more mysterious. I liked best some of the middle-size pictures, in which the scale of the mark and the scale of the whole panel seemed particularly felicitous. By contrast, the marks in some larger panels seemed a little small for the task. But that's a quibble. Schrank's recent show included some of her strongest paintings to date. They made me eager to see what she will produce in the next months at the Italian studio where she spends part of every year.
The narrow, slightly claustrophobic Chelsea space where Susanna Heller showed recent paintings last season was curiously appropriate for her latest images of a bewildering, off-balance New York. For years, Heller has reported on her offbeat responses to her adopted home - for her, a city of precipitous drops and upthrusts, collapsing distances and tilting ground planes. In her energetic paintings, Manhattan's orderly grid explodes; land and water collide, apparently squeezing the urban infrastructure into being. Heller diagrams both the energy of the city, its moods, and her changing perceptions in near-abstract, expressionist terms.
She takes a long view, often from the perspective of the outer boroughs. She has painted riffs on lower Manhattan from across the flats of Brooklyn (with side trips to Coney Island). A series of dizzying views from the World Trade Center substituted vertical distance for horizontal, with dramatic effect. The recent paintings were inventions based on views across the Hudson from New Jersey, with the complexities of the vast river, its banks and waterfront structures, and the magical towers of Manhattan used as themes for unfettered improvisations. Slashing, whirligig drawing competed with nervously scrubbed zones of color. Denied a secure location from which to orient yourself, your relationship to the implied space of the painting was never stable. You hovered, zoomed in, stayed back - sometimes, improbably enough, simultaneously - grabbing fragments of imagery and bold incidents of drawing or painting for support. And then you were off again, sailing through Heller's lively inventions and savoring her urgent touch. Heller has been a force to be reckoned with for many years, but her newest work seemed to me to reach a new level of freedom, looseness, and, paradoxically, specificity of place. The recent paintings are a little noisy and insist that you pay attention immediately, but they become juicier and more peculiar (in a good way) with time, so much so that I suspect they'd be both exciting and satisfying to live with.
Residents of 70 Washington Street, DUMBO, have the luxury of living with one of the highlights of the past season, a playful, richly colored, permanent installation by the British-born sculptor Helen Brough that turns the lobby into a fantasy garden. Emulated Flora plays tricks on conceptions of reality and illusion. Exuberant, stylized blossoms - smoothly curving floral shapes, laser-cut from translucent, colored Plexiglas - appear to burst through the ceiling, suspended or fixed directly to an expanse of mirror-polished stainless steel overhead. The layered color changes from every viewpoint, while reflections expand and double the sensuous floral shapes, creating a lush "bouquet" overhead, and making the space seem limitless. Shifts in the sizes of the blossoms, along with occasional mirrored shapes and the radiant, light- catching edges of the Plexiglas, further enrich Emulated Flora and add to its light-hearted charm. Oddly, the sculpture is most crisply delineated and most rational when seen in the lobby's wall-mounted mirror. Check the reality of the piece against the reflection and you are delightfully disoriented, lost in Brough's inverted garden.
There's a nice twist to the history of Emulated Flora. Commissioned by the building's owner, David Walentas, of Two Trees Management, the piece originated in works made by the artist during a residency at the Brooklyn studios of Triangle Arts Association and her participation in Triangle Artists' Workshop, a program for international artists based, since 2002, in DUMBO, thanks to Walentas' support. Triangle's first residency studios, where Brough initially developed the ideas that culminated in Emulated Flora, were located in 70 Washington Street, before its renovation.
"Trace," a group exhibition at the Whitney Altria, selected by Shamim Momim, included another high point of the past season, Karlis Rekevics' multipart plaster installation, Veracity, Validity, Fabrication, Facts. Rekevics' theme is his remembered experience of the urban environment, usually its neglected, unobserved, industrial corners, which become the starting points for potent abstract structures that suggest real places without replicating them in terms of materials, structural logic, or scale. For the Whitney Altria's glass-walled lobby space, Rekevics played off the dominant structures of the neighborhood, Grand Central and the Pershing Square overpass, where Park Avenue hoists itself up to surround the great Beaux-Arts terminal building. Typically, however, Rekevics' points of departure were elements you had to work to discover in the built environment, even after he had alerted you to their existence: the rivet-studded sides of girders, a protective canopy with strings of lights, a supporting truss. These were translated into mysterious fragmented constructions built of plaster slabs, eerily illuminated by their own light sources.
A low-lying scalloped "canopy" lifted itself to hover tensely above the ground, like a Yoga adept in a gravity-defining pose; the golden light from a row of naked bulbs became a palpable force thrusting the elegant plaster slabs upward. Perhaps even more compelling was a skewed assembly of wedge-shaped, pierced "girders" and a horizontal slab, sliced to expose metal reinforcements, like abrupt drawing strokes. Here the light source was hidden, so that the sculpture seemed to generate an inexplicable rosy glow that became a kind of structural element. The pool of light not only colored the plaster but more importantly cancelled out the shadows cast by the misaligned, loose- jointed "beams," disembodying the massive structure, and making it even more uncanny and poetic. The third large component - a row of slabs evocative of old-style riveted girders, studded with naked light bulbs, one deliberately turned off to suggest the passage of time - was the most logical and clearest, in its reference and structure. Yet as in the other elements, Rekevics subverted expectations by disrupting your relation to the sculpture, forbidding you to consider them as literal responses to their sources, no matter how resonant their associations. Instead you saw through the sculptures, looked down on them, or were stopped by them, chest high, encountering each pale, dislocated construction in an unexpected way that both abstracted it into an autonomous, richly associative object and forced you to measure yourself against it to determine its irrational scale.

</text>
