<text id="G73" category="" words="1998" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Critical Intimacy: Comparing the paradocical obituaries of Susan Sontag' The Believer, Vol. 4, No. 3" Author="Lisa Levy" PublicationDate="April 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.believermag.com/issues/200604/?read=article_levy">

The most talked-about essay in Against Interpretation also mined this pop-culture vein. "Notes on Camp," a long piece dedicated to the spirit of Oscar Wilde, has been largely misunderstood as a flattening of the differences between high and low culture. It is actually a nuanced and complex piece of writing accentuating the contrast between high and low. It introduced the interplay of androgyny and kitsch as the underpinnings of a style since made familiar by drag queens and other expressions of outlandish femininity. "Camp taste draws on a mostly unacknowledged truth of taste: the most refined form of sexual attractiveness (as well as the most refined form of sexual pleasure) consists in going against the grain of one's own sex." Sontag was the first person to describe this "truth of taste," the exploration of gender that would so dominate popular culture in the coming decades of glam and disco. The Times notes, "The article made Ms. Sontag an international celebrity, showered with lavish, if unintentionally ridiculous, titles ('a literary pinup,' 'the Natalie Wood of the U.S. avant-garde')." Or, more bluntly, as the Hollywood Reporter wrote in its obituary (and how many intellectuals, glamorous or not, get an obituary there?), "The 1964 piece 'Notes on Camp,' established her as a major new writer, popularized the 'so bad it's good' attitude toward popular culture, applicable to everything from 'Swan Lake' to feather boas." This is, of course, an oversimplification of her thesis, but accurate in its range and impact. "Camp" encapsulated an attitude never previously named, let alone anatomized, which had existed since the time of Wilde, and Sontag unleashed a certain cultural power by giving it a vocabulary and an arena for discussion. TheNew York Times obituary said that "with 'Notes on Camp,' Ms. Sontag fired a shot across the bow of the New York critical establishment." The Times U.K. agreed: "'Notes on Camp' [was] the essay that established her almost instantly as a cultural commentator of stature." Everyone recognized camp style and recognized Sontag as the critic who got it.
Art critic Arthur C. Danto's appreciation of Sontag in the March 2005 issue ofArtforum magazine, "Passion Play," aligned Sontag, the self-proclaimed "besotted aesthete," with Wilde, the fundamental aesthete (Sontag also called herself an "obsessed moralist," which is where she and Wilde obviously diverged). Aesthetics was an area of acute concern for Sontag. In his reminiscence, Danto references a 1963 review of Camus's notebooks Sontag wrote for the New York Review of Books,which frequently published her work, where she classified writers as husbands or lovers: "Some writers supply the solid virtues of a husband: reliability, intelligibility, generosity, decency. There are other writers in whom one prizes the gifts of a lover, gifts of temperament rather than of moral goodness." Danto places Sontag in the camp of the lovers, "addressing dangerous topics" and "practicing criticism in the spirit of eroticism." Sontag probably would agree, for lovers are charged with the ability to "savor rare emotions and dangerous sensations" in the reader, and she loved to stir things up, as in "Camp," or calling for an "erotics of art" at the end of the essay "Against Interpretation." This need to challenge set her apart from other aesthetes, as Danto notes. Aesthetics, Danto writes, "has traditionally been a fairly dreary specialty in academic philosophy." But Sontag transformed it: "The difference between it and the relationship to art that Sontag exemplified and enjoined was like the difference between sex education and theKama Sutra. That is what made her an aesthetician-hero. Her whole enterprise lay in publicly exemplifying the life of art as she felt it should be lived." This raises the question of how an aesthete should live, according to Sontag. She was criticized for enjoying life, reveling in her looks and her work and the attention both brought her, using her celebrity to draw attention to causes she advocated. She was condemned, in short, for her enthusiasm.
Critics are not often enthusiasts. There is a sense of keeping cool or detached, and even a phrase to describe it: critical distance. Sontag had the opposite impulse: critical intimacy. She claims in the introduction to Against Interpretation that she can write only about what truly engages her - "passionate interest" is her formulation. What it comes down to is that she criticizes what she loves - which made her work and her life a matter of such great intensity. As Craig Seligman wrote in his remembrance of her, "The greatness was in her cool, hardheaded essays on aesthetic matters; as an aesthete defending the senses against the intellect, the new against the established, silence against noise, she was magnificently coldblooded. But she was hotblooded and hotheaded when she turned to politics." Sontag was hot, sharp, passionate about her subjects, though the prose in her essays is always careful, deliberate, and calm.
Along these lines, the Washington Post obituary takes a balanced approach to Sontag, claiming that she "engaged and enraged equally with her insights into high and low culture." It praises her best pieces, the essays on writers, distillations of hero-worship and adoration, most of which appeared in her 1980 collection Under the Sign of Saturn. Explorations of photography (On Photography) and the language of pain and suffering (Illness as Metaphor, 1978; expanded into AIDS and Its Metaphors, 1988; Regarding the Pain of Others, 2003) also won her admirers for their innovation and eloquence.
Her last published essay, about torture and the photographs at Abu Ghraib prison, combined both of these preoccupations. "Regarding the Torture of Others," was published in May 2004, when Sontag was already combating her final illness, a "particularly virulent blood cancer." She had written On Photography and Illness as Metaphor during her first bout of cancer, and had vanquished the disease again in her mid-sixties. She wrote the piece on Iraq as she prepared to become a patient for her most harrowing ordeal yet: an adult-stem-cell transplant. "To me, torture is not too strong or hyperbolic a word," her son David wrote in a posthumous article about this final cancer and its effects, "Illness as More Than Metaphor."
In examining the photographs of the torture of Iraqi prisoners Sontag tries to dissect a "public-relations disaster." She keenly observes the administration's avoidance of "the 'torture' word." The people in the photographs had been victims of "abuse" or "humiliation," but that was as far as Bush officials would go. Sontag is not willing to let an abstraction like the administration stand in for the violence perpetrated; she points out the "perpetrators, posing, gloating, over their helpless captives." She discusses how the camera has infiltrated corners of private life heretofore unknown to others: not only in these war atrocities, but those at home, as in the documentary about a family of accused pedophiles, Capturing the Friedmans. This is the strident Sontag, who comes right out and proclaims, with horror: "The photographs are us." It cannot be lost on her that this is the logical end of the Warholian line, webcams recording the most mundane aspects of existence, all these images breeding what she calls a "culture of shamelessness," reveling in "secrets of private life that, formerly, you would have given nearly anything to conceal you now clamor to be invited on a television show to reveal." But the "you" in this sentence is certainly not Sontag herself, who guarded her private life just as carefully as she staged the many photographs of herself.
Her political positions receive more scrutiny in the Washington Post obituary: essays about a trip to Vietnam in the 1960s in which she raged against American imperialism, longtime work on behalf of the people of Bosnia, an impassioned defense of Salman Rushdie when the Ayatollah Khomeini declared a fatwa against him for the Satanic Verses during her presidency of the international writers' organization PEN, a piece in the New Yorker proclaiming the 9/11 terrorists were not cowards. All of this warranted the remark that "occasionally, she caused palpitations among the fervently patriotic for her less-nuanced commentary," and her enemies, like her positions, were on both the left and the right. The Post is not the only obituary to get into Sontag's politics. Her friend Christopher Hitchens's reminiscence of her on Slate.com also probes her political involvements, crediting her with timing "her interventions very deftly." Of the Rushdie case, Hitchens writes that Sontag "mobilized a tremendous campaign of solidarity that dispelled all this masochism and capitulation," referring to the nervousness of many who declined to speak out against Rushdie's attackers. He recalls her confiding in him during a heated moment of the campaign: "'You know, I think about Salman every second. It's as if he was a lover.' I would have done anything for her at that moment," Hitchens recollects, wistfully, "not that she asked or noticed." Her obliviousness to others, not asking or noticing them, seems to be a common theme among Sontag's acolytes - an uncomfortable position, maybe even a mundane form of the torture Sontag was so interested in documenting and dissecting.
Ever the provocateur, Hitchens begins his elegy with this statement: "Between the word 'public' and the word 'intellectual' there falls, or ought to fall, a shadow. The life of the cultivated mind should be private, reticent, discreet: Most of its celebrations will occur with no audience, because there can be no applause for that moment when the solitary reader gets up and paces round the room, having just noticed the hidden image in the sonnet, or the profane joke in the devotional text, or the secret message in the prison diaries. Individual pleasure of this kind is only rivaled when the same reader turns into a writer, and after a long wrestle until daybreak hits on his or her own version of the mot juste, or the unmasking of pretension, or the apt, latent literary connection, or the satire upon tyranny." Sontag was just such a person, Hitchens argues, who passed on her delight with reading, with photography, with old-fashioned international high culture. It is this uneasy public-intellectual version of Sontag that Hitchens's countrymen present in the British obituaries. The Guardian proclaims Sontag the "Dark Lady" of American intellectual life in the headline of her obituary and again in its first line. Yet it goes on to make more of that darkness than just her hair color: "In a culture expecting easy intimacies from its great figures, she was aloof, poised, posed: she was camera-friendly. But you never could claim to know Sontag, however much New York was alive with gossip about her loves, her ex-loves, her next book." The Times U.K. claims that "her polymath expertise and vocal cultural comment made her in subsequent years one of the closest equivalents in her country to the French concept of a public intellectual," a damning-with-faint-praise if ever there were one. The Daily Telegraph deems her "a paragon of radical intelligence and austere beauty of whom it was said that, if she had not existed, the New York Review of Books would have had to invent her."
Several of the obituaries, including the Telegraph's, chart Sontag's move to writing fiction after being blocked from doing so for many years. She had published two experimental (read: unreadable) novels in the 1960s, Death Kit and The Benefactor,but had long abandoned fiction for the more solid ground of the essay. In 1992 she reversed course again and published The Volcano Lover, a historical novel about the romantic triangle between Sir William Hamilton, his wife, Emma, and her lover, Lord Nelson. The book had an unusual genesis: it was "released" in Sontag after a conversation with her psychiatrist when she discovered that her difficulty in writing a popular novel came from a "fear that giving readers pleasure might seem trivial." Her last novel, In America, for which she won the National Book Award in 2000, was not nearly as well received as Volcano, and there were accusations about Sontag relying on uncredited sources in writing her story of nineteenth-century Polish actress Helena Modjeska's emigration and triumph in California.

</text>
