<text id="G75" category="" words="2013" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Wait.' Kenyon Review, Fall2006, Vol. 28 Issue 4, p32-45" Author="Roy Kesey" PublicationDate="Fall 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=106&sid=267cddae-c19c-4d22-9c49-7f6ff97d9542%40sessionmgr112&bquery=(JN+%22Kenyon+Review%22+AND+DT+20060901)&bdata=JmRiPWE5aCZ0eXBlPTEmc2l0ZT1laG9zdC1saXZl">

The girl from Ghana stretches, and the air around her hums. Night closes in, and the airline personnel report that they are unfortunately unable to offer proper lodging for the evening, as all the hotels in the city are full. None of the passengers believe this. More shouting ensues, and an exodus, all of the locals and a number of hopeful non-locals.
A cafe runs short of creamer; a restaurant runs short of cheese. The airline personnel announce that each passenger still present will receive free cassava crackers and purple tea for the remainder of his or her stay in the airport. The children are very pleased. The poet asks the airline personnel if all traces of cyanide were removed from the cassava roots before they were ground into flour, is assured that in fact they were.
Pillows and blankets are brought from the invisible plane on the tarmac. Children stretch out on the floor. Parents drape themselves with coats. The girl from Ghana stares at the fog, wondering how many days it will take her ex-husband to track her from Berekum. Bars run short of bitters and the cleaning staff cleans, threading themselves between sleepers and sacks in silence.
The poet elbows the accountant, points to the checkerboard protruding from the Mongolian boy's carry-on. Four hours later, with the score 9-7 in favor of the accountant, the old Honduran woman asks if she might play as well. She wins the next twelve matches, falls asleep mid-move at dawn.
The accountant slides the board back into the child's bag. Other passengers stir and scratch. The members of last night's exodus come traipsing back, the locals smiling, satisfied at having chosen wisely, the non-locals exhausted, mumbling anecdotes of numberless cab rides and the infinite walk back from the cargo bay entrance.
Children whine. Airline personnel bring thin coffee and bad rolls, promise that today is the day, that it is only a question of minutes. The fog appears still denser, still grayer, still more certain. The televisions say that the chemical spill is nearly cleaned up and vehicular traffic will soon be permitted on the access road once again.
And the passengers wait. All the bars have run short of cognac and celery sticks. The accountant follows the girl from Ghana into Duty Free, observes her observing ceremonial daggers, buys a key chain bearing an animal that looks part monkey, part ferret, part partridge - a favored local pet. The loudspeaker voice whistles briefly. The televisions flip and flap, a cholera epidemic spreading toward the city, and the airline personnel assure everyone that their best bet now is staying put. Groups are reconfigured: locals versus foreigners. There are hygiene-based accusations, a few punches thrown but none landed.
The children ignore this, chase one another through the wing, and one kicks at a carry-on. Both the child and the carry-on belong to locals, but from different parts of the city, and now the groups split into subgroups, the foreigners based on nationality, the locals based on neighborhood and therefore class. Each subgroup retreats into itself, then expands slightly, seeking more terrain; neither the Canadian nor the Bulgarian fit into any subgroup, and they keep their eyes down, their elbows firmly on their armrests.
More shrieking occurs, and some kickboxing, and a small amount of Tae Kwon Do. It is the Belgians who have the first idea for a way to diminish the tension and pass the time: a congress followed by a pageant. Eyes are rolled, but all subsequent ideas are worse. Delegates are nominated, gather in the bookstore a4d hammer out agreements, square yardage assigned per capita, dotted borders drawn in masking tape. Magazines are shoplifted, and the bookstore manager flutters.
The pageant: middle-class locals drag the statue to one side, and each subgroup pools its makeup and clothes and advice. The women dress in the restrooms, fight for mirror-space, angles and light. Improvised sashes, Swiss judges, an Italian emcee; the vast gifts of the girl from Ghana deafen the crowd, swing each decision, and even so the Venezuelans protest.
Lunch is worrisome: restaurant prices have trebled and there is no ham to be found. Afterwards, children remove toys from bags. The boys have plastic soldiers, the girls have Barbie dolls, and they all play together at war. The dolls wear stiletto heels, are ten times the size of the soldiers, leave death and destruction in their wakes.
There is a new phenomenon, light seeming to sift through the fog that now appears thinner, striped, not entirely sure. The loudspeaker voice announces that the flight will be departing momentarily. The pilot and crew stride again into the lounge, they nod and wave, and applause floods the air. Magazines are stowed and carry-ons are hefted, hands are shaken, and a line forms. The line lengthens, and yet there is no cutting in. The line arcs and straightens. The boarding-gate door is opened, then closed.
An upper-middle-class local child points out the window. The fog has thickened, darkened, grown more assured.
The pilot and crew stride again out of the lounge, and they do not nod, and they do not wave. The loudspeaker voice announces that the flight will be delayed momentarily. The subgroups sulk back to their territories. Children poke each other and cry.
An hour passes this way, and another hour, and another. The bookstore manager aligns his paperbacks. The fog surges, stalls, surges. The Mongolian boy comes to the accountant, asks what is in his briefcase, says that he hopes to be an accountant when he grows up, or else a matador, and then his mother calls and he runs away.
The old woman from Honduras champs and sighs and dreams of a pageant she once won, a pageant that never occurred, but it was wonderful, wonderful; she waved to the throng, thanked her father for his unwavering support, and the poet turns to the accountant.
"Would you happen to know - " "No." "I was only wondering - " "It doesn't matter. The answer is no." The Bulgarian shrugs, Afghanistan's longest river goes unnamed,
and there is an explosion not far away; children fall and parents stumble, the lounge windows crack, ceiling tiles pinwheel through the air and dust pours into the wing, the lights go out and the televisions fall dark, there is shouting and screaming and hands clawing at necks and eyes.
Then there is the hum and grind of generators, and the electricity returns, and the passengers go still.
The loudspeaker voice requests that all available security guards and cleaning staff report immediately to their respective central work stations. Airline personnel run in medium-sized circles. The passengers gather around the televisions that clatter and spark. They wait and wait and at last the answer comes: a small meteor has hit the main lobby.
It is not easy to believe, but the images are undeniable. Delegates meet at the boarding gate and reach no conclusions. Children kick one another. Restaurants run short of lettuce. And now the airline personnel assure the passengers that there
is no reason to panic, that while the number of dead and wounded is not yet known, there is no structural damage to Wing D, and the plane and runway and control tower are wholly intact, and it is therefore only a question of the fog lifting and then the flight will be on its way.
Passengers wander out to see the meteor and damage, are met by armed guards and partitioning, wander back. The Honduran woman finds a large fuchsia bug crawling up her pant leg; it has nine eyes and twenty-two legs, reminds her of her mother's flower garden, and she squashes it with her fist. Bars run short of swizzle sticks, and then, improbably, gin.
The fog scurls. Toilets clog and garbage cans overflow. Darkness drops, the generators growl and fail, and the airline personnel regret that no additional blankets are available. The subgroups gather into themselves. The girl from Ghana dreams the roar of a thousand fontomfrom drums while across the lounge the accountant fights through a nightmare involving misconstrued negative amortization schedules.
In the morning there is still no electricity, and the subgroups curse and pace. There are accusations of theft - missing magazines, missing mints. The fog slackens, then stiffens, and at the masking-tape borders there are dark suggestions, darker looks.
The local delegates gather in a sloppy oval, announce that they have had enough, that they are going home, that they will break down the door if necessary, will walk across the tarmac and scale any fence and be free. The airline personnel insist that the flight will be departing at any moment. The locals gather their things. The airline personnel take a stand at the boarding gate. The locals push them aside, then hesitate: lined outside the door are a dozen armed soldiers standing shadowed and gray in the fog.
The locals look at the airline personnel. The airline personnel shrug and say that they have no idea either. The locals set down their things, gather again. The soldiers grimace and strut. The airline personnel wave the unit captain up to the glass, and words are passed, and the words are diffuse, something about a quarantine, but its cause is unclear: the word "virus" is heard, but what came before? AIDS? Space?
The locals froth. An hour passes angrily. The fog lifts eight inches. drops back down. The Bulgarian rereads an old poem in his notebook, contemplates adding an adverb, and the Belgians have another idea: an Olympiad.
Enough already, say the Dutch. And yet no better idea is brought forward. Judges are appointed, and passengers who belong to no subgroup are assigned to one now created: Other. A program is drawn up on stationery bought by the Saudis; the Americans want baseball, the Russians want volleyball, the Chinese want table tennis, and all are disappointed. The upper-lower-middle-class locals suggest that children ride their parents for the equestrian events. Synchronized swimming is exchanged for synchronized walking; water polo becomes carpet polo, and archery is replaced with Throw the Ball of Paper into the Garbage Can from Increasingly Great Distances. Winter events are ignored until the Norwegians threaten to boycott; then babies in strollers are called bobsledders, and curling is given pride of place and time.
Hog lines are drawn in chalk, brooms are taken from closets, wheeled carry-on bags replace rocks, and the Scottish skip's hammer is a double takeout draw for the gold. Next comes fencing, a question of umbrellas; then rowing occurs with baggage carts and mops, and the Australian coxless four is untouchable.
Dressage is won by a Chilean toddler when the Mongolian boy's father hashes a last-minute piaffe. Kenyans of course sweep the marathon, hours of quick circling; Cubans of course sweep the boxing. A Turk and a Greek meet in judo, half-middleweight the only division: the Greek has mastered the body drop, the naked strangle, and the inner thigh, but the Turk has mastered the sweeping hip, the scarf hold, and both the major inner and major outer reaps, thereby carrying the day and declaring the Cyprus question settled.
The Latvians are accused of doping, the Nigerians of bribery. A tenor from Surinam sings so that rhythmic gymnastics might flourish. Again there is a small amount of Tae Kwon Do, the lower-upper-upper-class locals upsetting the Koreans to everyone's moderate surprise.
The members of Other are the Canadian, the Bulgarian, five stout young women who are not willing to say where they are from, an Orthodox priest from Ukraine, and a lawyer from Pakistan. They consistently come in fourth. The Canadian apologizes for his failure to hurdle more deftly, and his teammates tell him not to worry as long as he did his best, which they are sure he did.
The girl from Ghana blows him a kiss from the long jump pit, and the fog brindles and shies. The competition lasts until nightfall the following day. The medal ceremony is light-hearted yet dignified, and the medals donated by Duty Free are foil-wrapped chocolate coins that gleam in the low, gray light.

</text>
