<text id="H02" category="" words="1992" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="School Size and Student Outcomes in Kentucky's Public Schools Program Review and Investigations Committee. Legislative Research Commission" Author="Greg Hager" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="http://www.lrc.ky.gov/lrcpubs/RR334.pdf">

Hispanic Students. Table 6 displays the results for Hispanic
students. On some assessments, the scores of Hispanic elementary
students were typically higher for those attending schools with
either 301 to 600 students or 601 to 900 students. The scores for
students attending the smallest schools, those with 300 or fewer,
were similar to those attending the larger schools.
Among Hispanic middle school students, the scores on the math
assessment were highest for those attending moderately sized
schools. There were no other statistically significant differences in
the scores of Hispanic middle school students. There were also no
differences in the scores of Hispanic high school students across
any of the assessments.
Asian Students. Table 7 shows the performance of Asian students
by school size. The results do suggest somewhat different patterns
for Asian students than for all students. While scores of all
elementary students were typically higher at larger schools, the
scores of Asian elementary students were often lower for those
attending larger schools. For example, social studies scores among
Asian elementary students at schools with 901 to 1,200 students
were approximately 50 points lower than those of Asian
elementary students at schools with 300 or fewer students.
The results for Asian middle school students were mixed. On some
assessments the Asian students at larger schools performed as well
as those attending smaller schools, while on other assessments they
performed worse.
On most assessments, there were no differences in the scores of
Asian high school students attending different-sized schools.
Differences did exist, however, on the reading assessment and the
practical living and vocational skills assessment. For reading,
scores were lowest for Asian students in school with 901 to 1,200
students. For practical living and vocational skills, scores were
typically lower at the moderately sized schools.
Students Receiving Free or Reduced Lunch. Scores were also
compared across school size categories for students participating in
free or reduced lunch programs. Some students who qualify may
choose not to participate in the free or reduced lunch programs, so
those participating may not fully reflect those eligible.
Table 8 indicates that the results for students participating in these
programs exhibited the most variation. On some assessments
administered to elementary students, scores were lower among
those enrolled in moderately sized schools. Scores on the arts and
humanities assessment, however, were lowest among the
elementary students attending large schools. There were few
differences among the scores of middle school students. Among
high school students, scores were typically
School-level Performance
School-level performance was also compared across differentsized
schools. This analysis was similar to the student-level
analysis. The performance levels compared are individual student's
scores aggregated for the school. Students are assigned to
performance levels based on their scores on each assessment. A
student with a score that falls within a particular range would be
classified as performing at the proficient level. The percentage of
students within each performance level is multiplied by a weight
and totaled to determine the school's academic index. Table 9
shows how the academic index is calculated for 4th-grade reading.
Table 10 shows how school-level performance varied across
different-sized schools. As with the student-level results, the
figures show the difference between schools of a particular size
and schools with 300 or fewer students. None of the differences for
elementary schools was statistically significant. For middle and
high schools, scores were typically lower for the moderately sized
schools. There were no statistically significant differences,
however, between the smallest group of schools and the largest
group of schools.
The results of the school-level analysis often differed from the
student-level analysis. For example, elementary student-level
scores did vary across school size, but no evidence of this
difference was found in the school-level analysis. The method used
to aggregate student-level scores may be the reason for these
discrepancies. As individual scores are aggregated, some of the
smaller differences are lost. For example, two students might both
be considered distinguished even if there are several points
between their scores. When aggregated at the school level, it only
matters that they scored at the distinguished level, not that one
scored higher. Therefore, both of these students make the same
contribution to their schools' scores and any difference between
them is lost. Given the lost precision inherent in the school-level
scores, some of the differences observed at the student level would
not be observed at the school level.
In addition to comparing academic scores, it is possible to compare
other measures such as attendance rates, dropout rates, and
retention rates across different-sized schools. Dropout rates
represent the number of students who drop out of school. Retention
rates represent the percentage of students who are held back to
repeat a grade. Comparisons across elementary and middle schools
yielded no statistically significant differences across school size for
any of these measures. Differences for high schools are shown in
Table 11. Attendance rates were lower in high schools with 601 to
900 students, otherwise there were no statistically significant
differences. All of the groups of high schools with more than 300
students had higher dropout rates than did high schools with 300 or
fewer students. Other than being higher than schools with 300 or
fewer students, there did not appear to be a strong relationship
between dropout rates and school size. Retention rates were higher
in schools with 901 to 1,500 students, but as with the academic
measures of performance, there was no difference between the
smaller and larger schools.
Limitations of the Analysis
The results discussed above provide an indication of how different
types of students perform in schools of various sizes. There are
some limitations, however, that should be noted. First, while it was
possible to account for some factors that could influence scores,
such as participation in an extended school services program, it is
not possible to account for all the factors that influence student and
school scores. For example, school officials and teachers may have
developed independent programs to address their unique situations.
Data on these programs are limited and not consistently collected
across all districts in the state.
In addition, it is likely that some families locate in school districts
with characteristics that are seen as desirable. Families that believe
small schools are preferable may locate in districts with small
schools. If this is more likely to occur among families with highperforming
students, then the results might be affected by these
choices. Similarly, high-performing students may be attracted to
larger schools that are able to offer a broader range of
opportunities. As a result, the differences in performance across
different-sized schools may not reflect only the advantages or
disadvantages associated with different sizes. Instead, the results
would also reflect the choices made by different types of families.
It is unclear how much of the differences should be attributable to
school size and how much should be attributable to other factors.
Due to these limitations, the results should be interpreted as
showing the performance levels of students who are enrolled in
schools of various sizes with the recognition that other factors that
might be unrelated to school size may also affect the results. The
results do not necessarily indicate that the size of a school is the
reason for different scores.
Conclusions
The results presented indicate that students' performance levels do
differ across sizes of schools. These differences persisted even
after accounting for various factors that could affect performance.
The results comparing scores of all students suggest that students
in the largest schools scored as well or higher than did students at
smaller schools. The differences in scores varied across
elementary, middle, and high schools and across assessments.
Scores for elementary students were generally as high or higher at
the largest schools. For some assessments, however, scores at the smallest and the largest groups of elementary schools were
statistically the same. For middle school students, scores were
progressively higher at the larger schools. Students' scores at high
schools with 300 or fewer students were higher than those with
301 to 600 and those with 601 to 900 students. This differed,
however, for the largest high schools, in which students had scores
as high or higher than students in the smallest schools.
Much of the past research examining the relationship between
enrollment and student performance concluded that performance is
typically lower at larger schools. The original research examining
Kentucky schools that was presented in this report suggests that
this is not the case. One reason for this difference may be the
amount of detailed data available in Kentucky. Often researchers
must rely on samples of data or data that is limited in other ways.
Kentucky collects many types of detailed data across all schools
and for all students, which tends to improve the validity of the
results.
Another possible reason for the different findings is the manner in
which differences in school size were evaluated. Past researchers
typically assumed that the relationship between enrollment and
performance was constant across all school sizes. This assumption
was made by Summers and Wolfe, Fowler and Walberg, and
Caldas. Given this assumption, the results would show a
relationship that was the same across all schools. That is, if the
analysis showed a negative relationship, the relationship would be
negative across all sizes of schools. The relationship between size
and performance, however, might not be constant across all school
sizes.
The results from analyzing Kentucky schools suggest that the
relationship is more complicated. When comparing small schools
to somewhat larger schools, performance was lower among the
somewhat larger schools, indicating a negative relationship
between size and performance. When the largest schools were
included, performance at these schools often exceeded
performance at the smaller schools. Therefore, the relationship is
negative over a range of enrollment but positive beyond that
range.9 Researchers who assumed the relationship was constant
may have found a negative relationship overall because there are
typically more schools with enrollment in the negative range than
there are in the positive range.
Proponents of small schools suggest that small schools offer
students certain advantages that can result in a better education,
such as more personalized attention or greater opportunities to be
involved. There was some evidence suggesting that these types of
advantages may exist. Students' scores at the smallest high schools
were higher than those at somewhat larger schools. For all
students, however, the largest schools frequently had higher scores
than did the smallest schools. This suggests that the advantages
provided at larger schools may be more effective at increasing
scores on the state assessments.
There is an important caveat that should be noted regarding these
results. While the results do indicate that Kentucky students
attending larger schools tend to perform as well as or better on
average than do students at smaller schools, the reasons for this are
not entirely clear. These differences could be due to the advantages
that the largest schools can provide such as specialized programs.
There may be other factors, however, affecting scores that could
not be adequately accounted for in the analysis. For example, if
larger schools are able to provide a broader range of classes than
can smaller schools, higher-performing students may try to enroll
in these schools. In addition, schools with high scores may attract
more students, so that high performance levels result in larger
schools. The performance differences across school size may
reflect these types of choices and other factors that are not
necessarily related to how well students learn at a particular-sized
school.
In addition, to the extent that larger schools do provide certain
education advantages, these advantages may not apply equally to
all students. For example, Asian students in large elementary
schools scored lower than those in small elementary schools.
Similar results were found on some assessments for Asian middle
school students. Therefore, depending on their circumstances,
some students may learn better in the environments provided at
smaller schools, while others may perform better with the greater
resources and more specialized classes that larger schools might
provide.

</text>
