<text id="H03" category="" words="1984" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title=" U.S. House of Representatives Committee on the Judiciary  Hearing: Presidential Signing Statements " Author="Nicholas Quinn Rosenkranz " PublicationDate="2007" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://judiciary.house.gov/hearings/pdf/rosenkranz013107.pdf">

As you know, there has been significant confusion on this topic in the popular press; I hope that by disaggregating the various issues and discussing them dispassionately, we may at a minimum dispel some of the more hysterical assertions that have found their way into print.
In addition, the Committee may be interested in possible legislative responses to the President's use of signing statements. As you know, Representative Jackson Lee has already introduced a bill to regulate the creation and use of signing statements. Likewise, Senator Specter introduced a somewhat similar bill last summer, which may also be of interest to the Committee. Therefore, I will address the constitutionality and the structural desirability of these and other possible legislative measures. 
I should mention that I testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee on this same topic last summer, and I will be drawing substantially from that prior testimony today (in Parts I-III). I should also say that I largely agree with the position put forth by Deputy Assistant Attorney General Michelle Boardman at that hearing, and I commend her testimony to this Committee. 
As Ms. Boardman explained, this President's signing statements have not differed significantly from those of his recent predecessors. And in any event, as I shall explain, presidential signing statements are an entirely appropriate means by which the President fulfills his constitutional duty to "take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed."
I. Executive Interpretation 
The most important and most common function of presidential signing statements is to announce - to the Executive Branch and to the public - the President's interpretation of the law. The propriety of such an announcement should be obvious. There is an oft repeated canard that the President has no business interpreting federal statutes - his job is to execute the laws, and interpretation should be left to the courts. A moment's reflection reveals that this view is unsound. It is simply impossible, as a matter of logic, to execute a law without determining what it means. 
A. Informing the Executive Branch of the President's Interpretation 
Imagine, for example, a statute that imposes a tariff on the importation of "vegetables." Comes an eighteen-wheeler full of tomatoes. Is a tomato a vegetable? At the end of the day, maybe the Supreme Court will decide, but long before then, the executive branch is put to a choice: stop the truck at the border or let it through. There is no ducking the question; either choice implies an interpretation of the statute, an interpretation of the word "vegetable." And the President cannot simply flip a coin. He has a constitutional duty to "take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed," and this faithfulness inherently and inevitably includes a good faith effort to determine what "the Laws" mean. In short, as the Supreme Court has explained, "[i]nterpreting a law enacted by Congress to implement the legislative mandate is the very essence of 'execution' of the law."
Nor is the President obliged to leave the choice to individual Border Patrol agents. The Supreme Court has rightly said that the President can and should "supervise and guide [executive officers'] construction of the statutes under which they act in order to secure that unitary and uniform execution of the laws which Article II of the Constitution evidently contemplated in vesting general executive power in the President alone." And as Walter Dellinger, Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel under President Clinton, has explained, this is a "generally uncontroversial . . . function of presidential signing statements" - "to guide and direct executive officials in interpreting or administering a statute."
B. Informing the Public of the President's Interpretation 
Of course, the President need not make his interpretations public; he could quietly instruct the U.S. Border Patrol that a tomato is a vegetable and have done with it. But there are many good reasons why, in most circumstances, a public statement of interpretation is desirable. First, if the President's interpretation is public, then those who believe that his interpretation is erroneous can better and more quickly structure a challenge in court. Second, a public statement of interpretation reduces legal uncertainty; if people know the President's interpretation, they are better able to organize their affairs accordingly. Third, and perhaps most important, a public statement informs Congress of the President's interpretation, and if Congress disagrees, it may pass a bill clarifying the matter. 
In short, in the United States, we have a strong preference for sunlight in government. Once it is clear that interpreting the law is essential to executing it, there can be no independent objection to the President making his interpretations public. This is the primary function of presidential signing statements, and President Clinton's Office of Legal Counsel was quite right to call this function "uncontroversial."
II. The Canon of Constitutional Avoidance 
The President interprets statutes in much the same way that courts do, with the same panoply of tools and strategies. His lawyers carefully study the text and structure of Acts of Congress, aided perhaps by dictionaries, linguistic treatises, and other tools of statutory interpretation. In addition, just like courts, they also apply well-established maxims of statutory interpretation, called canons.
One canon in particular is of interest today. As Justice Holmes explained in 1927, "[T]he rule is settled that as between two possible interpretations of a statute, by one of which it would be unconstitutional and by the other valid, our plain duty is to adopt that which will save the Act." This is known as the canon of constitutional avoidance, and it "is followed out of respect for Congress, which we assume legislates in the light of constitutional limitations."
This is the canon that the President is applying when he says, in signing statements, that he will construe a particular provision to be consistent with a particular constitutional command. Many of the presidential signing statements that have most exercised the press have taken this form, so it is crucial to understand what these statements do and do not say. These statements emphatically do not "reserve the right to disobey" the law. They do not "amount to partial vetoes." They do not "declare[ the President's] intention not to enforce anything he dislikes." And they do not declare that the statutes enacted by Congress are unconstitutional. 
In fact, they declare exactly the opposite. As President Clinton's Office of Legal Counsel has explained, these sorts of signing statements are "analogous to the Supreme Court's practice of construing statutes, if possible, to avoid holding them unconstitutional . . . ." What these signing statements say, in effect, is that if an ambiguity appears on the face of the statute or becomes apparent in the course of execution, and if one possible meaning of the statute would render it unconstitutional, then the President will presume that Congress intended the other, constitutional meaning - and he will faithfully enforce the statute so understood. 
Again, this amounts to nothing more than a straightforward application of a canon of statutory construction that was already well established when Justice Holmes elaborated it in 1927, a canon that finds its entire rationale in "a just respect for the legislature" and the faithfulness of Representatives and Senators to their constitutional oaths. If a statute is ambiguous, we - the President, the Court, the People - presume that Congress intended it to be constitutional. Now, it may be argued that this canon has grown too strong. After all, it is not used merely as a tie-breaker for ambiguous statutes. Even if dictionaries or other canons point in the opposite direction, the canon of constitutional avoidance sometimes wins the day. As the Supreme Court explained in 1895, "every reasonable construction must be resorted to in order to save a statute from unconstitutionality," and reasonable people may differ on what constitutes a reasonable construction. Moreover, the Supreme Court has held that "[a] statute must be construed, if possible, so as to avoid not only the conclusion that it is unconstitutional but also grave doubts upon that score." This aspect of the doctrine is of more recent vintage and has been subject to quite compelling critique.
For present purposes, though, it suffices to note that the President's application of this canon has been consistent with the interpretive doctrine espoused by the Court. If there is any plausible interpretation of a statute that would avoid a serious constitutional question, the President - like the Court - gives Congress the benefit of the doubt and adopts the constitutional interpretation. 
III. Presidential Signing Statements in Court 
An entirely separate issue is whether presidential signing statements are relevant to judicial interpretation of statutes. Courts sometimes use legislative history to resolve ambiguities in statutes (though this practice has been subject to withering criticism). The issue here is whether courts can and should put presidential signing statements to analogous use. 
There are strong arguments on both sides of this question. On the one hand, one might say that judicial interpretation of statutes should seek to discover legislative intent, and the President is not a legislator. The President's power over bills is the power to "approve" or disapprove legislation; it is a simple, binary, up-or-down decision, subsequent to, and distinct from, the legislative process. Indeed, the Constitution makes clear that even though the veto power appears in Article I, it is not legislative power. The Constitution provides that "[a]ll legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States," not a Congress and a President. And it is "[t]he Congress," not the Congress plus the President, who "shall have Power . . . To make all Laws." 
On the other hand, one might say that this is an unduly formalistic view of the legislative process. In reality, the administration often drafts legislation, and even when it does not, the entire legislative machinery operates in the shadow of the President's veto power. On this view, the President's understanding of a bill as reflected in a signing statement is at least as important as the understanding of Congress reflected in legislative history. Moreover, any effort to glean the intent of Congress from legislative history is arguably quixotic: first, it is difficult to know how many Representatives and Senators agreed with any given portion of legislative history; and second, it is arguably By contrast, the President is just a single person, so his interpretive statement poses none of those problems. For this reason, the argument runs, presidential signing statements are more valuable because they are inherently reliable as an indication of presidential intent, whereas legislative history is less valuable because it is inherently unreliable as an indication of congressional intent. 
My own view is the same as Justice Scalia's. I believe that the project of statutory interpretation is to discern "the original meaning of the text, not what the original draftsmen intended." And I believe that presidential signing statements - like legislative history - are of very little use in that project. In my view, absent instruction on this question from Congress, courts should rely on both equally - for the strength of their reasoning and nothing more. 
IV. Legislative Responses 
It follows from the analysis above that a general legislative response to the President's use of signing statements is probably unnecessary. Nevertheless, because a bill on this topic, H.R. 264, has been introduced by Representative Jackson Lee and is now pending before the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, I shall address the balance of my testimony to the constitutionality and the wisdom of such proposals. I shall begin with the pending bill, and I will conclude by discussing some other options, including the bill that Senator Specter introduced last summer. 
A. Limiting Funds for Signing Statements 
Section 3(a) of H.R. 264 provides: "None of the funds made available to the Executive Office of the President, or to any Executive agency . . . from any source may be used to produce, publish, or disseminate any statement made by the President contemporaneously with the signing of any bill or joint resolution presented for signing by the President."

</text>
