<text id="H07" category="" words="1997" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Revised power integrated resource plan for Metropolitan's Colorado river Aqueduct power operations" Author="Metropolitan water district of Southern California" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.wapa.gov/es/irp/CustIRPs/dsw/MetWaterDistIRP.pdf">

RESOURCE OPTIONS
Metropolitan's consideration of resource options to supply CRA pumping requirements focuses on
renewable and conventional resources. As electric industry restructuring continues, Metropolitan may
consider other options, as they become available.
Historically, Metropolitan has been able to meet its CRA pumping energy needs using economy energy
purchases whenever necessary. This has been facilitated by WSPP membership which began in December
1990. Metropolitan does not expect that economy energy will be required to supplement Metropolitan's
existing resources over the period from 2007-2017. However, alternate sources of energy have been
considered for analysis after 2017 or in case greater than the Expected CRA Delivery levels should occur in
the future. Metropolitan's consideration of alternative pumping energy resources and efficiency measures
must: 1) Be consistent with the schedule of Metropolitan's resource requirements; and 2) Reduce the
expected cost of meeting pumping loads on the CRA or provide other benefits, such as increased system
reliability.
In addition to alternative sources of energy, Metropolitan has identified and continues to evaluate energy
efficiency and operating measures which may reduce energy requirements, or improve the reliability of
CRA operations.
Existing Renewable Generation onMetropolitan's System:
Metropolitan owns and operates approximately 122 MW of eligible renewable generation, as further
described below, and strongly supports efforts to promulgate the development of additional generation from
renewable resources in California. Some of these renewable resources currently help serve the CRA pump
load through the Edison exchange arrangement as previously discussed. As these existing contracts
terminate under their own terms, Metropolitan is re-evaluating their use as future options for CRA supplies,
which may be described in the annual action plans.
15 small hydro generating plants have been integrated into Metropolitan's water distribution system since
the early 1990s. Generation from these plants is sold under existing contractual agreements with Pacific Gas
and Electric Company, Edison, and DWR. During the first half of 2001, the State of California was
concerned of a potential power shortage during the summer of 2001. Metropolitan responded to an
emergency generation program offered by the California Energy Commission (CEC) to have new generation
on line by June 1, 2001 by adding generation capability at its 800,000 AF reservoir, Diamond Valley Lake
(DVL). The DVL reservoir, completed in 2002, was originally installed with 12 vertical turbine pumps.
With control system changes, these pumps were converted to turbine generating units and currently have a
total dependable capacity of 21 MW. Energy from DVL is sold in the spot energy market.
All 16 plants have been registered with the CEC as renewable resources. Ten plants are certified to meet
Renewable Portfolio Standard goals for Edison and PG&amp;E. The chart below summarizes the interrelationship
between energy production from these 16 existing plants, with a total Capacity of 122 MW, and
water delivery requirements.
Potential Renewable Resources:
Metropolitan is investigating the feasibility of adding at least two new renewable hydro plants: (1) a third
unit at the Foothill power plant which currently has two 4.5 MW units; and (2) a pressure control facility
along the planned Inland Feeder Project near Diamond Valley Lake. This planned Inland Feeder Project,
expected to be in service by 2011 should result in minimizing if not eliminating the need to pump water into
Diamond Valley Lake after constructed.
Four wind measurement instruments were installed at the Julian Hinds Pumping Plant along the CRA in
2005. The data provided by these instruments will be used to evaluate the Hinds site as a future location for
wind turbines. Other CRA sites that will also be evaluated for wind energy include the Gene and Iron
pumping plants.
Resource Evaluation Criteria
Metropolitan's energy resource requirements may vary significantly from one year to another. Since
Metropolitan's year-to-year energy requirements are difficult to forecast in more detail than presented
herein, no resource options have been screened from consideration solely due to the expected schedule of
energy availability. The primary criterion then becomes the estimated cost of the energy resource, and its
relationship to the forecasted range of Metropolitan's marginal cost of energy supplies.
Metropolitan's marginal cost of energy depends on the volume of water to be delivered through the CRA5.
Therefore, for up to annual deliveries of about 915,000 AF, Metropolitan's marginal cost of energy is
defined by the cost of the Hoover Power Plant and Parker Power Plant resources, as suggested by Table 8.
Metropolitan expects that in future years should deliveries exceed 915,000 AF, off-peak economy energy
purchases would represent Metropolitan's marginal energy cost. A forecasted range of the estimated cost of
these potential marginal energy supplies has been developed, and is shown in Table 10 and detailed in
Appendix 1.
Metropolitan considered a range in natural gas price escalation, and the uncertainty introduced by industry
restructuring, in developing the escalators used for economy energy in Table 10. The primary difference
between the Low Case and High Case is the future cost of natural gas, which is based on the Energy
Information Administration Energy Outlook 2006. In the Low Case rapid technological progress in
production and end-use efficiencies is assumed, with increased ultimate reserves and lower well-head gas
costs. The High Case assumes less success in production and reserve replacement, and that the increased
use of natural gas to reduce emissions from power plants, industrial boilers, and vehicles will lead to higher
prices.
A 30-year study period is used for cost comparisons. Based on the history of the last several years, and an
informal assessment of industry projections, a general inflation rate of 3.5 percent per year is assumed. A
discount rate of 5 percent, reflecting a margin of 1.5 percent over the assumed inflation rate, was also
applied. Metropolitan's actual cost of financing is currently less than 5 percent, and this rate is assumed to
provide a reasonable adjustment to acknowledge forecast uncertainty and risk.
Energy costs from the Hoover and Parker Power Plants are assumed to escalate at the general inflation rate
of 3.5 percent under both the High and Low Cases. Economy energy costs are assumed to escalate at 0.994
percent for the Low Case and 2 percent for the High Case.
Table 10 provides a forecasted range for Metropolitan's marginal cost of energy for CRA pumping. Which
resource is at the margin will depend on the amount of Colorado River water available to Metropolitan for
delivery through the CRA, the energy available from Parker and Hoover Power Plants, and the relative
economics of economy energy purchases or sales. For CRA deliveries less than 915,000 AF, Metropolitan
has sufficient or even surplus energy and no purchases are typically necessary. However, Metropolitan is
planning to maximize delivery of water through the CRA as allowed, and expects the marginal cost of
energy to be based on the prices to be paid for energy beyond the Hoover and Parker resources while the
contracts exist through 2017.
Table 11 provides the average cost of supplies and marginal cost of supplies for each delivery case. The
only case that requires marginal energy supplies is the 1,300,000 AF Maximum Delivery Case since there is
surplus energy for sales or use on the SWP for the other two delivery cases.
Power Resource Options
Metropolitan has considered a range of conventional and renewable supply options to replace or supplement
the supplies presently available to Metropolitan. That review considered the cost and characteristics of a
range of technologies. Western's Resource Planning Guide Reference Data Volume 5 was used, and official
energy statistics from the U.S. Government6 the Energy Information Administration website published by
the Department of Energy were evaluated.
Renewable technologies which were investigated include:
• Wind
• Geothermal
• Solar Thermal
• Photovoltaic
Conventional and non-renewable technologies which were considered include:
• Conventional Combined cycle (CC)
• Combustion turbine (CT)
• Coal-fired steam
Figure 3 and Appendix 2 provide a comparison of resource costs under the Low Case. Under this scenario,
the cost of each alternative conventional and renewable resource option is higher than Metropolitan's
weighted forecast of marginal cost of energy except for the Maximum Delivery Case which is not expected
to occur in the next five years.
Figure 4 and Appendix 2 present a comparison of levelized energy costs under the High Case. As in the
Low Case, Metropolitan's weighted forecast of marginal cost of energy is lower than the cost of each
alternative supply-side resource except for the Maximum Delivery Case which is not expected to occur in
the next five years.
Efficiency and LoadManagement Options
As discussed, Metropolitan will generally schedule as much water as is available and allowed for delivery
through the CRA. The nature of Metropolitan's load on the CRA limits the number of demand-side
management options that are applicable, and also simplifies the analysis that must be completed to
determine cost-effectiveness. In contrast, a retail electric utility must consider multiple factors including
customer load characteristics, appliance saturations, participation rates, free ridership, differential costs to
participants and non-participants, measure screening criteria, program design, marketing and evaluation.
These requirements are substantially simplified for Metropolitan.
Each of Metropolitan's member agencies will be similarly affected by Metropolitan's decisions regarding
demand-side management options on the CRA. All member agencies will implicitly participate. All costs
will be directly incurred by Metropolitan, making the analysis a simple comparison of the cost of energy
saved by efficiency measures under consideration, as compared to the cost of energy that would be
purchased in the alternative. Metropolitan has established a schedule in the action plan to monitor and
report on the performance of the efficiency measures planned and implemented.
Pumping Plant Rehabilitation - The objective of Metropolitan's pumping plant rehabilitation program was to
improve pumping efficiency and system reliability by restoring pumps, transformers, motors and other
systems. The cost of the five-year program was $33.3 million, with savings of as much as 100 GWh per
year at full CRA operation. The program was completed in 1993.
Improvement in System Efficiency - In addition to increasing pump efficiency and reducing transformer
losses, the pumping plant rehabilitation program provided better data regarding flow rates and net-head so
that system efficiency can be monitored on a continuous basis. The rehabilitated pumps were balanced to a
uniform pumping capacity to minimize the need for throttling head gates at the pumping plants, thereby
improving efficiency. Metropolitan has conducted system flow tests at the five pumping plants using
different unit combinations for multiple CRA flow rates. Information from these tests was used to assist in
identifying a balanced CRA flow condition, and the most cost-effective mode of operation of the CRA.
SCADA System - The CRA operation is coordinated from the Gene Dispatch Control Center (GDCC)
located near the intake to the CRA (Refer to Figure 1). Metropolitan owns and operates a microwave
communication system which provides communications for the CRA operations.
Under the existing operating guidelines, the GDCC which is staffed 10 hours per day, seven days per week
by Metropolitan personnel, has the responsibility of monitoring and coordinating the flow control of the
CRA pumping operation. During the unstaffed 14 hours per day, the CRA operation is monitored by the
individual pumping plant's and GDCC's standby personnel via a paging system. The transmission and
distribution switching are coordinated from the GDCC. The real-time scheduling and accounting is
performed at the Operations Control Center located at Eagle Rock, California which is staffed 24 hours per
day and receives the pumping schedule changes from the GDCC. All changes and control operations are
done at the GDCC. After hours requests go to a GDCC standby operator via a paging system which is sent
to the related plant(s) standby operators.
Metropolitan has a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system. There are several benefits
from the SCADA system including the ability to more flexibly schedule energy from alternate sources on a
real-time basis. Improved emergency response, better control of water deliveries, reduced purchased
power costs, and a better database for future forecasting are also provided.
Other benefits of the SCADA system include a better indication of real-time load requirements to make
decisions on economy energy purchases.

</text>
