<text id="H15" category="" words="1996" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Occupational Radiation Exposure 2006 Report" Author="U.S. Department of Commerce" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.hss.energy.gov/CSA/Analysis/rems/annual/2006_Occupational_Radiation_Exposure_Report.pdf">

One of DOE's primary objectives is to provide a safe and
healthy workplace for all employees and contractors.
To meet this objective, DOE's Office of Health, Safety
and Security establishes comprehensive and integrated
programs for the protection of workers from hazards in
the workplace, including ionizing radiation. The basic
DOE standards are radiation dose limits, which establish
maximum permissible doses to workers and members
of the public. In addition to the requirement that
radiation doses not exceed the limits, contractors and
subcontractors are required to maintain exposures as low
as reasonably achievable (ALARA).
This section discusses the radiation protection standards
and requirements in effect for 2006. For more information
on past requirements, visit DOE's Web site for DOE
Directives, Regulations, and Standards at
http://www.hss.energy.gov.

2.1 Radiation Protection
Requirements
Current DOE radiation protection standards are
based on federal guidance for protection against
occupational radiation exposure promulgated
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) in 1987.[1] This guidance, initially
implemented by DOE in 1989, is based on the
1977 recommendations of the International
Commission on Radiological Protection
(ICRP)[2] and the 1987 recommendations of
the National Council on Radiation Protection
and Measurements (NCRP).[3] This guidance
recommends that internal organ dose be added
to the external whole-body dose to determine
the total effective dose equivalent (TEDE). Prior
to this, the whole-body dose and internal organ
dose were each limited separately.
In summary, the current laws and requirements
for occupational radiation protection pertaining
to the information collected and presented in
this report are shown in Exhibit 2-1.

2.2 Radiation Dose Limits
Radiation dose limits are codified in 10 CFR 835.202, 206,
207, and 208 [4] and are summarized in Exhibit 2-2.
Under 10 CFR 835.204, planned special exposures (PSEs)
may be authorized under certain conditions, allowing
an individual to receive exposures in excess of the dose
limits shown in Exhibit 2-2. With the appropriate prior
authorization, the annual dose limit for an individual
may be increased by an additional 5 rem (50 mSv) TEDE
above the routine dose limit, as long as the individual
does not exceed a cumulative lifetime TEDE of 25 rem
(250 mSv) from other PSEs and doses above the limits.
PSE doses are required to be recorded separately and are
only intended to be used in exceptional situations where
dose reduction alternatives are unavailable or impractical.
No PSEs have occurred since the requirement became
effective.

2.3 Reporting Requirements
On August 19, 2003, DOE approved and issued the
revised DOE Order 231.1A. [5] The DOE Manual 231.1-1A,
[6] which details the format and content of reporting
radiation exposure records to DOE, was approved on
March 19, 2004. The revisions affected the content and
reporting of radiation exposure records, beginning with
the 2005 monitoring year. This report is the second
report in the series to include data from the new DOE
Manual 231.1-1A. However, it should be noted that several
DOE sites are not required to report under the revised
requirements since they are exempted due to imminent
closure or an undue impact on the dosimetry program
at sites with relatively small numbers of monitored
individuals. Ninety-two out of the 95 organizations
reported under the revised Manual 231.1-1A, while
the remaining three organizations reported under the
previous DOE Manual 231.1-1. These three organizations
accounted for only 0.3% of the total monitored
individuals.

3.1 Analysis of the Data
Several indicators were identified from the data submitted
to the central data repository that can be used to evaluate
the occupational radiation exposures received at DOE
facilities. In addition, the key indicators are analyzed to
identify and correlate parameters having an impact on
radiation dose at DOE.
Key indicators for the analysis of aggregate data are
number of records for monitored individuals and
individuals with measurable dose, collective dose, average
measurable dose, and dose distribution. Analysis of
individual dose data includes an examination of doses
exceeding DOE regulatory limits and doses exceeding
the 2 rem (20 mSv) DOE administrative control level
(ACL). Additional information is provided in this report
concerning activities at sites contributing to the majority
of the collective dose.

3.2 Analysis of Aggregate Data
3.2.1 Number of Records for Monitored Individuals
The number of records for monitored individuals
represents the size of the DOE worker population
provided with radiation dose monitoring. The number
represents the sum of all records for monitored
individuals, including all DOE employees, contractors,
and subcontractors, as well as members of the public.
The number of monitored individuals is determined
from the number of monitoring records submitted by
each site. Because individuals may have more than one
monitoring record, they may be counted more than once.
Although an individual may be counted more than once,
the overall effect on the numbers and analysis is minimal.
The number of records for monitored individuals is an
indication of the size of a dosimetry program, but it is
not necessarily an indicator of the size of the exposed
workforce. This is because of the conservative practice
at some DOE facilities of providing radiation dose
monitoring to individuals for reasons other than the
potential for exposure to radiation and/or radioactive
materials exceeding the monitoring thresholds. Many
individuals are monitored for reasons such as security,
administrative convenience, and legal liability. Some sites
offer monitoring for any individual who requests
monitoring, independent of the potential for
exposure. For this reason, the number of records
for workers who receive a measurable dose best
represents the exposed workforce.
3.2.2 Number of Records for Individuals
with Measurable Dose
DOE uses the number of individuals receiving
measurable dose to represent the exposed
workforce size. The number of individuals with
measurable dose includes any individuals with
reported TEDE greater than zero.
Exhibits 3-1a and 3-1b show the number of
DOE and contractor workers, the total number
of workers monitored for radiation dose, the
number of individuals with measurable dose, and
the relative percentages for the past five years.

For 2006, 74% of the DOE workforce was monitored
for radiation exposure. Fourteen percent of
monitored individuals received a measurable
dose, and 86% of the monitored individuals did
not receive any measurable radiation dose. Over
the past five years, the percentage of individuals
monitored for radiation exposure has remained
within 2% of the five-year average; the percentage
of monitored individuals receiving any measurable
radiation dose each year was within 2% of the fiveyear
average.
Twenty-six of the 34 reporting sites experienced
decreases in the number of workers with
measurable dose from 2005 to 2006. The largest
decrease in total number of workers with
measurable dose occurred at Rocky Flats, which
ceased operations in 2005 and therefore had no
workers with measurable dose in 2006. The largest
increase in the number of workers receiving
measurable dose occurred at Fermilab, where a
number of repairs and improvements were made
during an extended shutdown period. A discussion
of activities at the highest-dose facilities is included
in Section 3.4.3.
3.2.3 Collective Dose
The collective dose is the sum of the dose received
by all individuals with measurable dose and is
measured in units of person-rem (person-Sv).
The collective dose is an indicator of the overall radiation exposure at DOE facilities and includes the dose
to all DOE employees, contractors, and subcontractors, as
well as members of the public. DOE monitors the collective
dose as one measure of the overall performance of radiation
protection programs to keep individual exposures and
collective exposures ALARA.
As shown in Exhibit 3-2, the collective TEDE decreased at DOE
by 18% from 989 person-rem (9.89 person-Sv) in 2005 to 813
person-rem (8.13 person-Sv) in 2006. Only 26% of the DOE
sites (9 out of 34 sites) reported increases in the collective
TEDE from the 2005 values. Four out of five of the sites that
contributed to the majority of the DOE collective TEDE in
2006 reported decreases in the collective TEDE. The sites are
(in descending order of collective dose for 2006) Los Alamos,
Idaho, Hanford, Savannah River, and Oak Ridge.
These highest-dose sites attributed decreases in the collective
dose to the following:
u Deactivation of facilities and a removal of radioactive
and ALARA controls to reduce direct handling of
transuranic drums at the Savannah River Site
u A reduction in the amount of work performed
associated with the Tennessee Valley Authority offspecification
fuel repackaging and other special
projects at the Oak Ridge Y-12 National Security
Complex (Y-12 NSC).
u A decrease in the isotope production work that took
place at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory during
2006 due to an outage at the High Flux Isotope Reactor
(HFIR) for the installation of the Cold Neutron Source
u A 41% reduction in the collective dose at the
Advanced Mixed Waste Treatment Project
(AMWTP) as a result of ALARA initiatives at Idaho
It is important to note that the collective TEDE includes
the components of external dose and internal dose.
Exhibit 3-2 shows the types of radiation and their
contribution to the collective TEDE. Internal dose, photon,
and neutron components are shown.
It should be noted that the internal dose shown in
Exhibit 3-2 for 2002 through 2006 is based on the 50-
year CEDE methodology. The internal dose component
decreased by 26% from 63 person-rem (630 person-mSv)
in 2005 to 47 person-rem (470 person-mSv) in 2006. The
collective internal dose can vary from year to year due
to the relatively small number of intakes of radioactive
material and the fact that the intakes often involve
long-lived radionuclides, such as plutonium, which can
result in relatively large committed doses. Due to the
infrequent nature of these intakes, care should be taken
when attempting to identify trends from the internal dose
records.
The external deep dose (comprised of photon, energetic
beta, and neutron dose) is shown in Exhibit 3-2 in order
to see the contribution of external dose to the collective
TEDE. The collective photon dose decreased by 17% from
772 person-rem (7.72 person-Sv) in 2005 to 642 personrem
(6.42 person-Sv) in 2006.
The neutron component of the TEDE decreased by 20%
from 154 person-rem (1.54 person-Sv) in 2005 to 123
person-rem (1.23 person-Sv) in 2006. This is due primarily
to decreases in the neutron dose at the Savannah River
Site (SRS) and Hanford. Hanford and SRS process
plutonium, which can result in a neutron dose from the
alpha/neutron reaction and from spontaneous fission
of the plutonium. The neutron dose at the Hanford site
decreased 46%. The majority of the site's neutron dose
is from work activities at the Plutonium Finishing Plant
(PFP). Overall dose at the PFP decreased as a result of
the slowdown of decontamination and decommissioning
of PFP facilities as priorities were shifted to the K Basins
Closure Project.
3.2.4 Average Measurable Dose
The average measurable dose to DOE workers presented
in this report for TEDE and CEDE is determined by
dividing the collective dose for each dose type by the
number of individuals with measurable dose for each
dose type. This is one of the key indicators of the overall
level of radiation dose received by DOE workers.
The average measurable TEDE is shown in Exhibit 3-3.
The average measurable TEDE increased by 3% from
0.061 rem (0.61 mSv) in 2005 to 0.063 rem (0.63 mSv) in
2006. While the collective dose and average measurable
dose serve as measures of the magnitude of the dose
accrued by DOE workers, they do not indicate the
distribution of doses among the worker population.
3.2.5 Dose Distribution
Exposure data are commonly analyzed in terms of
dose intervals to depict the dose distribution among
the worker population. Exhibit 3-4 shows the number
of individuals in each of 18 different dose ranges. The
number of individuals receiving doses above 0.1 rem
(1 mSv) is included to show the number of individuals
with doses above the monitoring threshold specified in
10 CFR 835.402(a) and (c). [4]
Exhibit 3-4 shows a reduction in the number of individuals
in all dose ranges except for the 1 - 2 rem (10 - 20 mSv)
range. Ninety-five percent of the individuals with
measurable dose had doses less than 0.25 rem (2.5 mSv).

</text>
