<text id="H17" category="" words="1999" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Press Releases" Author="US Supreme Court" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.supremecourt.gov/publicinfo/press/pressreleases.aspx">

For Immediate Release	For Further Information Contact:
April 20, 2006	Kathy Arberg (202) 479-3211
Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr., today announced the appointment of James C. Duff as the director of the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts. Duff, who has over 30 years of legislative, litigation, and management experience in Washington, D.C., comes to the position from the Baker, Donelson, Bearman, Caldwell, and Berkowitz law firm, where he has served as the managing partner of its Washington, D.C. office for six years. He succeeds Leonidas Ralph Mecham, who is retiring after 20 years as director.
The director of the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts serves as the chief administrative officer of the federal courts under the direction and supervision of the Judicial Conference of the United States, the principal policy-making body for the federal court system. The Chief Justice serves as the presiding officer of the Conference, which is composed of the chief judges of the 13 courts of appeals, a district judge from each of the 12 geographic circuits, and the chief judge of the Court of International Trade.
Duff will be responsible for the management of the Administrative Office with approximately 900 employees, and for providing legal counsel to the judiciary and administrative support to approximately 2,000 judicial officers and 30,000 court employees. Duff will serve as advocate and liaison for the judicial branch in its relations with Congress, including working with Congressional committees to secure the judiciary's annual appropriation and executing the judiciary's $6 billion dollar annual budget. In announcing his selection, the Chief Justice noted, "Jim Duff is uniquely qualified to lead the Administrative Office at this critical time. He has proven himself to be a dedicated public servant on behalf of the judiciary. I am delighted that he has agreed to take on this responsibility and certain that he will do an excellent job."
Duff has served under two other Chief Justices. He was Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist's administrative assistant from 1996-2000, serving as the chief of staff at the U.S. Supreme Court and as liaison to the other two branches of government on behalf of the Chief Justice. He began his career as an office and courtroom assistant to Chief Justice Warren E. Burger from 1975-1979, while attending law school. After graduating from the Georgetown University Law Center in 1981, Duff became an associate and then a partner at Clifford &amp; Warnke where he practiced in antitrust litigation and legislative matters until 1991 when most of the firm merged with Howrey &amp; Simon. He continued with Howrey &amp; Simon until 1996 when Chief Justice Rehnquist appointed him to be his administrative assistant. He joined Baker, Donelson, Bearman, Caldwell, and Berkowitz in 2000, where he has represented clients in various legislative corporate and litigation matters. His clients have included the Federal Judges Association, the University of Kentucky, the NCAA, and The Freedom Forum and Newseum, Inc.
Duff graduated from the University of Kentucky Honors Program in 1975 where he was Phi Beta Kappa, and received a J.D. from the Georgetown Law Center in 1981. He has taught Constitutional Law at Georgetown University since 1999, and has served on several boards, including the Capital Hospice Foundation, the Supreme Court Historical Society, and the Lawyers' Committee of the National Center for State Courts. Chief Justice Rehnquist appointed him to chair the Supreme Court Fellows Commission in 2005.
Duff is married to Kathleen Gallagher Duff. They have three children, Matthew, Kaitlin, and Scott.
For Immediate Release	For Further Information Contact:
March 21, 2006	Kathy Arberg (202) 479-3211
The Supreme Court will release the audio recording of oral argument in the following case on an expedited basis: Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, scheduled on Tuesday, March 28 at 11 a.m. for 90 minutes. The audio recording will be released shortly after the conclusion of the argument.
Sources for the oral argument audio recording will be as follows: 
•	The audio recording will be provided to the network pool, which will in turn provide an offsite, simultaneous feed to member news organizations. 
 
•	The audio recording will be made available in the House and Senate Radio and Television Galleries at the U. S. Capitol on Capitol Hill DA #9. Only press holding proper Congressional credentials will be allowed in the Galleries. 
 
 
•	An off-site mult-box is available in front of the ABC Washington News Bureau at 1717 DeSales Street, NW by request only. News organizations that are not part of the radio/TV pool systems may plug in at that location. There is no on-site parking available. Contact Rusty Lutz at (202)-222-7600 to make arrangements. 
 
Playback of the audio will be provided as soon as possible following the conclusion of the oral argument. The recording of the argument will be played in its entirety one time only. The feed of this recording is intended for broadcasters only. Contact ABC News at (202) 222-7600 for more information.

TO THE PRESS CORPS	For Further Information Contact:
April 20, 2006	Kathy Arberg (202) 479-3211
The Supreme Court of the United States will honor the memory of the late Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist on June 15 with a meeting of the Supreme Court's Bar, followed by a special sitting of the Court.
The Bar meeting-at 2 p.m. in the Upper Great Hall-will feature remarks by the Solicitor General of the United States Paul D. Clement; Associate Deputy Attorney General Ronald J. Tenpas; Hogan &amp; Hartson partner Allen R. Snyder; James C. Rehnquist, son of Chief Justice Rehnquist; Latham &amp; Watkins partner Maureen E. Mahoney; Deputy Chief of Staff and Counselor to the Attorney General Courtney Simmons Elwood; and Baker, Donelson, Bearman, Caldwell &amp; Berkowitz partner James C. Duff. Ronald J. Tenpas will serve as chairman of the meeting. At the meeting's conclusion, Bar members are expected to adopt a commemorative resolution. The Honorable Steven M. Colloton, Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, serves as chairman of the Bar's Committee on Resolutions. Ronald J. Tenpas, Allen R. Snyder, Maureen E. Mahoney, Courtney Simmons Elwood, and Steven M. Colloton all clerked for Chief Justice Rehnquist.
A Special Session of the Court will be held in the Courtroom at 3:15 p.m. U. S. Solicitor General Paul Clement and Deputy Attorney General of the United States Paul McNulty will address the Court. Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr. will respond on behalf of the Court. Attendance at the memorial sitting and meeting of the Bar is by invitation.
Members of the press corps are welcome to attend both events; please notify the Public Information Office if you intend to do so. The reception that follows the memorial sitting is closed to the press. We will make every effort to provide copies of all remarks as well as the commemorative resolution in advance.
For Immediate Release
May 9, 2006
The University of Arizona James E. Rogers College of Law announced today that Sally M. Rider, administrative assistant to Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr., has been named director of The William H. Rehnquist Center on the Constitutional Structures of Government, a nonpartisan national research center being established by the University to honor the legacy of the late Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist.
Rider, 48, served for five years as Chief Justice Rehnquist's administrative assistant and has served in the same capacity for Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr., since his appointment to the Court on September 29, 2005. As the administrative assistant to the Chief Justice, Rider has served as the Court's chief of staff and has assisted the Chief Justice in his overall management of the Court and with his other responsibilities as head of the Third Branch of government. Chief Justice Roberts said of Rider's selection, "Over the past term, Sally Rider's assistance has been invaluable with respect to administrative and management issues within the Court and throughout the federal judiciary as a whole, as well as with respect to relations with the other branches of the federal government, the state courts, and the judiciaries of other nations. Sally handled the broadest range of important responsibilities with sterling efficiency and gracious aplomb. I applaud the Rehnquist Center on a perfect choice for director. Sally will be greatly missed at the Court and throughout the federal judiciary, but I take comfort in the fact that her talents and energies will be devoted to making the Rehnquist Center a vital and vibrant memorial worthy of its namesake."
The Rehnquist Center will be devoted to nonpartisan academic research, policy analysis, national and international judicial exchange, and educational outreach. Rider will assume her duties as director of the Rehnquist Center in September, 2006. The Rehnquist Center is slated to open in Tucson in the fall of 2007.
Rider served as staff counsel to the United States House of Representatives Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs from 1986 to 1987. From 1987 to 1990 she was a trial attorney in the Civil Division of the Department of Justice. She was an assistant United States attorney in the District of Columbia from 1990 to 1995 and from 1995 to 1998 she was an attorney adviser and then deputy assistant legal adviser at the Department of State. Prior to working for the Chief Justice, Rider was deputy chief of the Civil Division in the Office of the United States Attorney for the District of Columbia. Rider received a B.A. from the University of Arizona, graduating Phi Beta Kappa, with high distinction, in 1980. She received her J.D. with high distinction in 1986 from the University of Arizona College of Law.
Rider is executive director of the Supreme Court Fellows Program and serves on the Judicial Conduct and Disability Act Study Committee, a committee appointed by Chief Justice Rehnquist that is evaluating how the federal judicial system is dealing with judicial misbehavior and disability
For Immediate Release
September 14, 2006
Beginning with the October 2006 Term, the Court will make the transcripts of oral arguments available free to the public on its Web site, www.supremecourtus.gov, on the same day an argument is heard by the Court.
In the past, the transcripts had been posted on the Web site approximately two weeks after the close of an argument session. Previously, transcripts could be obtained sooner than they were posted on the Court's Web site by making arrangements in advance and purchasing them from the Court's contract reporting service.
In the past, oral arguments had been transcribed off-site from audio recordings. The Court's current contract reporting service, Alderson Reporting Company, will now utilize the services of a court reporter in the Courtroom and high-speed technology to transcribe the oral arguments more quickly.
Transcripts can be located by clicking on the "Oral Arguments" prompt on the home page of the Court's Web site and selecting "Argument Transcripts."
Transcripts will be listed by case name and the date of oral argument. Transcripts are permanently archived beginning with the 2000 Term on the Court's Web site. Transcripts prior to the 2000 Term are maintained in the Court's Library.
For Immediate Release
September 19, 2006
Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr., today released the Report of the Judiciary's Committee to study the implementation of the Judicial Conduct and Disability Act of 1980. In May 2004 the Chief Justice's predecessor, William H. Rehnquist, responding to concerns expressed by members of Congress, appointed the Committee to study the Judiciary's implementation of the Act and to report its findings to him. Chief Justice Roberts asked the Committee to continue its work. Justice Stephen Breyer, who chairs the Committee, transmitted the report to the Chief Justice yesterday. The other members of the Committee are Pasco M. Bowman, Senior U.S. Circuit Judge, Eighth Circuit, Sarah Evans Barker, U.S. District Court, Southern District of Indiana, J. Harvie Wilkinson, III, U.S. Circuit Judge, Fourth Circuit, D. Brock Hornby, U.S. District Judge, District of Maine, and Sally M. Rider, Administrative Assistant to the Chief Justice. Staff work was performed principally by three senior members of the Federal Judicial Center and one from the Administrative Office.

</text>
