<text id="H18" category="" words="2009" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="State Magazine - various short articles" Author="US Department of State" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://2001-2009.state.gov/documents/organization/67518.pdf">

The Rich Variety
of U.S. Diplomacy
The Department displays a few of its
many diplomatic faces in this month's State
Magazine.
As Americans watch with growing
unease the spread across the globe of a particularly
virulent strain of avian influenza
that might spawn a human influenza pandemic,
the Department has taken a leading
international role in what could be the
most important health initiative of the
decade. The Department put together the
Avian Influenza Action
Group to coordinate
the overall international
response to avian and
a possible pandemic
influenza.
The new group
ensures that State has
the necessary staff,
expertise and interagency
reach to tackle
the huge job and to
practice health diplomacy
on a global scale.
Meanwhile, the professionals
in the Office
of International Health
Affairs work on the broader global health
picture.With a diverse team of Civil Service
employees, Foreign Service officers and scientific
fellows, this group promotes global
health to improve U.S. security and global
economic health. The eclectic staff concentrates
on infectious diseases, bioterrorism
and environmental health.
The Berlin Wall may be history and the
Cold War relegated to the academic world,
but Russia remains a major world power
and is a growing global economic player.
U.S. interests still require an intense bilateral
relationship with Russia, and the Russian
Affairs Office is charged with managing
this critical and complicated relationship.
While the Soviet Union and its system are
dead and buried, the new Russia doesn't
hesitate to follow its own course when its
interests diverge from U.S. interests. As one senior officer in the office says, there's never
a dull day.
Science and diplomacy may seem
strange bedfellows, but Under Secretary for
Democracy and Global Affairs Dr. Paula
Dobriansky makes a strong case in The Art
of Science Diplomacy that science and
technology can improve the lives of people
around the world and build bridges
between the U.S. and foreign societies. That
sounds like a solid definition of diplomacy
at work.
Reaching deep into
the spirit of transformation
diplomacy,
the diplomats at the
U.S. Mission in Côte
d'Ivoire took advantage
of a new embassy
complex to change
local perceptions,
highlight common
ground and foster
mutual understanding.
Working with the professionals
at Overseas
Buildings Operations,
the embassy turned its
spacious atrium into a vast gallery featuring
local art and artists alongside other
cultural items.
The ambassador also invited traditional
chiefs to perform ceremonies asking their
ancestors to bless and protect the new
embassy. And the embassy staff took diplomacy
outside the capital and corridors of
power by spending many hours in remote
villages across the government-controlled
south.
They give local people a real American
image to ponder.

DAVID FOY HONORS CONTINUE
The Bureau of Overseas Buildings
Operations has renamed its Facilities
Manager of the Year award the David E.
Foy Memorial Award for Excellence in
Facilities Management. Mr. Foy, a facilities
manager at the U.S. Consulate in Karachi,
Pakistan, was killed March 2 by a suicide
bomber who rammed his car into Mr.
Foy's vehicle. (See "3 Days in Karachi,"
May issue, p. 24.)
Mr. Foy, who was 51, was a devoted
family man who left a wife and four
daughters. They attended the American
Foreign Service Association Memorial
Plaque Ceremony May 5 presided over by
Secretary Condoleezza Rice, where David
and three other fallen colleagues were
honored.
On April 25, Congressman G.K.
Butterfield, representing Mr. Foy's home
state of North Carolina, paid tribute to
him on the floor of Congress.

Taking It On the Road:
Beijing IT Training a Hit
In early February, Fred Febo, a computer
instructor from the Foreign Service
Institute's Information Management
Training unit in the School of Applied
Information Technology traveled to the U.S.
Embassy in Beijing, China, to support the
rollout of Microsoft Office 2003 to the
embassy staff.
Doug Towns, a member of the
Information Management staff in Beijing,
worked closely with Mr. Febo and the management
of SAIT and IMT in designing
customized "just-in-time" training when
and where it was needed. The training was funded locally and open to all Department
personnel at post.
The response was overwhelming. Mr.
Febo's visit was extended three times to
meet the demand. In the end, more than 300
students completed the training.
Participants came from three Chinese
diplomatic posts: Beijing, Guangzhou and
Shanghai.
Applications taught included introductory
and intermediate levels of the entire
Microsoft Office 2003 Suite: Word,
PowerPoint,Access, Excel and Outlook. Two
additional weeklong classes - one in Word and one in Excel - were offered to help
office management specialists obtain internationally
recognized certification as
Microsoft Office Specialists.
Woody Miller, the information management
officer in Beijing, said bringing FSI's
instructor to post rather than sending
employees back to Washington for training
resulted in a hundred-fold increase in the
number of people benefiting. In addition,
since the training was customized for
Beijing, examples used in class incorporated
real-world, day-to-day issues faced by staff
members in their jobs. A local outside
vendor could not have provided this type of
knowledge.
"There is no way we could have trained
the number of people we did without this
program," said Doug Towns.
Comments from participants on the class
evaluations were overwhelmingly positive.

SO WE WILL
NEVER FORGET
One of the first U.S. soldiers to discover and liberate a Nazi
concentration camp spoke at the State Department recently,
telling employees about the horrors he and his fellow soldiers
found when they came upon the Ohrdruf camp in 1945. Retired
U.S.Army Colonel Willis B. Scudder, 90, was the keynote speaker
at the Department's Holocaust Days of Remembrance event on
April 24 at the Harry S Truman building.
As Scudder and the 4th Armored Division
approached the camp that day, they saw many
people walking the roads, including families and
youngsters by themselves, said Scudder. When
they came up a gravel road, which was lined by a
fence, they could almost immediately detect an
odor. They found the gates of the camp open, and
went in.
"On our right were bodies - about 50 or so.
They had been shot in the head," said Scudder.
"People who were members of the camp were in
rags and pajama-like concoctions. They didn't
know who we were, and we didn't know who they
were. They wanted to touch us; they wanted to kiss
us.We didn't know what to do."
"We next went to a shack. Inside there were
bodies. They were stacked perfectly, stacked like
cordwood. There were a couple hundred of them.
"We went to the barracks. The stench there was almost unbearable. On the floor, there were
bodies. Living bodies, if you like," said Scudder. "At
a field, we saw where the bodies had been burned."
As Scudder spoke, he became emotional several times and
briefly had to stop talking.
Years later, Scudder returned to the camp. He questioned
several of the townspeople, but everyone said they were
unaware that there had been a concentration camp in the area.
Ambassador Edward O'Donnell, U.S. Special Envoy for
Holocaust Issues, also spoke at the event.
"An important part of the War on Terror is the struggle
against intolerance and hatred," said O'Donnell. To fight against
anti-Semitism and to pass this fight on to our sons and daughters,
it is important to attend events like this, he said.
More than 50 people attended the observance, which was
organized by the Office of Civil Rights.

Green to Go

The Department of State achieved
"Green" for both status and progress on
the President's Management Agenda
Federal Real Property Initiative. Secretary
Condoleezza Rice announced the
achievement during an April 11 tour
of the Bureau of Overseas Buildings
Operation with Under Secretary for
Management Henrietta Fore.
The Office of Management and Budget
awarded Green status to OBO two quarters
ahead of its published schedule. The
Department achieved the coveted status
by demonstrating its ability to dispose of
surplus assets, maintain assets in the right
condition and operate at the right cost.
This meant preparing a comprehensive
Asset Management Plan, a three-year
rolling timeline of initiatives, numerous
performance measures and a shared
Department-U. S. Agency for Inter-national
Development real property inventory.
The Department is one of two government
agencies to achieve Green for this
Initiative.

SENATE CONFIRMS
VETERAN AMBASSADOR
AS NEW DG
The U.S. Senate has confirmed
Ambassador George M.
Staples as the new Director
General of the Foreign Service
and Director of the Bureau of
Human Resources.
Ambassador Staples has
been a career member of the
Foreign Service for 25 years
and was most recently political
advisor to the Supreme Allied
Commander Europe at NATO
in Belgium. Before his NATO
assignment, ambassador
Staples served as ambassador
to Rwanda, Cameroon and
Equatorial Guinea. He also
served as deputy chief of
mission in Bahrain and
Zimbabwe, senior watch officer
in the Operations Center and senior Turkey desk officer in
the Bureau of European Affairs
during the first Gulf War. His
other overseas assignments
include the Bahamas, Uruguay
and El Salvador.
Before joining the
Department, he served as an
officer in the Air Force and a
manager in private industry.
He speaks French, Spanish
and Turkish.
Ambassador Staples was
born in Knoxville, Tenn. He
received his B.A. in political
science from the University of
Southern California and an
M.A. in business from Central
Michigan University.
He and his wife Jo Ann have
one daughter, Catherine.

Sanaa Social
Club Races
for Yemeni
Women
A U.S. Embassy in Sanaa social club organized
a charity run/walk March 16 that raised
more than $400 for a local organization that
helps rural women and families escape
domestic abuse.
Some 75 runners and walkers from the
embassy and the Sanaa diplomatic community
volunteered to participate, generating enough
contributions to outfit the Ibb Women's
Association with a television, VCR and videotapes
to train women in basic professional
skills. Armed with these skills, the women will be more able to live
on their own.
Association Director Mona Ali said women living in rural areas
have difficulty finding help when they most need it.
"When I founded this organization, there was nothing to help
women who were getting divorced," she said, adding that some of
the most difficult cases were women who tried to leave a relation A U.S. Embassy in Sanaa social club organized
a charity run/walk March 16 that raised
more than $400 for a local organization that
helps rural women and families escape
domestic abuse.
Some 75 runners and walkers from the
embassy and the Sanaa diplomatic community
volunteered to participate, generating enough
contributions to outfit the Ibb Women's
Association with a television, VCR and videotapes
to train women in basic professional
skills. Armed with these skills, the women will be more able to live
on their own.
Association Director Mona Ali said women living in rural areas
have difficulty finding help when they most need it.
"When I founded this organization, there was nothing to help
women who were getting divorced," she said, adding that some of
the most difficult cases were women who tried to leave a relationship
that was abusive for them or their children. For these families,
the association provides referrals, home visits and training.
The embassy hopes its modest donation of equipment, resources
and cash will allow Ali's group to assist more women and families
in rural Yemen who might not even know such resources exist, said
Ambassador Thomas Krajeski.
"We respect the good work that the Ibb Women's Association is
doing to assist rural women with domestic problems," he said.
Security and
Prosperity
Partnership
Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs
Assistant Secretary Tom Shannon presents
letters of appreciation from President
George W. Bush to Department staff who
contributed to the development and implementation
of the Security and Prosperity
Partnership of North America. From left:
Robin Mathewman, Sigrid Emrich,
Antoinette Condo, Eugene Aaron, Steve
Royster, Assistant Secretary Shannon,
Maurice Parker, Evelyn Wheeler, Terry
Breese, Mitchell Optican, and Robert
Sorenson. Not included: Shaun Donnelly,
Tony Wayne, Linda Jewell, Roberta Jacobson,
Under Secretary Paula Dobriansky and
Roger Noriega.

Ambassador Aubrey Hooks, standing, is crowned honorary chief of the
Western Ivoirian village of Aboisso during a ceremony with the King of the
Sanwi people, Nana Amon Ndouffou V.

</text>
