<text id="H19" category="" words="1994" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Fact Sheet" Author="Federal Energy Regulatory Commission " PublicationDate="August 8, 2006 " SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.ferc.gov/legal/fed-sta/epact-fact-sheet.pdf">

ENERGY POLICY ACT OF 2005
Significant Policy Changes
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPAct) is the first major energy law enacted in
more than a decade, and makes the most significant changes in Commission authority
since the New Deal's Federal Power Act of 1935 and the Natural Gas Act of 1938. In
passing EPAct, Congress signaled a strong vote of confidence in the Commission. The
Commission has taken on new duties and authorities with a sense of purpose, mindful of
the public trust they entail. Moreover, the Commission has been dedicated to meeting
these obligations within the time allotted by Congress.
EPAct had three principal policy goals in the areas of the statute that relate to the
Commission: (1) it reaffirmed a commitment to competition in wholesale power markets
as national policy, the third major federal law in the last 30 years to do so; (2) it
strengthened the Commission's regulatory tools, recognizing that effective regulation is
necessary to protect the consumer from exploitation and assure fair competition; and (3)
it provided for development of a stronger energy infrastructure.
EPAct granted the Commission significant new responsibilities and significant
new authority to discharge these responsibilities by modifying the Federal Power Act, the
Natural Gas Act and the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (PURPA).
New Responsibilities
Significant new responsibilities include:
• overseeing the reliability of the nation's electricity transmission grid;
• implementing new tools, including penalty authority, to prevent market
manipulation;
• providing rate incentives to promote electric transmission investment;
• supplementing state transmission siting efforts in national interest electric
transmission corridors; and
• reviewing certain holding company mergers and acquisitions involving electric
utility facilities, a well as certain public utility acquisitions of generating facilities.
EPAct also specified a number of actions to be taken by the Commission. In
fulfilling these requirements during the first year since EPAct was signed into law on
August 8, 2005, the Commission has promulgated nine final rules, issued three additional
notices of proposed rulemaking, authored and submitted seven reports to Congress, and
entered into a memorandum of understanding with the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission. The Commission has taken these actions in a timely manner  -  meeting
every deadline set for the Commission in EPAct.
Some of these deadlines were challenging, particularly the task of implementing
the repeal of the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 (PUHCA 1935) and
promulgating a new rule to implement the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2005,
as well as implementing rules to address the Commission's expanded corporate
transaction review authority under the Federal Power Act.
Market Manipulation
EPAct gave the Commission the authority to issue rules to prevent market
manipulation in jurisdictional wholesale power and gas markets, and in jurisdictional
transmission and transportation services. For the Commission, this is one of the most
important and challenging provisions of the Act. Congress granted this authority out of
recognition that wholesale power and gas markets had changed dramatically since the
1930s. While the Commission's legal duty remains the same  -  protecting the wholesale
power and gas customer  -  it needed additional regulatory tools to discharge this duty.
EPAct gives the Commission civil penalty authority, which the Commission has
indicated it will exercise carefully by assuring that its market manipulation rules are
clear. That will make it easier for regulated entities to assure compliance, and make it
easier for the Commission to identify violations.
Electricity Reliability and Infrastructure
EPAct significantly augmented the Commission's electricity authorities. Perhaps
the most important of these are the provisions governing reliability of the bulk power
system. For the first time, the Commission was granted authority to oversee mandatory
reliability standards governing the nation's electricity grid. The Commission finalized
rules on the certification of an Electric Reliability Organization (ERO) and on procedures
for the establishment, approval and enforcement of mandatory electric reliability
standards. The Commission has now certified the ERO and issued a preliminary staff
assessment of 102 reliability standards filed by the ERO for Commission approval.
EPAct also contained a number of provisions directed at expanding and
modernizing the nation's electricity grid. The Commission has issued a rule on electric
transmission pricing reforms designed to promote needed investment in energy
infrastructure and benefit energy customers. This will bolster power grid reliability and
lower costs for delivered power by reducing transmission congestion. In addition, the
Commission issued a rule to require transmission organizations with organized electricity
markets to make available to load-serving entities long-term firm transmission rights that
satisfy certain guidelines. This will help customers who want to make long term supply
arrangements. These customers want to be able to enter into long term transmission
service arrangements without being exposed to unhedged congestion cost risk. The final
rule goes far to reduce the risk exposure to transmission customers, and is important to
development of the grid.
EPAct addressed the difficulties of siting major new transmission facilities. It
authorized the Secretary of Energy to designate "national interest electric transmission
corridors" where there is major transmission congestion. EPAct allows applicants
seeking to build transmission within these corridors to seek construction permits from the
Commission under certain conditions. While most transmission projects will continue to
be sited by states under state law, EPAct granted the Commission this important
supplemental siting authority. FERC has proposed rules on transmission siting that will
govern the issuance of construction permits by the Commission for projects that meet the
statutory criteria.
Also with respect to transmission, the Commission signed a Memorandum of
Understanding with the Department of Energy and other federal agencies with authority
to issue federal authorizations for electric transmission facilities to establish a
coordinated federal review and permitting process that continues strong federal
environmental protections.
In addition to the provisions relating to transmission grid improvements, EPAct
addressed a significant generation issue within the jurisdiction of the Commission.
Pursuant to directives in EPAct, the Commission tightened the thermal efficiency
requirements for qualifying cogeneration facilities under PURPA. These rules should
limit the potential for abuse under PURPA, curtail sham transactions, and prevent new
PURPA "machines." At the same time, the rules support the development of new
cogeneration facilities that truly conserve energy, by ensuring that new qualifying
cogeneration facilities use thermal output in a productive and beneficial manner, and that
the electrical, thermal, chemical or mechanical output of new qualifying cogeneration
facilities is used fundamentally for industrial, commercial or institutional purposes. Also
pursuant to EPAct amendments to the Federal Power Act, the Commission eliminated
ownership restrictions on qualifying cogeneration and small power production facilities.
Only minor changes to the Commission's hydroelectric regulations were enacted
with the passage of EPAct. For example, the first action the Commission took upon
enactment of the law was to extend the Flint Creek Project preliminary permit for three
years. Pursuant to section 241 of EPAct, the Commission has worked with other resource
agencies to develop mandatory license conditions that are fairer and more balanced. The
Commission also has issued a guidance document to help hydropower licensees seeking
renewable tax credit certification for incremental energy gains from efficiency
improvements.
Natural Gas Infrastructure
Pursuant to EPAct, the Commission has acted to encourage more investment in the
nation's natural gas infrastructure. In order to promote the expansion of natural gas
storage capacity and mitigate natural gas price volatility, the Commission has issued new
rules for allowing market-based rates for interstate natural gas storage.
To decrease the time needed for creating a complete application for new liquefied
natural gas (LNG) terminals, the Commission adopted a rule requiring potential developers to
initiate pre-filing procedures at least six months prior to filing a formal application with
the Commission. The Commission has proposed rules to implement provisions that grant
authority to coordinate the processing of federal and state authorizations required under
federal law for natural gas projects, as well as maintain a consolidated record of decisions
for judicial review.
Mergers and Acquisitions
Pursuant to EPAct, the Commission implemented the repeal of PUHCA 1935 and
the provisions of a new PUHCA 2005. PUHCA 2005 permits Commission access to
books and records of holding companies and their members if necessary for determining
jurisdictional rates. The Commission implemented PUHCA rules governing accounting,
record retention and reporting, including certain blanket waivers and exemptions, within
the deadlines in EPAct.
Along with the repeal of PUHCA 1935, EPAct expanded the Commission's
corporate review authority to include authority over certain holding company mergers
and acquisitions, as well as certain public utility acquisitions of generating facilities. It
also imposed statutory deadlines for acting on mergers and other jurisdictional corporate
transactions. The Commission implemented these new provisions of EPAct by providing
blanket authorizations for certain transactions while ensuring that captive utility
customers are protected. The Commission acted quickly, so that new rules would be in
effect before the effective dates of the new corporate review authority and PUHCA 2005,
and the repeal of PUHCA 1935, all of which became effective on February 8, 2006.
Studies and Reports
The Commission has issued seven reports as mandated by EPAct. In December
2005, the Commission issued a report on its investigation of the California electricity
crisis, detailing the actions the Commission has taken and the timetable for future action
to resolve outstanding refund claims from this time period. Also in December, the
Commission submitted to Congress a report on whether any PUHCA technical and
conforming changes were needed as a result of the repeal of the 1935 act. In February
2006, the Commission together with the Department of Energy issued a report on the
steps which must be taken to establish a system to make available to all transmission
owners and regional transmission organizations in the Eastern and Western
interconnections real-time information on the functional status of all transmission lines
within the interconnections. Also in February, the Commission issued its initial report on
the progress made in licensing and constructing the Alaska natural gas pipeline; and a
subsequent progress report was issued in July 2006, as required by EPAct.
Meeting EPAct deadlines of August 8, 2006, the Commission issued two
additional reports. First is a report assessing, by region, demand response resources and
the use of advanced metering resources. The second is a report detailing the
recommendations of regional joint boards to study the issue of security-constrained
economic dispatch for the various market regions, what constitutes security-constrained
economic dispatch and how it affects or enhances the reliability and affordability of
electric service.
Future Responsibilities of the Commission
Other EPAct requirements that the Commission will be implementing in the
future:
• Approve or remand more than 100 separate proposed electric reliability standards,
act on proposed regional delegation agreements, and oversee the effective
enforcement of approved mandatory reliability standards.
• Issue a final rule setting up procedures for the Commission to exercise its siting
authority for transmission applications in national interest transmission corridors.
• Issue a final rule on termination of the mandatory purchase obligation under
section 210 of PURPA.
• Issue a final rule on coordinating the processing of interstate natural gas
infrastructure proposals among federal and state authorities and to maintain a
consolidated record of decisions for judicial review.
• Enter into a Memorandum of Understanding with the Secretary of Defense to
ensure coordination of LNG facilities that may affect an active military
installation.
• Work jointly with other resource agencies to designate corridors for oil, gas, and
hydrogen pipelines and electricity transmission and distribution facilities on
federal land in the 11 contiguous Western states, perform environmental reviews
for such designations and incorporate the designated corridors into the relevant
agency land use and resource management plans.
• Along with the Department of Energy, study and submit a report to Congress on
the benefits of cogeneration and small power production.
• Determine the appropriate exercise of authority under new Federal Power Act and
Natural Gas Act transparency provisions.
• Along with the Departments of Justice, Energy, Agriculture and the Federal Trade
Commission, submit a report to Congress on competition within the wholesale and
retail markets for electric energy in the United States.

</text>
