<text id="H23" category="" words="1998" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="State and Local Taxes. An Overview and Comparative Guide" Author="Cory Fong" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.nd.gov/tax/genpubs/2006-redbook.pdf">

SALES AND USE TAXES
CURRENT LAW
Sales, Use, and Gross Receipts Tax
Imposition and Rates
Sales Tax. North Dakota imposes a sales tax on the gross
receipts of retail ers. The tax is paid by the purchaser and
collected by the retailer.
The sales tax is levied as follows:
• 2% rate on the gross receipts from retail sales of natural
gas.
• 3% rate on the gross receipts from retail sales of new
mobile homes.
• 3% sales tax surcharge on each motor vehicle rental
contract for a period of fewer than thirty (30) days,
provided the gross vehicle weight of the motor vehicle
is ten thousand pounds or less.
• 5% general rate on the gross receipts from retail sales
of tangible personal property, communication services,
maga zines and other periodicals sold over the counter,
cigarettes and tobacco products, and admission tickets
for recreation activities; from the rental of hotel, motel,
and bed and breakfast accommodations for periods
of less than 30 consecutive days; from the leasing of
tangible personal property; and from the rental of motor
vehicles for periods less than 30 days.
Use Tax. The purchase price of tangible personal
property purchased outside of the state for storage, use
or consumption within the state is subject to a use tax.
In addition, tangible personal property not originally
purchased for use in North Dakota is subject to a use tax
based upon its fair market value at the time it was brought
into the state. Credits are allowed for sales and use taxes
paid to other states.
The use tax is collected by any retailer who maintains
in this state, directly or indirectly, an offi ce, distribution
house, sales house, warehouse, or other place of business
or has a sales representative operating in this state either
permanently or temporarily.
Use tax is paid by contractors installing materials in real
property, including real property owned by government and tax-exempt entities. North Dakota use tax is also
paid by contrac tors buying materials in North Dakota and
installing them in other states, except Montana.
Use tax rates are the same as the sales tax rates listed.
Local Sales and Use Taxes. Cities or counties that have
adopted home rule charters may levy sales and use taxes.
North Dakota home rule statutes require the North Dakota
Offi ce of State Tax Commissioner to administer the local
taxes. The state pays the revenue collected to the local
governments on a monthly basis. Cities and counties with
a local tax during the 2003-2005 biennium are listed on
page 39.
Farm Machinery Gross Receipts Tax. North Dakota
imposes a 3% gross receipts tax on retail sales of new farm
machinery and new irrigation equipment used exclusively
for agricultural purposes. A person that receives new farm
machinery or new irrigation equipment for storage use, or
consumption in North Dakota is also subject to the gross
receipts tax. Credits are allowed for similar taxes paid
to other states. Used farm machinery and used irrigation
equipment used exclusively for agricultural purposes are
exempt from sales, use and gross receipts taxes. Farm
machinery is not subject to sales tax.
Alcoholic Beverage Gross Receipts Tax. North Dakota
imposes a 7% gross receipts tax on retail sales of alcoholic
beverages sold for consumption either on or off the
premises. A person that receives alcoholic beverages
for storage use, or consumption in North Dakota is also
subject to the gross receipts tax. Credits are allowed for
similar taxes paid to other states. Alcholic beverages are
not subject to sales tax.
Lodging Gross Receipts Tax. North Dakota imposes a
1% gross receipts tax through June 30, 2007, on the rental
of hotel and motel accommodations for periods of less
than 30 consecutive days. The gross receipts tax is in
addition to the state sales tax and does not apply to bed and
breakfast accommodations.
Exemptions
Receipts from the sale of tangible personal property for
the purpose of "resale" or "processing" by the purchaser are not subject to the sales, use, or gross receipts tax. In
addition, receipts from the sale of the following items are
exempt from sales, use, and gross receipts tax:
• Food and food ingredients for human consumption
except for prepared food for immediate consumption,
candy, and soft drinks.
• Food used as samples in grocery stores.
• Commercial fertilizers, fungicides, herbicides,
adjuvants, feeds, and seeds used for agricultural
purposes.
• Agricultural by-products used to pro duce steam or
electricity.
• Interstate communications (telephone calls, etc.).
• Hotel or motel rooms rented by or for same individual
for 30 or more consecu tive days.
• Machinery and equipment that a new or expanding
plant uses primarily for manufacturing, processing or
recycling (the company must get pre-approval or pay
the tax and apply for a refund).
• Materials used to construct an agricultural processing
plant (the company must get pre-approval or pay the tax
and apply for a refund).
• Computer and telecommunications equipment that is
an integral part of a new or expanding primary sector
business other than a manufacturer or recycler (the
company must be certifi ed as a primary sector business
by the Department of Commerce and get pre-approval
for the exemption or pay the tax and apply for a refund).
• Production equipment in a large coal-burning
power plant and tangible personal property used in
construction of the plant.
• Production equipment in a wind-powered electrical
generating facility constructed before January 1, 2011
and with a nameplate capacity of at least one hundred
kilowatts and other tangible personal property used in
construction of the facility (the plant operator must get
pre-approval or pay the tax and apply for a refund).
• Used mobile homes.
• Used farm machinery, used irrigation equipment, and
new and used farm machinery repair parts.
• Newspapers.
• Newsprint and printer's ink sold to publishers.
• Magazine subscriptions.
• Electricity.
• Water.
• Steam used to process agricultural products.
• Flight simulators or mechanical equip ment used with a
fl ight simulator.
• Money.
• Lottery tickets.
• Admissions to, or sales made at, an annual church
supper or bazaar held in a publicly-owned building.
• Admission tickets to state or local fairs.
• Performances of community non-profi t music or
dramatic arts organi za tions (if proceeds used for
charitable purposes).
• Film rentals if admissions to view the fi lm are subject to
sales tax.
• Prescription drugs.
• Artifi cial medical devices.
• Mobility-enhancing equipment for use by physically
disabled persons.
• Oxygen and anesthesia gases for medical purposes.
• Diabetic and bladder dysfunction sup plies.
• Ostomy devices and supplies.
• Items sold to federal chartered credit unions.
• Items subject to other taxes such as coal (if not used
for heating), benefi ciated coal, aircraft, motor vehicles,
gasoline, and combustible fuels.
• Items sold to private non-profi t schools.
• Bibles, hymnals, textbooks, prayerbooks sold to
nonprofi t religious organi zations.
• Items sold to governmental agencies, including public
schools.
• Items sold to residents of Montana if the total sales
price exceeds $50.
• Items sold to residents of Canada if purchase is over
$25 (must apply for a refund of tax paid).
• Items sold to a Commerce Authority for use in the
Authority's infrastructure.
• Items sold on an Indian reservation to an enrolled
Native American or to the tribal government.
• Goods sold to a hospital or skilled nursing, basic care
or intermediate care facility, assisted living facility, or
emergency medical service provider.
• Items sold at an auction unless the auctioneer is selling
retail inventory or consigned goods owned by an
undisclosed principal.
• Items sold to a charitable organization to be awarded
as a prize in a raffl e if the winner is subject to tax upon
receipt.
• CO2 used for enhanced oil recovery.
• Equipment used to sell biodiesel fuel.
• Hydrogen used to power internal combustion engines or
fuel cells.
• Equipment used to produce and store hydrogen.
• Precious metal bullion with purity not less than .999.
Administration
Every business making taxable retail sales and every
business accruing a use tax liability must obtain a North
Dakota sales and use tax permit from the North Dakota
Offi ce of State Tax Commissioner. A consolidated form is available to register for a sales and use tax permit, income
tax withholding, unemployment insurance and workers
compensation.
Most businesses pay sales, use, and gross receipts taxes
on a quarterly basis. However, businesses reporting
taxable sales and purchases of $333,000 or more during
the previous calendar year must fi le monthly returns.
Businesses required to fi le and pay monthly returns are
allowed to deduct and retain a compensation allowance of
1½% of the tax due, up to a maximum of $85 per month if
the returns are fi led on time.
Whether the tax is paid monthly or quarterly, the tax
payment and a return reporting all sales and purchases
are due the last day of the month following the end of the
reporting period. In odd-numbered years, monthly returns
for May are due June 22.
Distribution of Revenue
Revenue collected from the sales, use, farm machinery
gross receipts, alcoholic beverage gross receipts, and
motor vehicle excise taxes is divided between the State
General Fund and the State Aid Distribution Fund. The
formula to determine the State Aid Distribution Fund
portion is designed to keep the amount constant regardless
of tax rate changes. The formula is:
40% (1% ÷ by general sales tax rate) (net collections)
This formula to determine the State Aid Distribution Fund
currently yields 8% of the net collections. The distribution
of the State Aid Distribution Fund portion is 53.7% to
revenue sharing for counties and 46.3% for cities.
Motor Vehicle Excise Tax
Imposition and Rates
The purchase price of any motor vehicle purchased or
acquired, either within or outside of North Dakota, for use
on the streets or highways of this state is subject to a motor
vehicle excise tax if the vehicle is required to be registered
in North Dakota.
The motor vehicle excise tax is 5% of the purchase price
(the sale price less any trade-in amount). If the vehicle is
acquired by means other than purchase, the tax is 5% of
the fair market value. When a motor vehicle weighing less
than ten thousand pounds is leased for at least one year, the motor vehicle excise tax is 5% of the lease consideration.
All other leased vehicles are taxed at 5% of the purchase
price. North Dakota allows credit for any excise tax paid
on a motor vehicle in another state if that state allows a
reciprocal credit.
The motor vehicle excise tax is in addition to motor
vehicle registration fees for license plates. The registration
fees are paid annually to the Department of Transportation.
Exemptions
A motor vehicle is exempt from the motor vehicle excise
tax if the vehicle is:
• A gift between a husband and wife, parent and child or
brother and sister.
• Inherited.
• A motor carrier vehicle.
• Purchased for resale by a licensed dealer.
• Purchased by a disabled veteran.
• Purchased or leased by the State of North Dakota or a
political subdivision of the state.
• A bus purchased by a nonprofi t senior citizens' or
handicapped persons' organization.
• Specially equipped for a disabled per son.
• Owned by an individual and transferred to a partnership
or corporation.
• Transferred from a partnership to one of the partners
when the partnership dissolves.
• Acquired by a private nonprofi t school for the
transportation of students.
• Purchased by a charitable organization to be awarded as
a prize in a raffl e and the vehicle will be subject to tax
when requested.
• Transferred between joint tenants in whose names the
vehicle was previously titled if the vehicle is transferred
without monetary considerations.
• Owned by a person who has a change of name due to
marriage, adoption, or court order.

</text>
