<text id="H25" category="" words="1999" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Ford Foundation Report 2006 Delivering on a promise to advance human welfare with a diversity of approaches and continuity of purpose" Author="The Ford Foundation " PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.fordfoundation.org/pdfs/library/ar2006.pdf">

Bringing people together to build common vision,
networks of action and movements for change
1954
JUSTICE IN SOUTH AFRICA
In an effort to promote understanding between the United
States and South Africa, grants support exchange programs in
education, business and journalism. In the 1980's, under the
leadership of former President Franklin Thomas, foundation
grants help create a network of international and South African
legal experts who challenge the legal basis for apartheid and
are central participants in helping shape the new constitution.
Dedicated to supporting education, the arts and community
development, the foundation opens an office in Johannesburg
in 1993 to help the people of the country build a peaceful and
prosperous nonracial democracy.

1968
FIGHTING DISCRIMINATION
To create a broad civil rights network, the foundation
supports the founding of new civil rights groups over the
next two years, including the Mexican American Legal
Defense and Educational Fund, the National Council of
La Raza, the Native American Rights Fund, the Puerto
Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund, the National
Committee Against Discrimination in Housing and the
Legal Action Center. Ford also funds the Voter Education
Project to support minority voters' rights and increase
voter registration in the South. In 1992, Ford helps create
the Asian American Justice Center.

1976
A MOVEMENT
FOR WOMEN
Reflecting some 20 years of foundation
support for global women's empowerment
and health, Ford provides assistance to the
National Organization for Women's Legal
Defense and Education Fund to promote
gender equality and prohibit gender-based
discrimination. In addition, Ford supports
the International Women's Health Coalition's
efforts to ensure that women gain access to
reproductive health care services worldwide.

1985
a movement in
latin america
Building on a long history of support in the
region, the foundation forms partnerships
with local grantees to support human
rights in Chile, Argentina and Peru.
This includes expanding funds for research
centers, universities and bar associations;
addressing human rights violations and
building sound judicial procedures; and
promoting positive relationships between
government and civil society.
1998
STRENGTHENING
CULTURES
Ford helps launch the Honoring Nations
program to help build a network of
individuals and organizations committed
to excellence in Native American selfgovernance.
Administered by the Kennedy
School of Government at Harvard, the
national program demonstrates how good
governance is built upon the unique culture
of each tribe. More than 78 tribal government
initiatives have received awards for improved
approaches to education, health care,
economic development and environmental
protection.
1999
supporting
RIGHTS
The foundation begins its support of
the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force
through a grant for groundbreaking
research on issues of social and economic
discrimination affecting the gay and
lesbian community. Dedicated to
eliminating prejudice, violence and
injustice against gay and lesbian people
at the local and national levels, the
foundation also supports the work of the
Lambda Legal Defense and Education
Foundation and the ACLU.

2000
NURTURING
CIVIL SOCIETIES
Ford establishes a program on
global civil society, focused on
strengthening civic engagement
to make global institutions more
accountable and solve problems
that transcend national borders.

2006
A NEW AFRICAN
FOUNDATION
Akwasi Aidoo (at right), executive
director of TrustAfrica, a new African-led
institution launched by Ford to build on
the promise of political and economic
reforms across Africa. Based in Dakar,
Senegal, TrustAfrica works with African
institutions to develop lasting solutions to
the continent's most pressing challenges.

Building New Organizations
Supporting people who create new kinds of organizations
is a lasting tradition of the Ford Foundation.
In 2006, Ford launched TrustAfrica, a new philanthropy based
in Africa and run by Africans. Incubated by the foundation over five
years, TrustAfrica has already convened innovative African leaders who
are addressing the violence, discrimination and economic isolation
that impact many nations on the continent. TrustAfrica offers a forum
and funding for collaborative, locally grown solutions that build on
new democratic governance practices, growing civil society capacities
and greater freedom. Also in 2006, the foundation supported the
establishment of the Brazil Human Rights Fund, which makes grants to
strengthen promising grassroots initiatives and training and exchange
programs for Brazilian human rights activists.

Helping innovators realize their goals
with new organizational forms

1958
LINCOLN CENTER
The foundation commits $25 million to build and operate
Lincoln Center. The landmark performing arts institution was
one of the first in the United States to bring together venues
for all of the major performing arts and is now home to 12
independent and autonomous resident companies. In 2006,
the foundation commits $15 million to help kick off the first
major renovation of Lincoln Center to make it more inviting and
accessible to visitors, artists and students.

1970
NEIGHBORHOOD SAFETY
Support goes to organizations that research, monitor and
improve law enforcement and the administration of justice.
Recipients include the Police Foundation, created in 1970
with a five-year, $30 million commitment, which funds efforts
to improve police patrol, investigation and crime prevention,
as well as the Vera Institute of Justice, independently
established in 1961, which supports court reform and the
prevention of juvenile crime.

1976
EARLY MICROFINANCE
The foundation's Bangladesh office makes
a grant to the University of Chittagong's
Economics Department and Muhammad
Yunus to help launch a project to show that
landless people, primarily women, can use
credit and repay loans. This microfinance
demonstration evolves into the Grameen
Bank, which by 2005 has outstanding loans
of more than $300 million and cumulative
disbursements of more than $4 billion.
Yunus and the Grameen Bank are awarded
the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize. Support is also
given to the Bangladesh Rural Advancement
Committee, which organizes village
cooperatives and trains health, nutrition and
family-planning workers.

1979
COMMUNITY
REVITALIZATION
Ford helps establish the Local
Initiatives Support Corporation,
a national organization dedicated to
revitalizing low-income, distressed
communities. Other urban and
rural revitalization work involves
the Enterprise Foundation and local
development funds and banks that
help develop leadership, business and
housing in low-income areas.

1982
WELFARE
AND WORK
The Manpower Demonstration
Research Corporation, created
by the Ford Foundation, and
Public/Private Ventures, another
Ford-funded organization, address
the connections between welfare
and work and the link between
employment and youth development.

1985
ARTISTIC
OPPORTUNITIES
The Sundance Institute for Film and
Television is awarded a grant to establish
a laboratory in which choreographers and
filmmakers can create new dance work
specifically for film and television.

2001
HEALING THE
WOUNDS OF WAR
With major foundation support, the
International Center for Transitional
Justice is created to secure sustainable
peace and justice in countries emerging
from years of conflict.

Creating Opportunity
and Improving Lives

Almost 40 years ago, the Ford Foundation helped develop
a new philanthropic tool by pioneering the use of low-cost
loans and loan guarantees for charitable purposes. Called
program-related investments, they act as "risk capital" for innovative,
income-generating ideas that need patient development and testing.
The foundation now uses a full range of tools, from grants to recoverable
grants and loan guarantees to loans and equity investments - all
designed to support innovation, create opportunity and improve lives.
In 2006 we backed innovative financing tools to give low-income
families renting space in manufactured home parks a stake in the land
on which their manufactured homes sit. Our grantees are helping
these communities create land trusts so they do not lose their
homes when parks are sold. We continue to support a national policy
experiment in helping low-income families build assets for the future
through children's saving accounts. Seeded at birth by nonprofits
and government and built up over time by contributions from families
themselves, these accounts can eventually help pay for college tuition or
down payments on homes. And working with low-wage workers, the
foundation helps employers expand access to government programs that
provide workers with savings instruments, insurance and tax benefits - 
all of which encourage long-term financial security and stability.

2006
community
forestry
A Ford-supported initiative in Mexico
enables rural communities to play a more
direct role in managing forest lands in
cooperation with forestry agencies. These
efforts, supported by the foundation in
the United States and around the world,
create economic opportunities for lowincome
rural households.

Supporting new ideas with
mainstream potential

1967
RENEWING
COMMUNITIES
A grant to New York's Bedford-Stuyvesant
Restoration Corporation to revitalize the
disadvantaged Brooklyn neighborhood
signals the beginning of the foundation's
work in a new kind of community initiative:
Community Development Corporations
(CDCs). Formed by residents, small business
owners, congregations and other local
stakeholders, CDCs produce affordable
housing, job training and social services.
As of 2006, an estimated 4,600 CDCs are
operating in the United States.


1992
rural
development
The foundation supports innovative
forestry initiatives that enlist rural
communities and forestry agencies in
projects to improve management of forest
lands while creating economic opportunities
for poor rural households. Over the
years, this includes grants in India for
joint forest management; China for efforts
to protect biodiversity while improving
livelihoods; and Indonesia, Mexico and
Brazil to assist indigenous communities in
obtaining land and forest rights.

1996
TOWARD ECONOMIC SECURITY
The foundation initiates the American Dream Demonstration
to determine whether Individual Development Accounts - 
matched savings accounts - can help low-income people save
and achieve economic stability. Six years later, Ford initiates the
Savings for Education, Entrepreneurship and Down Payment
project in sites across the nation to assess whether children's
savings accounts can help young people save for college, buy a
first home, even build up a nest egg for retirement.

1998
AFFORDABLE MORTGAGES
The foundation collaborates with the Center for
Community Self-Help and Fannie Mae to develop
the Self-Help Initiative, which makes available
$2 billion in affordable mortgages for 35,000
minority and low-income home buyers nationwide.
The $50 million grant marks one of the largest
commitments to homeownership by a philanthropic
institution.

2005
A REGION IN NEED
In partnership with the W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Ford
commits $7 million to support a public/private initiative to
spur economic development in formerly industrial stretches
of Detroit's waterfront. Support for cultural institutions
and community development in struggling neighborhoods
is designed to help Detroit revitalize its economy.

the grant-making process
Once the foundation's board approves work on a key issue or in a particular geographic
area, a program officer will explore in detail how foundation grants can
have the greatest impact. The officer begins this process by consulting broadly
with potential beneficiaries, practitioners, researchers, policy makers and others
to identify ideas, institutions or projects worthy of support. During this
process, the program officer looks for innovative approaches in the work that
grantees might undertake, benchmarks to measure results and expected costs.
When the program officer has completed this process, he or she presents
a proposed program of grant making in a memorandum reviewed by peers,
a supervisor and at least two senior foundation officers. Once the proposed
program is approved, the officer begins the process of soliciting and reviewing
proposals and making specific grants, usually with a two-year budget.
Program staff regularly report to the board on how grantees are
performing. Because of the foundation's long-term focus, the foundation
frequently renews grants to organizations that
demonstrate they are making progress toward
their objectives.
In reviewing proposals, grant-making staff
look for fresh thinking and innovative people and
organizations that will be effective in fulfilling the
foundation's mission. Ford supports pluralism and equal opportunity, both
in its operations and in its grant making. In evaluating proposals, we look
for prospective grantees that provide opportunities for women and underrepresented
groups.
Applicants typically learn within six weeks whether their proposals fall
within the foundation's program interests and are being seriously considered
for funding. If a proposal is being considered for a grant, Ford may conduct site
visits and grant negotiations as well as administrative and legal reviews. This
process usually takes three months, unless there are special circumstances.
Activities supported by grants must be charitable, educational or scientific,
as defined under the appropriate provisions of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code
and Treasury Regulations.
Ford makes grants to individuals, generally limited to research, training
and travel directly related to our program interests. These grants are awarded
through publicly announced competitions or on the basis of nominations
from universities and other nonprofit institutions.

</text>
