<text id="H27" category="" words="2008" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Quarterly report pursuant to section 13 or 15(D) of the Securities Exchange  Act of 1934." Author="Hershey Co" PublicationDate="2007" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://phx.corporate-ir.net/phoenix.zhtml?c=115590&p=irol-SECText&TEXT=aHR0cDovL2lyLmludC53ZXN0bGF3YnVzaW5lc3MuY29tL2RvY3VtZW50L3YxLzAwMDAwNDcxMTEtMDctMDAwMTE3L3htbA%3d%3d">

Net Sales
 
The increase in net sales was attributable to sales volume increases from the introduction of new products, primarily in the United States, and higher sales for our businesses in Canada and Mexico.  Strong sales of seasonal products and our dark and premium chocolate items also contributed to the sales increase.  These increases were substantially offset by decreased price realization from higher rates of promotional spending and higher returns, discounts and allowances for products at retail.  Softness in sales of single serve items and the shift from limited edition items to new product growth platforms in 2007, compared with the first quarter of 2006, also had a negative impact on sales performance in the quarter.
 
Key Marketplace Metrics
 
Consumer takeaway increased 1.5% during the first quarter of 2007, in line with shipments.  Consumer takeaway is provided for channels of distribution accounting for approximately 80% of our U.S. confectionery retail business. These channels of distribution include food, drug, mass merchandisers, including Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., and convenience stores.
 
Market Share in measured channels declined by 1.2 share points during the first quarter of 2007. The change in market share is provided for measured channels which include sales in the food, drug, convenience store and mass merchandiser classes of trade, excluding sales of Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.
 
Cost of Sales and Gross Margin
 
Business realignment charges of $9.9 million were included in cost of sales in the first quarter 2007, compared with a credit of $1.6 million in the prior year.  The remainder of the cost of sales increase was primarily associated with sales volume increases and higher raw material and other input costs.
 
Half of the gross margin decline was attributable to the impact of business realignment initiatives recorded in 2007 compared with 2006.  The rest of the decline reflected higher costs for raw materials, fuel, and packaging, along with lower net price realization.  Favorable product mix and supply chain productivity partially offset the impact of cost increases.

Selling, Marketing and Administrative
 
Selling, marketing and administrative expenses decreased primarily as a result of expense control and lower administrative costs associated with incentive compensation, primarily stock options.  These decreases were offset by expenses of $3.0 million for project implementation related to our business realignment initiatives and higher advertising expenses.
 
Business Realignment Initiatives
 
Business realignment charges of $27.5 million were recorded in the first quarter of 2007 associated with our supply chain transformation program.  The charges were primarily associated with fixed asset impairments and expenses for the closure of certain manufacturing facilities, along with employee separation costs.
 
During the first quarter of 2006, we recorded charges related to previous business realignment initiatives that began in 2005.  The $3.3 million business realignment charge included $1.4 million related to a U.S. voluntary workforce reduction program, $1.3 million for facility rationalization relating to the closure of the Las Piedras plant and $.6 million related to streamlining our international operations.
 
Income Before Interest and Income Taxes and EBIT Margin
 
EBIT decreased in the first quarter 2007 compared with the first quarter 2006 principally as a result of higher net business realignment charges associated with our business realignment initiatives. Net pre-tax business realignment charges of $40.4 million were recorded in the first quarter 2007 compared with $1.7 million recorded in the first quarter 2006, an increase of $38.7 million. The remainder of the decrease in EBIT was attributable to lower gross profit resulting primarily from higher input costs which were only slightly offset by lower selling, marketing and administrative expenses.
 
EBIT margin decreased from 18.6% for the first quarter of 2006 to 14.7% for the first quarter of 2007.  The impact of net business realignment charges reduced EBIT margin by 3.4 percentage points.  The remainder of the decrease resulted from the lower gross margin offset partially by lower SM&amp;A expense as a percentage of sales.
 
Interest Expense, Net
 
Net interest expense was higher in the first quarter 2007 than the comparable period of 2006, primarily reflecting higher interest expense associated with the issuance of $500.0 million of long-term debt in August 2006. Higher interest rates in the first quarter 2007 as compared to the first quarter 2006 also contributed to the increase in interest expense.
 
Income Taxes and Effective Tax Rate
 
Our effective income tax rate was 34.1% for the first quarter of 2007 and benefited by .7 percentage points as a result of the effective tax rates associated with business realignment charges recorded during the quarter.  We expect our effective income tax rate for the full year 2007 to be 36.1%, excluding the impact of tax benefits associated with business realignment charges during the year.
 
Net Income and Net Income Per Share
 
Net Income in the first quarter 2007 was reduced by $25.3 million, or $0.11 per share-diluted, and was reduced by $1.2 million, or $0.01 per share-diluted, in the first quarter of 2006 as a result of net charges associated with our business realignment initiatives. After considering the impact of business realignment charges in each period, earnings per share-diluted in the first quarter 2007 was even with the first quarter of 2006.
 
Liquidity and Capital Resources
 
Historically, our major source of financing has been cash generated from operations. Domestic seasonal working capital needs, which typically peak during the summer months, generally have been met by issuing commercial paper. Commercial paper may also be issued from time to time to finance ongoing business transactions such as the refinancing of obligations associated with certain lease arrangements, the repayment of long-term debt and for other general corporate purposes. During the first quarter of 2007, cash and cash equivalents decreased by $36.7 million.
 
Cash provided from operations, short-term borrowings, cash provided from stock options exercises and cash on hand at the beginning of the period was sufficient to fund the repayment of long-term debt of $188.7 million, the repurchase of Common Stock for $150.0 million, dividend payments of $60.7 million and capital additions and capitalized software expenditures of $41.8 million.
 
Cash used by changes in other assets and liabilities was $32.1 million for the first quarter of 2007 compared with cash used of $46.9 million for the same period of 2006. The decrease in the amount of cash used by other assets and liabilities from 2006 to 2007 primarily reflected the timing of payments for accrued liabilities associated with selling and marketing programs and lower payments relating to incentive compensation and business realignment initiatives.
 
A receivable of approximately $14.0 million was included in prepaid expenses and other current assets as of April 1, 2007 and December 31, 2006 related to the recovery of damages from a product recall and temporary plant closure in Canada.  The product recall during the fourth quarter of 2006 was caused by a contaminated ingredient purchased from an outside supplier.
 
Interest paid was $52.5 million during the first quarter of 2007 versus $39.0 million for the comparable period of 2006.  The increase in interest paid reflects additional borrowings and the higher interest rate environment.  Income taxes paid were $9.8 million during the first quarter of 2007 versus $33.8 million for the comparable period of 2006.  The decrease in taxes paid in 2007 was primarily related to a lower federal extension payment for 2006 income taxes.
 
The ratio of current assets to current liabilities decreased slightly to .9:1 as of April 1, 2007 from 1.0:1 as of December 31, 2006. The capitalization ratio (total short-term and long-term debt as a percent of stockholders' equity, short-term and long-term debt) increased slightly to 76% as of April 1, 2007 from 75% as of December 31, 2006.
 
Generally, our short-term borrowings are in the form of commercial paper or bank loans with an original maturity of three months or less. In December 2006, we entered into a five-year credit agreement establishing an unsecured revolving credit facility to borrow up to $1.1 billion with the option to increase borrowings by an additional $400 million with the consent of the lenders. We may use these funds for general corporate purposes, including commercial paper backstop and business acquisitions.
 
Outlook
 
The outlook section contains a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on current expectations.  Actual results may differ materially.  Refer to the Safe Harbor Statement below as well as Risk Factors and other information contained in our 2006 Annual Report on Form 10-K for information concerning the key risks to achieving future performance goals.
 
We have revised our operating performance expectations for the full year 2007 as a result of significant increases in dairy input costs.  On April 20, 2007, the United States Department of Agriculture announced significant changes to the prices of dairy products effective immediately. These price changes, along with unfavorable worldwide supply and demand conditions for dairy products, will result in costs for our dairy raw materials for 2007, which are now anticipated to be considerably higher than our previous expectations.  The dairy markets are not as developed as many of the other commodities markets and, therefore, it is not possible to hedge our costs by taking forward positions to extend coverage for longer periods of time.  Our latest expectations with regard to key operating performance measures are presented below.
 
We continue to expect sales growth in 2007 to be within our long-term goal of 3% to 4%. Marketplace performance has been below this level to date, but we expect it to improve in the second half of the year behind continued increases in consumer and customer investment.
 
We expect that our 2007 business realignment initiatives designed to execute a comprehensive, three-year supply chain transformation plan will result in total pre-tax charges and non-recurring project implementation costs of $525 million to $575 million.  Total charges include project management and start-up costs of approximately $50 million.  In 2007, we expect to record charges of approximately $270 million to $300 million, or $.75 to $.84 per share-diluted.  As a result of the program, we estimate that our gross margin should improve significantly, with on-going savings of approximately $170 million to $190 million generated by 2010.  A portion of the savings will be invested in our strategic growth initiatives, in such areas as core brand growth, new product innovation, selling and go-to-market capabilities and disciplined global expansion.  The amount and timing of this investment will be contingent upon market conditions and the pace of our innovation and global expansion.
 
We have identified a number of initiatives which will help to offset a portion of anticipated increases in input costs and have implemented certain price increases.  However, the magnitude of the higher dairy input costs and maintaining our planned increases in brand investment are expected to result in reduced earnings compared with our previous expectations.
 
Excluding the impact of business realignment charges, we now expect our gross margin to be essentially flat for the full year 2007.  We expect significantly higher input costs in 2007 compared with 2006, particularly as a result of the recent increase in expected dairy input costs.  Productivity improvements, cost control initiatives and improving price realization are expected to partially offset these cost increases.

Excluding the impact of business realignment charges, we now expect EBIT margin to decline somewhat for the full year 2007.  This decline will result from the decision to maintain our increased levels of brand investment, despite the recent increase in expected dairy input costs.
 
Excluding the impact of business realignment charges, earnings per share-diluted is now expected to increase within a range of 4% to 6% for the full year 2007.
 
 The sudden and large increase in dairy costs will have a disproportionate impact on earnings in the second quarter of 2007.  This results from our interim accounting methodology in which expected annual costs for major raw materials are recorded ratably on a year-to-date basis. Therefore, dairy costs recorded in the second quarter will reflect approximately half of the expected full year impact of the recent increases in dairy input costs.  This factor, combined with expected sales performance, is expected to result in earnings per share-diluted for the second quarter of 2007 of $.34 to $.35, excluding the impact of business realignment charges.

</text>
