<text id="H28" category="" words="2005" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Greening the Government Through Leadership in Environmental Management" Author="U.S. Department of Energy Office of Health, Safety and Security" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress=" http://www.hss.energy.gov/nuclearsafety/env/reports/eo13148/2007.pdf">

Improved Relations with Outside Entities
DOE organizations reported improved relations with outside entities, including improved
relations with regulatory agencies and better community relations.
2. BEST PRACTICES/LESSONS LEARNED
Facilities were invited to provide up to three statements identifying EMS
implementation best practices/lessons learned.
DOE organizations reported numerous examples of best practices/lessons learned
associated with EMS implementation at their facilities. These are discussed under the
following general categories.
• Integration
• Management/staff roles
• Communication/coordination
• Aspects analysis
• Auditing/assessment
• Goals/objectives/targets
• Documentation
• Contacting/Subcontracting
• Electronics recycling
• Procedural and program practices.
The following paragraphs highlight best practices/lessons learned in each of these
categories.
Integration
DOE organizations reported lessons learned/best practices associated with integrating
environmental management considerations into their policies, operations, planning, and
management. Integration was cited at various levels, including the workplace, site, and
mission. One site reported:
"integrating EMS principles and the National Environmental Policy Act
evaluations through use of an environmental checklist,"
and another said that:
"ISO 14001 laid the foundation for implementation of the OHSAS 18001 system
for occupational safety and health."
One site reported that the: 
"integration of environmental corrective actions into the project's overall
[corrective action tracking] system provides an excellent example of the seamless
integration of the EMS into fundamental operational processes."
One lesson learned regarding integration was that:
"true integration with safety is difficult (processes will integrate but philosophy of
safety still dominates)."
Management/Staff Roles
DOE organizations stressed the importance of senior management involvement for EMS
success. One response is typical of many:
"Even though employees are generally environmentally responsible in their
actions, without the support and emphasis of top management, the EMS would
probably struggle to succeed."
Variations on this theme included the need for senior management support to "establish a
single entity with overall responsibility and authority if EMS covers diverse groups;" the
need for senior management to remain engaged  -  at least on an annual basis; and the
benefits of senior management support for marketing, sitewide communication and
aggressive EMS promotion. Sites also noted that acceptance of objectives/targets should
be at all levels involved with the subsequent management program  -  not just top
management, and that a bottoms-up approach to EMS design and direction produced
strong staff ownership.
Communication/Coordination
Lessons learned and best practices regarding communication and coordination were
reported by DOE organizations. A recurrent theme was the need for early and frequent
communication. Specific lessons learned included the need to develop an understanding
of environmental impacts among employees and the need for a full-time EMS
coordinator, especially at the larger facilities. One site reported that:
"Translating [the site's] over 24 aspects and potential impacts into terms which
can be communicated effectively to employees was an influential action taken in
response to an assessment (continual improvement cycle). This translation was
then quickly incorporated into [the site's] General Employee Training."
Best practices included the establishment of a lessons learned project point of contact for
each program area and the dissemination of examples of successes to line organizations
to provide guidance to future projects. One site observed that:
"Close working relationships between the environmental professionals, facilities
operations, procurement, and experimental operations personnel provide the best
opportunities for adoption of sustainable practices across the organization. By fostering these relationships, environmental professionals can help influence
decisions made throughout the organization in order to promote sustainable
practices."
Organizations reported lessons learned regarding marketing as a form of communication.
For example, one said that extensive marketing was effective, and another reported that:
"By keeping the EMS policy simple, it was easy to turn it into an acronym that
helped remind employees of environmental commitments. The policy
commitments  -  Pollution Prevention, Community, Cleanup, Continual
Improvement and Compliance  -  were condensed into the acronym P2C4."
Aspects Analysis
DOE organizations reported best practices or lessons learned regarding the analysis and
evaluation of environmental aspects. These included the importance of broad input to
aspect/impact identification, that the aspects analysis process needs to mature with the
EMS, and that revisions will be required as significant aspects are reevaluated. One
organization reported that the greater the effort (broad-based involvement) to identify
activities and their environmental aspects, the greater the potential to recognize areas for
improvement through new objectives and targets. Best practices cited include:
"Environmental impacts and aspects are analyzed along with health and safety
concerns on a continual basis during review of individual work packages as they
are prepared for field work,"
and
"Annual evaluations of aspects and impacts to identify potential vulnerabilities as
a result of changing conditions. Examples include facility demolitions;
equipment moves; and process start ups."
Auditing/Assessment
DOE organizations reported best practices and lessons learned regarding auditing and
assessment. One noted that a defined self-assessment process facilitates continuous
improvement, and another reported that it had integrated a process-assessment approach
that allows for periodic review of environmental aspects of major operations. Another
facility reported that a:
"Robust internal EMS audit process drives continuous improvement and
demonstrates commitment to external auditors."
Another said that using an external auditor gives the program more credibility.
Goals/Objectives/targets
DOE organizations reported lessons learned regarding goals and objectives. One noted
that the objectives should be achievable even under adverse conditions, and another
reported that the "establishment of annual goals and objectives allows management to
identify important ESH issues in their organizations."
Documentation
DOE organizations reported on the advantages of using electronic documentation. One
said:
"The documentation of the [project] EMS has been done entirely electronically
through our Intranet. Using web page documentation has made it much easier to
update and manage changing processes and procedures."
Another said that:
"[The laboratory] utilizes a state-of-the art database system . . . to manage its
environmental management obligations. This internet-based relational database
system allows for the integrated management of citations (permit requirements,
regulatory citations, etc.), operational requirements, tasks, monitoring data,
documents, and reporting. Automatic comparison of requirements against
regulatory limits and escalating e-mail notifications provide robust compliance
management tools. User-specific regulatory update notifications provide flexible
and powerful tools to manage regulatory compliance obligations. Reporting and
document management functions provide a comprehensive status of
environmental performance."
Contracting/Subcontracting
Organizations reported lessons learned regarding EMS and contracting, including that
EMS targets were tied directly to concrete objectives. They noted that:
"EMS supports the subcontracting process through consideration and inclusion of
environmental issues."
"The transition of management and operating responsibilities from the previous
contractor to [the current operating contractor] demonstrates continuation of
commitments to the prevention of pollution, compliance with applicable
requirements, and continual improvement."
Electronics Recycling
One organization reported a best practice that it intends to repeat in future years:
"During Earth Day, 2006 [the organization] sponsored an employee electronics
recycling day whereby personnel and their families could bring old electronic
equipment in to be reused or recycled by [the organization's] recycling contract
vendor. Approximately 4500 lbs of old electronic equipment, televisions,
computers, etc. were accumulated at this event. It was apparent from comments
made by employees that there are few means in the general public to recycle old
electronic equipment. [The organization] is planning to perform this service next
year in hopes of expanding the total amount of equipment recycled."
Procedural and Program Practices
Various EMS procedural and program best practices were identified. Examples include
the following:
Flexibility.
"The EMS needs to be flexible to accommodate different types of workers
in the organization. Changes in performance take time."
Implementation.
"Use of EMS toolkit to assist in EMS implementation and operation."
Purchasing.
"Use of warehouse to purchase in-stock 'green' items."
Planned work reviews. One organization reported its process for facilitating
approval of work documents:
"All planned work (in the form of a Work Document) undergoes
comprehensive review by the site Work Review Group, which is
comprised of representatives from the following departments: Safety,
Environmental Affairs, Radiation Protection, QA, and the work group
assigned to complete the task. The process requires that a hazard analysis
checklist be completed for each work activity planned. The checklist
includes an evaluation for applicability of waste minimization/pollution
prevention opportunities to the work, as well as required environmental
reviews. When environmental aspects are identified during the checklist
process, subject matter experts from the Environmental Affairs department
evaluate the proposed work with respect to applicable state and federal
environmental regulations and associated permits. Based upon these
environmental reviews, and as necessary, the Environmental Affairs
department will modify the work scope to comply with existing permits, modify existing permits/licenses, or apply for new permits/licenses. The
method for transmitting the upcoming work packages to the Work Review
Group via electronic mail prior to issuance is noteworthy. This process
allows time for representatives of the Work Review Group to thoroughly
review each document and brainstorm any questions prior to the work
being performed. The implementation of this process allows for an
efficient mode in getting work documents approved."
Energy conservation. DOE organizations reported that energy conservation
measures were implemented or improved at their sites. For example, one said that
"Through energy and environmental conservation efforts, the amount of
natural gas consumed in the X-6002 Boilers was reduced by
approximately 59% for the period from October 2005 through July 2006.
This was accomplished through reducing thermostat settings and by
application of a biocide to control bacteria growth in the boiler water
during the summer months instead of running the boilers to keep the
temperature high enough to control the bacteria growth. In addition to the
cost savings of $173,900, the reduction in consumption of natural gas
resulted in a corresponding reduction in risk of harm to the environment
by reducing the quantity of greenhouse gas emissions (CO2) by
approximately 2 million pounds."
Programs and operating procedures. Best practices regarding programs and
operating procedures included the following:
• An Environmental Program Description that addresses all of the specified
DOE Order 450.1 requirements.
• Standard operating procedures (for used oil and for cold weather), emergency
response systems, a [site] Safety Observer program (which has provided
localized support to ensure issues are identified and corrected), and
aggressively conducted Pollution Prevention Opportunity Assessments that
result in the elimination or reduction of emissions, effluents, and waste.
• Required periodic reviews to ensure that the EMS remains current and
dynamic.
3. EMS IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES
Facilities were invited to provide up to three statements identifying EMS
implementation challenges.
DOE organizations identified several challenges to EMS implementation, which have
been grouped under the following topics:
• Funding/resources/costs
• Staff resources/turnover
• Integration
• Awareness
• Management
• Compliance
• Communication
• Flowdown of requirements
• Cultural change/mindset
• Procurement
• Continuous improvement
• Other priorities
• Other challenges
Funding/Resources/Costs
Three related types of funding issues were reported: (1) lack of funding, (2) competition
with other funding priorities, and (3) additional costs posed by EMS. A typical lack-offunding
challenge was:
"The ability to dedicate resources to implementation is hampered by uncertainties
in funding availability and application."
Funding competition challenges included:
"New contract significantly reduced funding across the Lab creating priority
problems."
"With environment as a supporting function, it is not always given a priority in
the organization. Additional documentation required by EMS requires resources
not always available."
Staff Resources/Turnover
Related to funding challenges are staffing challenges. Organizations cited the challenges
of limited personnel resources and of transferring EMS knowledge to a staff with high
turnover rates. For example, one said that meeting reporting requirements in a timely
manner is difficult with the minimal staff available to conduct EMS.
Integration
Organizations expressed challenges pertaining to EMS integration. Specific integration
challenges included integration among site contractors and into various levels within the
organization, integration of EMS principles into the work control processes and day-today
activities, and integration of the EMS into other management systems. Examples
include:
"The single greatest challenge to achieve the long-term benefit of an EMS is to
fully integrate it within a site's management structure."
"Joint Federal/Contractor EMS poses challenges to EMS management, audits and
reviews."
"Managing a vast number of procedures and instructions required to address
significant environmental aspects requires constant vigilance from multiple
disciplines."

Awareness
DOE organizations said that maintaining awareness was a challenge and that training was
needed to foster awareness.

</text>
