<text id="H30" category="" words="1998" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="2006-7 Academic Catalog" Author="Jacksonville University " PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.ju.edu/06-07catalog.pdf">

Students may receive assistance in generating ideas,
formulating a thesis/focus, planning, organizing, and/or revising. The center is ideal for students who need
assistance in writing, speech-intensive courses, or for students who would like to take their writing to the
next level.
SPLASH
The Successful Professional, Life, and Study Habits (SPLASH) program is a collaborative programming
initiative sponsored by Academic Services for Athletes, Career Services, the Student Counseling Center,
Residential Life and the Learning Resource Network. SPLASH speaks directly to the advancement of
students as leaders within their communities by focusing on the skills and abilities needed for succeeding in
the 21st century beyond those learned in the classroom. SPLASH programs contribute to the development of
the whole person through dynamic presentations on interpersonal skills, career preparation, personal
growth, and learning how to learn. SPLASH creates vibrancy on campus by modeling collaborative
interdepartmental efforts and by engaging students in creative and interactive ways while at the same time
exposing them to ideas and skills that will assist them in becoming personally satisfied and living as leaders
within their communities. SPLASH meets NCAA CHAMPS/Life skills programming criteria for studentathletes.
SPLASH programs are offered at various times throughout the semester.
ACCESSIBILITY PLAN FOR THE MOBILITY IMPAIRED
Jacksonville University recognizes its obligation to have classrooms accessible to persons with mobility
impairments. Generally, if a classroom is inaccessible, another classroom on the first floor of the same
building will be used to make a class accessible to a mobility impaired student. Staff members who have
offices located on the top floors of an inaccessible building will meet with students on the first floor of the
building they are located in, if the need arises.
The Vice President of Student Life will coordinate the relocation of classes and is also the point of
contact for students and staff who are mobility impaired.
CAMPUS AND STUDENT LIFE
Jacksonville University places a priority on a campus environment that is comfortable, safe and conducive to
living and learning. JU actively promotes a well-rounded program of co-curricular activities and experiences
to supplement and complement its academic programs. A majority of these activities are initiated, organized
and administered by students. Students are encouraged not only to attend, but to take part in co-curricular
programs and activities, including clubs and organizations, student media, recreation and athletic
competition, and cultural and entertainment offerings.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES
JU operates fully air-conditioned, smoke-free residence halls and apartments (see "Campus and Facilities"
in the General Information section). The residence halls and apartments accommodate about 1,100 students
and are supervised by a professional staff of residential life coordinators who live on the premises and who
are augmented by student staff members.
Undergraduate students who have been accepted for enrollment receive a room reservation form from
the Admission Office. Those students who desire or are required to live in campus residence halls should
complete the form, indicating room and, if applicable, roommate preferences, and return it to the Admission
Office with the appropriate deposit (new students, see "Enrollment Deposit" in the Admission section;
returning students, see "Residence Hall Deposit" in the Financial Information section). Room assignments
are made in July. New students are assigned residence hall rooms in the New Student Living and Learning
Community unless accommodations are required as a result of a documented disability. Although JU cannot
guarantee students preferences will be met, every effort is made to accommodate requests.
RESIDENCY POLICY
Jacksonville University is committed to the holistic development of students, thus the University has
established a residency policy, requiring first-year students to live on campus. Living on campus provides
students with the opportunity to share experiences with peers and take full advantage of the learning that
takes place outside the traditional classroom. The Office of Residential Life is responsible for monitoring
compliance with this policy as well as the enforcement of this policy.
As a residential campus, we require that all first-year students live on campus, and share in the
development of our living and learning communities, unless a student:
1. Reaches 21 years of age prior to the drop/add date of the semester/term.
2. Is legally married, as defined by the state of Florida.
3. Is a member of a branch of the armed services on active duty.
Students who reside with a family member may request permission to reside at such residence while
enrolled at the University. The residence must be located within reasonable commuting distance of the
University in Duval County, Florida or a neighboring county. Requests to reside off campus as a first year
student must be made in writing to the Office of Residential Life at students' time of first enrollment with the
University, and must be accompanied by appropriate documentation, as prescribed by the Office of
Residential Life.
Resident students should maintain a minimum credit load of 12 credit hours during the fall or spring
semesters and six (6) credit hours during the summer terms. Failure to enroll for a full academic load does
not alter the residency requirement.
Residential facilities close for recesses and vacations published in the academic calendar. Notices of
closings are posted prior to each period.
The Residency Policy is reviewed each year and is subject to change on an annual basis.
STUDENT ADDRESSES
All students, whether living on campus or off campus, must ensure their correct local and permanent
addresses are on file in the Registrar's Office. Changes of address must be reported to the Registrar
immediately.
PUBLIC SAFETY
Jacksonville University maintains a full-time public safety department that provides services 24 hours a day,
seven days a week. All public safety officers undergo background investigations prior to employment. The
mission of the Public Safety Department is crime prevention. This mission is accomplished by patrolling
University buildings and grounds, conducting safety and security education programs, providing safety
escort services, and enforcing other University rules and regulations under its jurisdiction. The department
also supervises campus traffic and parking and a network of "blue light" emergency telephones placed
throughout the campus. Public Safety serves as the campus lost and found depository. Public Safety also
maintains liaisons with local, state and federal law enforcement agencies.
STUDENT MEDICAL SERVICES
Resident students participate in the University Infirmary Plan. The fee for this plan is included in the
residence room charge. A doctor at the university's designated health care provider can see students
enrolled in the Infirmary Plan who become ill during the semester. The University provides transportation
through a local taxi service to and from the infirmary for students without their own transportation. After
normal office hours, an on-call doctor can be reached by calling the health care provider . In an emergency,
rescue is always called. The Infirmary Plan does not cover emergency medical needs. Students will need to
file individual insurance claims for these services.
Jacksonville University requires all full-time undergraduate students to carry a blanket accident
and health insurance policy (see "Medical Information" in the Admission section in this Catalog.)
SPECIAL STUDENT SERVICES
COUNSELING CENTER
Enrolled students may schedule appointments with professional counselors at the Student Counseling
Center. Assistance is available for problems related to stress, anxiety, depression, eating disorders,
relationship issues, alcohol and drugs, and family concerns. Confidentiality is protected under Florida law.
Students requiring long-term counseling may request referral services from the counselors.
DISABLED STUDENT SERVICES
The Student Life Office coordinates disabled student services. Available resources include, but are not
limited to, assistance with special accommodations, academic adjustments, study or tutorial assistance,
lifestyle management, service coordination with other University departments, community agency referrals,
and referral for testing and for reevaluation. Also, refer to "Non-Discrimination" in the General Information
section and "Disability Related Information" in the Admissions section.
INTERNATIONAL STUDENT SERVICES
To assist international students in maintaining status with the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service and
transitioning smoothly to life in the United States and at JU, the University has designated an international
student advisor in the Student Life Office. The advisor guides international students through required U.S.
Federal and University processes and procedures from first semester of enrollment to graduation. Specific
information is published in the International Student Handbook, including immigration regulations, Internal
Revenue Service requirements, health and health insurance requirements, and general information about
U.S. customs and courtesies. International students also enjoy social contact through the International
Student Association (see "Clubs and Organizations" in this section.)
STUDENT GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATION
The Student Government Association (SGA), through the elected Student Senate, sponsors and funds cocurricular
organizations, events and activities from student life fees. Elections for class senators are held in
the spring, with the exception of the freshman class that holds its election in the fall. Students who are
academically eligible may run for and be elected to offices.
Each full time undergraduate student has an equal vote in student government. All students are
entitled to admission to University-sponsored campus events and free copies of some student publications.
Students also are eligible to participate in student organizations and activities, provided they meet academic
qualifications required by the University and eligibility requirements specified by an organization's charter,
constitution and/or bylaws.
CULTURAL AND ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITIES
DOLPHIN PRODUCTIONS
JU students have opportunities to plan, promote and attend activities through Dolphin Productions, the
student events programming board. Dolphin Productions, offers a variety of concerts, comedians, lectures,
films, and other special events, including the annual Homecoming.
ARTIST SERIES
World-class artists headline the annual series of concerts given in Terry Concert Hall. Past performances
have included the Amabile Piano Quartet, the Juilliard String Quartet, Grant Johannesen, and the Albert
McNeil Jubilee Singers. JU students are admitted free with identification.
FINE ARTS SERIES
The Fine Arts Series consists of music, drama, dance events, art lectures, and exhibitions. Admission to
these performances is free to students who may obtain tickets upon presentation of their Dolphin Cards. An
active art exhibit program presents shows by visiting artists.
MUSICAL ORGANIZATIONS
The Concert Choir is open to all interested students. Participation in the Chamber Singers and the
Dolphinaires show choir is by audition only. The Chamber Singers ensemble performs frequently around
Jacksonville, the southeastern United States, and abroad. The Dolphinaires show choir combines song
and dance in a popular idiom. This entertaining group is in great demand locally. The Music Theatre
Workshop performs scenes from operas and musicals or short operas and also participates in major
opera and musical productions produced by the College of Fine Arts. Enrollment is by audition only.
Participation in the JU Community Orchestra is open by audition to qualified instrumentalists. The
orchestra is a significant Jacksonville cultural asset. The Concert Band provides performance opportunities
for interested and qualified wind and percussion players. The group is dedicated to the performance of the
finest works from the traditional and contemporary wind repertoire. The Jazz Ensemble is a select group that
performs a variety of standard and contemporary jazz selections. Other performance opportunities include
chamber music, percussion ensemble, jazz combo, and guitar ensemble.
Academic credit may be earned by participation in any of the performing groups. Music opportunities
are coordinated by the Department of Music of the College of Fine Arts.
FACULTY RECITAL SERIES
The Department of Music features its faculty artists in an annual series that includes a variety of exciting
chamber music and recital works. Admission is free to JU students.
DANCE ORGANIZATIONS
The JU Dance Theatre is the performance group for ballet, modern, and jazz dance. Interested students are
requested to audition for participation through the Department of Dance.
DRAMA AND THEATRE ORGANIZATIONS
All JU students are invited to participate in College of Fine Arts theatre activities. Open auditions are
conducted several times each year for productions of full-length and one-act plays in Swisher Auditorium.
Students are also invited to volunteer for backstage participation.
COMMUNITY CULTURAL EVENTS
Leading concert artists, professional Broadway plays, musicals, rock concerts, and ballets come to the
Jacksonville Veterans Auditorium and Florida Times-Union Center for the Performing Arts each year.
Various other events feature lectures and presentations in politics, public affairs, sciences, and the arts.
Reading and discussion series, forums, and art exhibits are also scheduled.

</text>
