<text id="J01" category="" words="2016" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Laboratory Astrophysics and Radio Astronomy: Some Recent Successes" Author="Michael C. McCarthy" PublicationDate="September 22, 2006 " SampledFrom="Astronomy & Astrophysics Review" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=5&hid=106&sid=61ccce05-0a1d-4f10-8be6-ccab328c4aa5%40sessionmgr114">

INTRODUCTION
This paper focuses on several recent examples in which: (i) laboratory studies provide much new data  -  i.e. rest frequencies typically better than 1 km s-1 in equivalent radial velocity  -  to guide future astronomical searches for rare isotopic species or additional transitions of known astronomical molecules, (ii) the close coordination of laboratory astrophysics and radio astronomy has led to the discovery of a new molecule in space, or (iii) laboratory studies provide unambiguous assignment for a previously unidentified series of astronomical lines. The molecules
highlighted here are: (1) silicon sulfide SiS, (2) the isomeric pair SiCN/SiNC, (3) the free radical 12CH, and its carbon-13 isotopic species 13CH, and (4) C6H in a low-lying vibrationally excited state, which we conclude on the basis of laboratory measurements is the carrier for a series of unidentified series of lines in the rich astronomical source IRC+10216.
The spectrometer that has been responsible for the detection of these and many other molecules in our laboratory is a Fourier transform microwave (FTM) device used in combination with a supersonic molecular beam, in which an electrical discharge source through suitable precursors gases is used to produce the desired species in high abundance. A detailed description of the spectrometer can be found elsewhere. It is equipped with a sensitive microwave receiver and is fully computer controlled so that nearly round-the-clock operation is routinely achieved. The spectrometer possesses both high sensitivity  -  about a million molecules per quantum state per gas pulse  - 
and high spectral resolution  -  approaching 1 part in 107. FTM spectroscopy has been used with good success in the past nine years by our group to detect a large number
of molecules of astronomical interest: more than 130 by late 2005. Nine of these species have already been detected in rich astronomical sources on the basis of precise laboratory rest frequencies, and many of the others are good candidates for detection because they are closely related in structure and composition to known astronomical molecules; many are also calculated to be quite polar which should assist radioastronomical searches.
A large subset of our new discoveries are carbon chains terminated at one or both ends with a heteroatom (e.g.Si, S, O, etc.) or functional group (e.g. -CH3, CN, etc), but stable and reactive rings, and molecular ions have been detected as well. Small atomic clusters which are weakly polar can also be detected by this technique.
The key point here is that many polar molecules, even light hydrides, often possess at least one transition  -  a pure rotational transition or a lambda-type doubling transition in the ground or low-lying vibrational state  -  in the centimeter-wave band. Because the production efficiency and detection sensitivity of our present spectrometer are usually both high, extensive isotopic spectroscopy is often undertaken, as have studies of vibrationally excited states.
Silicon Sulfide
Silicon sulfide SiS plays a very important role in the rich astronomical source IRC+10216 because chemical models predict it is the progenitor for most Si-bearing molecules in the outer molecular envelope. Although SiS is composed of two second row elements, a total of seven isotopic have now been detected in this source, the faintest of which is Si36S. On the basis of observations using the IRAM 30 m telescope of the 34S and 34S isotopic species of CS and SiS, Mauersberger et al.  conclude that the 36S/34S abundance in this source (107±15) is more
than two times smaller than the solar value (288), but close to the interstellar value (115), implying that IRC+10216 is fairly well processed. The astronomical detection of Si36S which is secure, however, was based on a predicted rather than a measured rotational constant, because this rare isotopic species and several others had not yet been detected in the laboratory.
One goal of recent laboratory studies  -  motivated in large part by this astronomical work  -  was to significantly extend the isotopic spectroscopy of this important diatomic molecule. Towards this end, rotational lines from all twelve isotopic species of SiS have now been detected using a dilute mixture of silane (SiH4) in combination with a sulfur-containing gas (e.g., H2S, OCS, or CS2, which all appear to work comparably well). As the spectrum in Fig. 1 shows, the least abundant species 30Si36S, which has a fractional abundance relative to 28Si32S of 6x10-6, can now be detected with good signal to noise in a modest integration time. Owing to the high spectral resolution, for species such as 29Si33S, it is possible to resolve widely-spaced hyperfine structure which arises from the I=3/2 spin of the 33S nucleus, and much smaller nuclear spin-rotation splittings that arise from the interaction of the I=1/2 nuclear spin of 29Si with the small magnetic field induced by rotation [see Fig. 1(b)]. The ground state rotational constants for all eleven isotopic species of SiS are summarized in Table 1. We estimate by comparison of line intensities in the beam with those of the stable molecule carbonyl sulfide (OCS), at a known fractional abundance (i.e. 1% OCS in Ne), that a remarkably high percentage of the precursor  - 
nearly 15%  -  is converted to SiS. By comparison, the mole fraction of most reactive molecules produced in our discharge source is typically in the range of 10-4 -10-6. The high abundance of SiS may not be so surprising, however, if one considers that this molecule is the second row analog to CO, and therefore may be unusually stable. For the more abundant isotopic species of SiS, in addition to rotational lines that originate from the ground vibrational state, strong satellites from high-lying vibrational states have also be observed, up to high as v=51,
or about 60% of the dissociation limit, for the normal species. Although of less astronomical interest, these measurements in combination with tetrahertz and infrared data enable the potential energy surface of SiS to be probed at quite high energy. Such measurements also enable one to study how vibration excitation affects hyperfine interactions in the molecule, e.g. the vibrational dependence of the quadrupole coupling constant of 33S has been measured up to v=17. High vibrational temperatures are possible in our discharge expansion because of collisional
excitation with electrons, which typically have a kinetic temperature of 10,000 K. Because V-V cross-sections for diatomic molecules are normally large compared to those for V-T relaxation, redistribution of the rotational population to high v levels occurs very rapidly. Similar excitation of CO into high v levels has long been observed in discharge sources similar to ours.
The Isomeric Pair: SiCN and SiNC
Because silicon-bearing molecules are so conspicuous in IRC+10216, considerable effort has been devoted to the laboratory detection of new Si species of plausible astronomical interest. Considerable success has now been achieved by using silane gas as a source for free Si, which, owing to its refractory nature, is otherwise difficult to produce in high quantities in the gas-phase. Nearly 30 Si-bearing molecules have now been discovered by this method (see Fig. 2 of Ref. 8), including the isomeric pair SiCN and SiCN, which are of particular astronomical interest because other refractory molecules containing nitrile groups have been detected in IRC+10216. Theoretical calculations conclude that the two isomers are comparable in energy, differing by less than 5 kcal/mol, with SiCN being both slightly lower in energy. Both are predicted to possess linear structures, 2Π electronic ground states, and to be fairly polar, with SiCN possessing a somewhat large dipole moment. 
We have now detected SiCN and then SiNC in the laboratory, first in the centimeter band, and then in the millimeter band with a long path free space absorption spectrometer. Detection in both bands allows the radio spectra of each to be calculated to very high precision (better than 1 km sec-1 in equivalent radial velocity) over the entire range of interest to radio astronomers. The millimeter-wave measurements provide information on the centrifugal distortion of the molecules at high rotational excitation, which is crucial in the 2-3 mm band where these radicals are expected to possess their most intense rotational transitions in IRC+10216, a source characterized by an
effective rotational temperature of roughly 20 K. On the basis of the laboratory measurements, radio emission lines of SiCN were detected soon afterwards in IRC+10216, and more recently so too were those of the slightly less stable and less polar isomer SiNC.
The observed lines are faint for both radicals, but the astronomical identifications are secure because multiple lines have been detected at precisely the expected frequencies with similar intensity. All of the observed lines appear to display a characteristic double cusped line shape indicating that they are concentrated in the thin outer shell where
molecules like SiC2 have also been found. Derived column densities for the isomeric pair are quite similar, in contrast to the cyanopolyyne/isocyanopolyynes where the decrement is nearly 100. Both SiCN and SiNC are present at a fractional abundance of order 10-9 relative to H2.
The Free Radicals 12CH and 13CH
Another prominent astronomical molecule which has been the subject of recent studies in our laboratory is the CH radical. CH was one of the first molecules detected in space by its optical transitions in the blue; it has a modest dipole moment of 1.46 D, and is comprised of two cosmically abundant elements. Astronomical detection at radio frequencies has proven far more challenging, but after considerable effort, lambda-doublet transitions in the lowest X2Π1/2 fine structure ladder were detected by Rydbeck et al. in 1973, and then those in the X2Π3/2 ladder were subsequently found by Ziurys and Turner in 1985. Astronomical data on the rare isotopic
species 13CH is scarce, but some of its lines have now been identified in the solar spectrum.
Although much laboratory spectroscopy has already been done on CH and 13CH, including detection at terahertz frequencies of pure rotational transitions, the low-J lambda-doublet transitions have never been observed directly, and as a consequence, rest frequencies are still not known to high precision. This result is somewhat surprisingly because many of the same transitions of astronomically important OH were reported many years ago in response to astronomical observations. At present, the most accurate measurements of the CH lambda-doubling frequencies are those derived from the astronomical data. For 13CH, owing to the lack of such data, these transitions are only known to a few MHz.
By means of FTM spectroscopy, lambda-doubling transitions of 12CH and 13CH in the lowest rotational levels of the X2Π1/2 ground state have been directly detected for the first time. Frequencies of the hyperfine-split lines have been measured to better than 1 ppm, an improvement over previous laboratory data of order 100 for CH and 1000 for 13CH. When these measurements were included in a least-squares fit of all the available spectroscopic data, a set of spectroscopic constants is obtained which yields significantly better predictions of the CH and 13CH lambdadoubling transitions.
As the rotational energy level diagram in Fig. 2 illustrates, a total of nine hyperfine lines in the X2Π1/2 state of CH, three from J=1/2, four from J=3/2, and two from J=5/2, have now been measured. Most are observed with high signal-to-noise as the spectrum in Fig. 2 (insert) shows. Sixteen lines of 13CH, including 14 from J=3/2, have also been detected, many again with good signal-to-noise. A refined set of spectroscopic constants has been derived for CH and 13CH by a least-squares fit of the new measurements with all of the other available spectroscopic data, using
an effective Hamiltonian for a diatomic molecule in an isolated X2Π1/2 electronic state. Because both data sets now contain more accurate measurements of the lambda-doubling intervals, the hyperfine constants are significantly better determined, c and d for CH and c for 13CH by as much as a factor of 17. In addition, for 13CH, we are now able to determine a(H), d(H), and the dD(H) for the first time; all are now determined with comparable precision to those for CH. A complete account of the laboratory observations will be published elsewhere.
B1395: An unidentified series in IRC+10216
The last example highlighted here is the identification of the carrier of a series of unidentified lines in IRC+10216.

</text>
