<text id="J02" category="" words="2021" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="New Theory of the Earth" Author="Anderson, Don L." PublicationDate="Cambridge : Cambridge University Press, 2007. p. 33-37" SampledFrom="Book" WebAddress="http://cat.lib.lancs.ac.uk/F/CMA37CMEAF2YVPFQ11HIF99PVAF19Q2C7NYL65CY1CDAA9Y3RY-08050?func=full-set-set&set_number=021688&set_entry=000012&format=999">

Overview. 
Plate tectonics on Earth, at present, consists of about a dozen large semi-coherent entities -- called plates -- of irregular shape and size that move over the surface, separated by boundaries that meet at triple junctions. There are also many broad zones of deformation. Plate tectonics is often regarded as simply the surface, or the most important, manifestation of thermal convection in the mantle [this phrase, and phrases in the same typeface, is a Googlet; see Preface or type it into a search engine]. In this view the plates are driven by thermal and density variations in the mantle. Cooling plates and sinking slabs can also be regarded as driving themselves, and driving convection in the underlying mantle; they create chemical, thermal and density anomalies in the mantle. Plate tectonics qualifies as a branch of complexity theory. Plate tectonics may be a far-from-equilibrium self-organized system powered by heat and gravity from the mantle and organized by dissipation in and between the plates. Mantle convection, below the plates, may not drive or organize the plates; it may be the other way around. Plate buoyancy and dissipation control plate motions, stresses, and locations of plate boundaries, intraplate extensional zones and volcanic chains. The cold stiff outer shell of Earth is the active element and the template; the underlying convective mantle is passive. The outer shell of the Earth is not just a thermal boundary layer or a cold strong layer. It is, in part, the accumulated buoyant residue of mantle differentiation including the on-going process of seafloor spreading and building of island arcs. It is composed of fertile melts, dikes, sills and cumulates, and infertile refractory residues. It is, in part, isolated from the low-viscosity fertile interior. Earthquakes and volcanoes not only mark plate boundaries but they antici- pate new plate boundaries, changes in boundary conditions and dying plate boundaries. If the shallow mantle is close to the melting point or partially molten, volcanoes have a simple cause, stress. The mode of convection in the Earth depends on the distribution of radioactive elements and physical properties and how these properties depend on temperature and pressure and melt- ing point. An Earth with most of the radioactive elements in the crust and upper mantle, and with strongly pressure-dependent thermal properties will not behave as a uniform fluid being heated on a stove. These effects, plus continents and sphericity, break the symmetry between the top and bottom thermal boundary layers. The main plate tectonic cycle is the ridge- trench-slab system, primarily playing out in the ocean basins. There is a secondary cycle involving underplating, freezing at depth, delamination and asthenospheric upwelling. A mafic lower crust, if it thickens and cools sufficiently, will convert to a high density mineral assemblage, leading to a gravitationally unstable configuration in which the lower crust can sink into the underlying lower-density mantle, cooling it and fertilizing it. The solid Earth can rotate rapidly underneath its spin axis through a process known as true polar wander (TPW). The spinning Earth continuously aligns its maximum moment of inertia with the spin axis. Melting ice caps, plate motions, continental uplift and drift and ridge-trench annihilations can all cause TPW. The magnetic and rotational poles are good terrestrial reference systems; the hotspot frame is not. But fertile patches in the asthenosphere move more slowly than the plates and plate boundaries and therefore melting anomalies appear to be relatively fixed.
The outer shells of Earth.
Plate tectonics involves the concepts of plates, lithospheres, cratonic keels and thermal bound- ary layers; these are not equivalent concepts. Lithosphere means rocky shell or strong layer. It can support significant geologic loads, such as mountains, and can bend, as at trenches, without significant time-dependent deformation; it behaves elastically. Plates are not necessarily strong or elastic. Thermal boundary layers conduct heat out of the underlying regions; they are defined by a particular thermal gradient. 
Plates. 
A plate is a region of the Earth's surface that translates coherently. The word plate as in plate tectonics implies strength, brittleness and permanence and often the adjectives rigid and elastic are appended to it. But plates are collages, held together by stress and adjacent portions rather than by intrinsic strength. Plates break at suture zones (former plate boundaries), fracture zones and subplate boundaries, often generating volcanic chains in the process. A plate can be rigid in the sense that relative plate motions can be described by rotations about Euler poles on a sphere but can still have meter-wide cracks, which is all that is needed to create volcanic chains from the hot underlying mantle and its low-viscosity magmas. What is meant by rigidity is relative coherence in motions, not absolute strength. Because rocks are weak under tension, the conditions for the existence of a plate probably involve the existence of lateral compressive forces. Plates have been described as rigid but this implies long-term and long-range strength. They are better described as coherent entities organized by stress fields and rheology. The corollary is that volcanic chains and plate boundaries are regions of extension. Plates possibly organize themselves so as to minimize dissipation. The term plate itself has no agreed-upon formal definition. If plate is defined operationally as that part of the outer shell that moves coherently then several interpretations are possible. 
(1) Plates are strong and rigid (the conventional interpretation). 
(2) Plates are those regions defined by lateral compression since plate boundaries are formed by lateral extension. 
(3) Plates move coherently because the parts experience similar forces or constraints. 
With the first definition, if there is to be spread- ing and volcanism, local heating or stretching
must overcome the local strength; this reason- ing spawned the plume hypothesis . With the second definition the global stress field, dictated by plate boundary and subplate conditions, and cooling plates, controls the locations of stress conditions appropriate for the formation of dikes and vol- canic chains, and incipient plate boundaries; the underlying mantle is already at or near the melting point. This is the plate hypothesis. Plates are not permanent; they are temporary alliances of subplates. Global plate reorganization processes episodically change the orientations of spreading centers, the directions and speeds of plates, and redefine the plates. Plates annex and lose territory to adjacent plates and they break up or coalesce. New plate boundaries do not form all at once but evolve as age-progressive chains of volcanoes. Volcanic chains can also be extinguished if lateral compression takes over from local extension. Volcanism can be turned on and off by changing stress but it is not so easy to turn off plume volcanism, or to suddenly reduce the temperature of the mantle. Important aspects of plate tectonics are the necessity for ridges and trenches to migrate, for triple junctions and boundary conditions to evolve, and for plates to interact and to reconfigure when boundary conditions change. Second order features of plates and plate boundaries (e.g. fracture zones, accreted terranes , transform faults, broad diffuse zones, swells, sutures, lithospheric architecture and microplates) and boundary reorganizations are actually intrinsic and provide the key for a more general view of plate tectonics than contained in the rigid plate-fixed hotspot scheme . 
The many lithospheres.
The lithosphere is that part of the cold outer shell of the Earth that can support stresses elas- tically. The lithosphere is defined by its rheolog- ical behavior. There are other elements of the outer shell that involve lateral motions, buoy- ancy, chemistry, mineralogy or conductivity and these may or may not be part of the lithosphere. Lithosphere is not the same as thermal boundary layer or plate . Since mantle silicates flow readily at high temperatures and flow more rapidly at high stress, the lithosphere appears to be thicker at low stress levels and short times than it does for high stress levels and long times. Thus, the elastic lithosphere is thick when measured by seismic or postglacial-rebound techniques. At longer times the lower part of the instantaneous elastic litho- sphere relaxes and the effective elastic thickness decreases. Thus, the elastic litho- sphere is relatively thin for long-lived loads such as seamounts and topography. Estimates of the flexural thickness of the lithosphere range from 10-35 km for loads having durations of millions of years. A more complete definition of the lithosphere is that part of the crust and upper mantle that deforms elastically for the load and time scale in question. The viscosity and strength of the mantle depend on composition -- including water content -- mineralogy and crystal orientation as well as on temperature and stress. If the upper mantle is compositionally layered, then the lithosphere--asthenosphere boundary may be controlled by factors other than tempera- ture. For example, if the subcrustal layer is dry olivine-rich harzburgite, it may be stronger at a given temperature than a damp peridotite, or a clinopyroxene--garnet-rich layer. If the latter is weak enough, the lithosphere--asthenosphere boundary may represent a chemical boundary rather than an isotherm. Likewise, a change in the preferred orientation of the dominant crystalline species may also markedly affect the creep resistance. The boundary may represent a dehydration boundary -- wet minerals are weak. The effective elastic thickness of the lithosphere depends on many parameters but these do not necessarily include the parameters that define plates, thermal boundary layers and cratonic keels. The layer that translates coherently, the plate of plate tectonics , is often taken to be identical with the elastic lithosphere . This is probably a valid approximation if the stresses and time scales of the experiment that is used to define the 
flexural thickness are similar to the stresses and time scales of plate tectonics. It must be kept in mind, however, that mantle silicates are anisotropic in their flow and thermal characteristics, and that the stresses involved in plate tectonics may have different orientations and magnitudes than the stresses involved in surface loading experiments. We do not know the thickness of the plate or how well it is coupled to the underlying mantle. We do not even know the sign of the basal drag force . In a convecting or cooling mantle there is a surface thermal boundary layer (TBL) through which heat must pass by conduction. The thickness of the thermal boundary layer is controlled by such parameters as conductivity and heat flow and is not related in a simple way to the thickness of the elastic layer or the plate. Since temperature increases rapidly with depth in the conduction layer, and viscosity decreases rapidly with temperature, the lower part of the boundary layer probably lies below the elastic lithosphere; that is, only the upper part of the thermal boundary layer can support large and long-lived elastic stresses. Unfortunately, the con- duction layer too is often referred to as the lithosphere. In a chemically layered Earth there can be TBLs between internal layers. These TBLs act as thermal bottle-necks and slow down the cooling of an otherwise convective mantle. Continental cratons have high seismic velocity roots, or keels, extending to 200--300 km depth. These are referred to as archons . They persist because of low density and high viscosity, and because they are protected from high stress. They are more than just part of the strong outer shell. These keels can last for billions of years. Most models of the Earth&amp;#8217;s mantle have an upper-mantle low-velocity zone , LVZ, overlain by a layer of higher velocities, referred to as the LID. The LID is also often referred to as the litho- sphere. Seismic stresses and periods are much smaller than stresses and periods of geological interest. If seismic waves measure the relaxed modulus in the LVZ and the high-frequency or unrelaxed modulus in the LID, then, in a chemically homogenous mantle, the LID should be much thicker than the elastic lithosphere. If the LID is chemically distinct from the LVZ, then one might also expect a change in the long-term rheological behavior at the interface. If the LID and the elastic lithosphere turn out to have the same thickness, then this would be an argument for chemical, water or crystallographic control, rather than thermal control, of the mechanical properties of the upper mantle.

</text>
