<text id="J03" category="" words="2028" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Oscillatory shear of suspensions of noncolloidal particles" Author="Jonathan M. Bricker and Jason E. Butler" PublicationDate="September 1, 2006 " SampledFrom="Journal of Rheology " WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=4&hid=106&sid=0d30257b-ecf0-4194-bf65-162fc401885c%40sessionmgr115">

INTRODUCTION
Studies on suspensions of noncolloidal particles have primarily concentrated on the
response when exposed to steady shear flow [Gadala-Maria and Acrivos (1980); Chan
and Powell (1984); Tsai et al. (1992), thus the rheology of these suspensions is fairly
well-defined as recently reviewed by Stickell and Powell (2005). In steady flow, noncolloidal
suspensions at vanishing Reynolds numbers undergo a diffusive-like motion which
is due solely to hydrodynamic interactions. Whereas the trajectories of particles undergoing
simple pairwise interactions are symmetric and reversible [Batchelor and Green
(1972)], inhomogeneities in the particle surface can cause permanent displacements of
particles from their original streamlines, resulting in irreversible interactions [Davis
(1992); Rampall et al. (1997)].
Shear-induced diffusion of particles in steady shear flow has been observed in both
experiments [Eckstein et al. (1977); Leighton and Acrivos (1987a); Breedveld et al.
(2001) and simulations [Dratler and Schowalter (1996); Drazer et al. (2002)]. The shear-induced diffusion explains the apparently random trajectories that particles undergo in
concentrated suspensions exposed to steady shear and has been used to explain such
phenomena as shear-induced particle migration [Leighton and Acrivos (1987b); Phillips
et al. (1992)]. This chaotic motion is intimately related to the time and spatial configuration
of the particles, closely linking the rheology to the microstructure.
Whereas the rheology of suspensions in steady shear is well-understood, the behavior
of noncolloidal suspensions in oscillatory flow is less understood. This is due in part to
few experiments investigating unsteady flows. Gadala-Maria (1979) studied suspensions
exposed to oscillatory shear, finding that above a certain strain amplitude, the stress
response became nonlinear. The rheology was found to be independent of the frequency
and the amplitude of the stress response drifted lower in time until a steady state was
achieved after approximately 100 cycles [Gadala-Maria and Acrivos (1980)]. Gondret
and Petit (1996) found a similar drift for a strain amplitude of 0.1, however, a steady state
was achieved after a much larger number of cycles. Gondret and Petit (1996) explained
the observed decrease in viscosity with time as being caused by microstructural changes
due to a regular ordering of particles into layers parallel to the flow direction, as evidenced
by optical microscopy experiments. Breedveld et al. (2001) performed a comprehensive
set of oscillatory shear experiments on noncolloidal suspensions in a Couette
geometry and found that the rheology was both frequency and amplitude dependent and
that plateaus existed at both small and large amplitudes which were separated by a
transient period in which the response signals were nonlinear. In contrast to Gondret and
Petit (1996), Breedveld et al. (2001) found that at small strain amplitudes, the particle
positions remained unchanged with no evidence of a shear-induced microstructure. Similar
to Breedveld et al. (2001), Pine et al. (2005) reported results on hydrodynamic
diffusivities from simulations and experiments indicating that at small strain amplitudes
the particle diffusivity became increasingly small such that particles returned to their
initial positions after each oscillation. Pine et al. (2005) also found a transition at high
strain amplitudes above which the flow becomes irreversible. Narumi et al. (2005) report
on the rheology of suspensions undergoing high amplitude oscillatory shear and explain
the unusual output wave forms in terms of the transient responses observed in shear
reversal experiments [Kolli et al. (2002); Narumi et al. (2002)].
Significant gaps therefore exist in understanding the characteristic behavior of noncolloidal
suspensions in oscillatory shear flow. In this study, suspensions of noncolloidal
particles are exposed to oscillatory shear to investigate the response as a function of the
applied strain amplitude. The goal is to gain some understanding of the dynamics within
unsteady flows. In the following sections, we present results from experiments of noncolloidal
suspensions exposed to both steady and oscillatory shear flow. The results are
presented for five different systems in both Couette and parallel-plate geometries using
the same instrument. In Sec. II, a detailed description of the experiment is provided along
with details concerning the characterization of each suspension system. Results are presented
in Sec. III for the cases of steady shear flow and oscillatory flow. The results are
discussed in Sec. IV and conclusions of the work are presented in the last section.
EXPERIMENT
Three sets of particles were used to determine the effect of size distribution and
particle type on the suspension rheology. Figure 1 shows scanning electron microscopy
SEM images of two sets of the particles with size distributions for all three sets. The
distributions were measured using a Coulter counter and were verified using scanning
electron microscopy. The polystyrene and poly (methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) particles 
obtained from Sapidyne Industries were found to be monodisperse with similarly shaped
size distributions and mean diameters of 99±6 m and 100±8 m, respectively. The
PMMA particles obtained from Bangs Laboratories had a much broader size distribution
and a mean diameter of 61±16 m as measured in the laboratory, though the manufacturer
reported a mean diameter of 83 m. The surface roughness was evaluated using
scanning electron microscopy, and for all of the spheres used, the size of the surface
roughness features never exceeded 1 m. The sphericity was also evaluated using scanning
electron microscopy. A form factor was evaluated according to the equation F
=4Ap /P2, where Ap is the particle area and P is the perimeter. For each set of particles,
a similar form factor of F 0.91 was measured, whereas a factor of 1 corresponds to a
perfect sphere.
Three different suspending liquids were investigated and are listed in Table I. For the
polystyrene spheres, a polyalkylene glycol oil Aldrich was used and found to be Newtonian
with a viscosity of 1.87 Pa s and a measured density of 1.052 g/cm3. Two different
suspending liquids were prepared for the PMMA spheres. The first consisted of a
mixture of equal amounts by volume water and 75-H-90000 UCON oil (Dow Chemical).
To effectively match the densities of the PMMA and suspending liquid, sodium iodide
25% by weight was added to the water prior to mixing. The composition of the suspending
liquid is comparable to previous experiments [Sinton and Chow (1991); Butler
and Bonnecaze (1999); Butler et al. (1999)]. Although the UCON oil/water suspending
liquid was found to have a constant short-time viscosity of 0.97 Pa s, a significant drift in
the viscosity with time was observed in the parallel-plate geometry due to a slow evaporation of the suspending liquid. This drift was found to be minimized by using the
Couette geometry since the fluid in a Couette gap is not directly exposed to the environment.
Due to the presence of evaporation in this system, an additional suspending liquid
identical to the one used in the experiments of Han et al. (1999) was used. In this system,
a mixture of approximately equal amounts by mass of ethylene glycol and glycerol were
mixed based on the measured density of the particles. The short-time viscosity of the
suspending liquid was found to be 0.0924 Pa s and although the suspending liquid has
been reported to be Newtonian in previous studies [Han et al. (1999)], a 30% decrease in
the viscosity was observed over 24 h when sheared in the parallel-plate geometry at a
constant shear rate of 24 s−1. A smaller decrease of 5% was observed in the Couette
geometry over the same time period and shear rate. The decrease probably results from
absorption of moisture from the surrounding air, which is minimized in the Couette
geometry since the exposed surface area to volume ratio is smaller.
A summary of the suspension systems studied is provided in Table I. To confirm close
matching of densities between the suspending liquid and particulate phases, suspensions
at a volume fraction of 0.10 were set out for a period of 24 h. In all systems, no
apparent sedimentation or buoyancy was observed during this period. The volume fraction
of particles henceforth was set at 0.40 for all experiments. All suspensions were
prepared by gently hand mixing the particles in small increments until a homogeneous
state was reached. The suspensions were placed under vacuum prior to testing to eliminate
any air bubbles entrained within the suspension.
The maximum particle-based Reynolds number for the systems used is 10−7, so the
effects of inertia are expected to be minimal. Likewise, thermal diffusion is negligible for
the relatively large particle sizes since the minimum particle-based Peclet number is 107.
Other colloidal interactions, such as electrostatic interactions, should also be of no importance.
The rheometer used in all experiments was an ARES LS-1 strain controlled rheometer
(TA Instruments). Experiments were performed using both parallel plate and Couette
geometries. The Couette geometry consisted of a rotating 34 mm diameter cup and a
stationary 32 mm diameter bob, resulting in a gap of 1 mm. The bob height was 33 mm
and to ensure consistent measurement, the reservoir gap was set to 10 mm in all experiments.
A 50 mm diameter parallel plate was also used and the plate separation was set at
1.0 mm in all cases reported in Sec. III. Note, however, some experiments were performed
for different plate separations of 0.5, 1.5, and 2.0 mm. Results for plate separations of 1.0 mm and larger matched within experimental error, indicating that boundary
layer effects near the walls negligibly impact the reported results despite the relatively
small ratio of gap to particle diameter.
Since the rheology of noncolloidal suspensions is sensitive to the microstructural
arrangement of particles and thus to the initial configuration, the suspensions were presheared
in each geometry before starting the oscillatory experiments. A steady preshear of
24 s−1 was employed for a period of 120 s to reduce any effects caused by loading the
sample and to ensure that the oscillatory experiments began from a fairly consistent
configuration. This total strain of 2880 was sufficient to reach a short-time steady state in
the Couette geometry (Fig. 2 inset), but not long enough to result in any significant
shear-induced migration in the vertical direction [Leighton and Acrivos (1987b)]. In the
case of the Couette geometry, a nonuniform concentration profile develops within the gap
during sample loading. To achieve a homogeneous state, a preshear is required to induce
a redistribution of particles in the radial direction [Leighton and Acrivos (1987b)]. Following
the preshear, the oscillatory shear experiments were performed. In each oscillatory
shear experiment, the shear rate was set by specifying the strain amplitude A and
frequency f. Based on the applied strain amplitude, a total strain can be calculated by
4An, where n is the number of cycles. Unless noted otherwise, all experiments were
performed at the same frequency of f =1.59 cycles/s. The temperature was maintained at
25°C using an external temperature bath. During a typical experiment the temperature
fluctuated less than 0.05°C.
RESULTS
In this section, steady shear results are first given as a reference to the oscillatory shear
results. The oscillatory shear results are then provided in detail for a monodisperse suspension
system. Comparison of these results are made with other suspension systems to
evaluate the effects of particle size distribution and choice of particle type and suspending
fluid.
Steady shear
The time evolution of the relative viscosity r (defined in this work as the suspension
viscosity normalized by the short-time viscosity of the suspending liquid) of both monodisperse
and polydisperse suspension systems sheared in the Couette geometry at a steady
rate of 24 s−1 is shown in Fig. 2. At short times the systems show a small decrease in
the viscosity followed by a short-time steady state (shown as an inset in Fig. 2). This
short-time steady state corresponds to a microstructural rearrangement of particles across
the Couette gap [Leighton and Acrivos (1987b)]. From this short-time steady state, the
viscosity of the suspensions decreases continuously in time. For the suspension of monodisperse
polystyrene spheres in polyalkylene glycol, a long-time steady state occurs after
15 h and was found to be sustainable for at least 10 h more. The transient long-time
decrease in the viscosity of suspensions of spheres in the Couette geometry has been
previously observed in experiments [Gadala-Maria and Acrivos (1980); Phillips et al.
(1992); Chow et al. (1994)] and is the result of shear-induced migration of particles out
of the Couette gap into the stagnant reservoir [Leighton and Acrivos (1987b)].

</text>
