<text id="J04" category="" words="2029" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Ideally glassy hydrogen-bonded networks" Author="J. C. Phillips" PublicationDate="30 January 2006" SampledFrom="Physical Review " WebAddress="http://prb.aps.org/pdf/PRB/v73/i2/e024210">

INTRODUCTION
A few inorganic glasses exhibit extraordinary properties:
remarkable mechanical stability, densities of order 90% of
their crystalline counterparts, nearly reversible glass transitions,
and almost no bonding defects that would create electronic
traps. These glasses are composed of stress-free (ideal)networks, and these networks can persist metastably at temperatures below their glass transitions for very long times. In
the last 25 years our knowledge of these networks has grown
rapidly, both experimentally and theoretically, especially for
inorganic chalocogenide and oxide glasses (such as window
glass). At the same time, the idea that H-bonded protein
networks exhibit many (almost equilibrated, nearly reversible) properties similar to those of inorganic network glasses has become popular.
Deductive multiparameter approaches to such ideal
glasses, employing standard polynomial Newtonian methods (such as molecular dynamics), encounter severe difficulties even in supercooled liquids (where the viscosity grows exponentially
and diverges as T→Tg), and these difficulties
increase in the glass, where relaxation follows the even
slower path described by stretched exponentials. In practice
these difficulties often limit simulation times to ns or even
10 ps. Some simulations of inorganic glasses have circumvented
these difficulties by guessing that a good approximation
to the optimally dense glassy network can be obtained
by ring disordering an amorphous solid; this guess can be
tested semiquantitatively (but with only polynomial, not exponential,
accuracy) by comparison with radial distributions
observed by diffraction, but this method, like molecular dynamics,
does not predict phase diagrams or predict chemical
trends in general.
An abstract, parameter-free axiomatic method, based on
the variational concepts of Lagrangian mechanics, has provided
an excellent guide for experiments on inorganic network
glasses, and it was indeed helpful in identifying the
intermediate compositional window where nonreversing and
aging effects are small, as well as the internal network
stress. This method is hierarchical in nature, and its application
involves the general principles of chemical bonding as
utilized by Huckel and Pauling (resonating valence bonds in mixed ionic-covalent molecules). Interatomic forces are supposed to decrease from
bond stretching to bond bending to dihedral interactions by
roughly a factor of 3 - 4 between stages. (There are always
uncertainties in classical interatomic force fields weaker
forces tend to be overestimated, but in good glass formers
these hierarchies are unambiguous). The accuracy of the
method in predicting optimized compositions (without using
any adjustable parameters) can be as good as 1%. It is summarized
in Sec. II, where examples of Lagrangian constraints
show how the method works in the simplest cases of
covalent-ionic chalcogenide and oxide network glasses.
The success of the abstract axiomatic method can be
tested best by showing that it can be used to identify ideal
glasses. For the inorganic network glasses the success has
been confirmed in many ways, but most of these have not
yet been tested for organic glasses. Some organic glasses,
such as polymers, are not well described by constraint
theory, and to broaden constraint theory to include some
cases of hydrogen bonding (Sec. III) requires careful choices
of test cases. It turns out that several simple carbohydrates
(polyalcohols and saccharides) are good candidates for ideal
glasses; the reasoning that led us to those choices, as opposed,
for example, to polymers, is discussed in Sec. III,
where the hierarchy of H-bonding interactions is inserted
into the covalent hierarchical framework. Some macroscopic
properties of polyalcohols and saccharides are collected in
Sec. IV. It is then straightforward to enumerate (Sec. V)
these interactions for polyalcohols and monosaccharides, but
when the procedure is extended to sucrose and trehalose, the
results are surprising. Molecular dynamics models in the
time range from 10 ps to 1 ns partially explain the remarkable
biopreservative properties of trehalose, but other factors
could be important on a time scale of years. The hierarchical
results for trehalose lead to the tandem array network model
described in Sec. VI; this model represents a substantial refinement
of the two-dimensional percolative model of trehalose
films proposed in recent molecular dynamics models of trehalose performed in the time range from 10 ps to 1 ns.
This model is used to contrast the structure and properties of
trehalose with a polyester biopreservative, cutin, in Sec. VI.
There we note analogies with extensible tandem arrays of the
elastic protein titin and other extracellular matrix and cell
adhesion molecules, such as fibronectin, which also contain
tandem arrays. It appears that the tandem nature of trehalose
networks corresponds well to novel tandem repeats in the
cell surface proteins of archaeal and bacterial genomes (Sec.
VII). In the Appendix there are some general remarks on the
H-bonding network of water, especially at interfaces with
proteins, polyalcohols, and saccharides.
COVALENT BOND HIERARCHIES.
The simplest case of a covalent glass is a binary one
A1−xBx in which the covalent radii are nearly equal because A
and B belong to the same row of the periodic table - for
example, A=Ge and B=As or Se. Then the B-A-B and A-B
-A bond angles are nearly equal and the bond-bending constraints
at the ideal composition are all intact, while there are
no constraints on dihedral conformations. This situation is
illustrated in Fig. 1(a). The ideal glass-forming condition is
(Nc=number of constraints) =Nd=number of degrees of
freedom=3 (number of atoms Na), all per formula unit according
to axiomatic mean-field theory. Simulations with
space-filling models, based on bond-deleted, ring-disordered
space-filling networks, confirmed this condition and showed
a crossover from floppy to stiff networks at the ideal composition,
with a density of soft modes nearly linearly decreasing
with increasing connectivity.
What happens when A and B radii are quite different?
This is the case in g-SiO2, where diffraction data show that
the width of the O-centered bond angle distribution is much
greater than that of the Si-centered distribution. Then the
former bond-bending constraints are broken, while the latter
bond-bending constraints are intact, as shown in Fig. 1(b). In (Na2O)x(SiO2)1−x alloys with increasing x the Na atoms cut
(or form "nonbridging") O - Si bonds and there is a crossover
from broken oxygen bending constraints to intact ones; this
crossover actually shows up in the phase diagram as a narrow
low-temperature immiscibility gap (Tc 1000 K), a
transition that was previously unexplained and which has so
far been inaccessible to molecular dynamics simulations
(MDS) confined to T3000 K. More generally, the effects
of space filling on constraints is subtle and is best determined
empirically from traditional structural data (diffraction, Raman,
infrared) or even from the phase diagram and the location
of the stiffness transition. An important point is that the
axiomatic rules are discrete (constraints are nearly always
broken or intact in glasses and are seldom in an intermediate
case between the two limits) and have been refined systematically
in ways that are transferable between situations that
are apparently very different and are conventionally described
by completely different (and often quite large) sets of
adjustable parameters.
The ways in which phase diagrams and structural data can
be interpreted in terms of intact and broken constraints are
illustrated in Fig. 2. In underconstrained glasses, Fig. 2(a),
there are not enough bond-stretching and bond-bending constraints
to exhaust the 3Na degrees of freedom. Thus some of
the dihedral angles can be constrained. In the case of g-Se,
there are one stretching and one bending constraints per
atom, leaving room for one dihedral angular constraint per
atom. This makes it possible for g-Se to form long chains
(300 atoms), yet remain glassy because of entanglement.
As cross-linking Ge or As atoms are added, the number of
allowed dihedral constraints decreases and the chain segments
rapidly shorten.
In overconstrained glasses (Fig. 2b), the number of
bond-stretching and bond-bending constraints is too large and some redundancies will occur. A simple way for this to
happen is for pyramidal or tetrahedral building blocks to
share edges, but there are other possibilities, such as replacement
of single bonds by double bonds.
Nanoscale phase separation is common in binary glasses.
Percolative backbones can consist of molecular units that
locally satisfy the ideal glass condition, also describable by
isostatic, a term borrowed from hydrodynamics to describe
parts of the network that are strain free. The fraction of the
network that is isostatic is variable, and this leads to the
formation of a narrow range of compositions with sharp
edges that have very favorable properties. The density
reaches a plateau, and the glass transition is nearly reversible
and shows little aging. In this reversibility window the network
is unstressed and Raman vibrational frequencies shift
linearly with hydrostatic pressure. Outside the window the
shifts are small until a threshold pressure is reached, which is
interpreted as an internal network pressure. For underconstrained
networks, this pressure stiffens soft matrices before
it affects isostatic backbones, and for overconstrained networks,
it stiffens the isostatic regions before it affects the
stiffer overconstrained regions.
H-BOND HIERARCHIES.
Hydrogen bonding DuHA energies are small
(3 kcal/mol) and problematic, partly due to the relative
weakness of the interaction. Their electronic components
have been studied for a few small molecules, while in
larger molecules these energies are subject to large dynamical
screening corrections, especially those due to the large
OH dipoles responsible for the dielectric constant e80 of
water. Thus recent models of H bond interactions in proteins
are empirical and are based on complex statistical analysis
designed to differentiate H-bonding interactions with both
peptide backbones and amino acid side groups. However,
one may still expect the usual hierarchy of interaction energies,
with E(OuH-A)E(NuH-A)E(CuH-A)and E (bond stretching)E(bond bending). For the polyalcohols
considered below, where the complexities produced
by N lone pairs are avoided, this leads to the simple hierarchy
shown in Fig. 3(b). It is far from obvious that the
CuH-A bending energies are larger than the covalent dihedral
energies; these two could be grouped together without
changing some of our results.
Polymers may avoid crystallization because of entanglement,
and similarly molecular glasses may form because of
steric hindrance. The polar nature of H bonds suggests that
dynamical interactions with local electrical fields to form H
bond networks can compete with steric hindrance in promoting
the glass-forming tendency and be more easily quantified.
Thermal expansion at constant pressure [P=V−1(V/T)P] and at constant dielectric relaxation time
[a=V−1(V/T)T] near the glass transition temperature [T=1s] provides an easy way to gauge quantitatively whether or not H bonding is critically enhancing the glassforming
tendency. (The results are quantitatively similar for
T=1000s or when T is replaced by the viscosity n). The
measured values of the ratio aT/aP are near unity (they range from 0.6 to 2.8) for 15 molecular and polymer glass formers, but are 6 and 17 for the strongly hydrogen-bonded polyalcohols
sorbitol and glycerol, respectively. H bonding is thus
less sensitive to pressure, and more sensitive to temperature,
than covalent bonding and is more dominant, and therefore
probably more easily quantified, in polyalcohols than in polymers.
POLYALCOHOLS AND SACCHARIDES.
Polyalcohols and saccharides have strikingly simple
bonding patterns: all the covalent bonds are single and all the
carbons are tetrahedrally coordinated. Many polyalcohols are
good glass formers, so they are a good starting point for
broadening constraint theory to include hydrogen bonding.
The melting points Tm and glass transition temperatures Tg of
a few polyalcohols and sugars are listed in Table I, together
with the extrapolated slopes of reduced viscosity fragilities
m on a reduced temperature scale - that is, m=d ln T/d lnTg/T)T=Tg. Saccharide data are also included,as these also have strong H-bonding interactions. The
ratios r=Tg/Tm are a simple measure of the extent of clustering
or medium range order in the glasses. This ratio is r=0.77 for sorbitol, 0.74 for orthoterphenyl, and 0.73 for the monosaccharide glucose; these ratios are typical for many
glasses. The ratio behavior of the disaccharides sucrose and
trehalose is unusual: for sucrose r=0.52, while in trehalose
r=0.81. The asymmetry of the rings in sucrose suppresses
clustering, but the bisymmetric structure of trehalose produces
one of the largest values of r known for good glass
formers. However, the anomalously large value of r in trehalsoe
does not tell us much about the nature of the cluster
ordering in the glass.Clustering is a common property of good glass formers;
another quantitative measure of clustering is the ratio of the
minimum in Raman scattering intensity before the boson
peak to the value at the peak, denoted by R1.

</text>
