<text id="J07" category="" words="2013" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Astrophysical Hydrodynamics: An Introduction, 2nd Edition" Author="Steven N. Shore " PublicationDate="2007 p. 1-5" SampledFrom="Book" WebAddress="http://media.wiley.com/product_data/excerpt/97/35274066/3527406697.pdf">

The Equations of Fluid Motion.
We live in an incredibly dynamical universe. Any chance observation bears
witness to the enormous diversity of motions and interactions that dominate
the structure of matter in astrophysical environments. It is the aimof this book
to put some of this in context. We see that gravitation, the ultimate structuring
force on the scales typical in astrophysical problems, plays a key role in
understanding how matter evolves. But we also must reckon with magnetic
fields, turbulence, and many of the same processes that dominate laboratory
studies.
Introductory Remarks.
When you think of a fluid, the idea of a structureless deformable continuous
medium comes to mind. Other properties, ingrained in childhood, are also
likely to occur to you; things like incompressibility, viscosity (if you were really
precocious), and perhaps even the statement that a fluid will not support
shear and will yield freely in the presence of an applied force. So what have
these to do with an astrophysical context? More than these definitions and
properties might lead you to suspect. Of course, you will likely think, since
stars are gaseous (something we have known since the 1860s), that we should
be dealing with kinetic theory and gas dynamics. The processes of rarefied
media are likely to dominate our understanding of cosmic bodies. This is not
quite true. Since a star is composed of gas which is homogeneous (in most
cases) and which acts collectively to create its own gravitational field, it mimics
rather well the behavior of a fluid moving (or sitting) under gravity. The
collision times are so short (or, put another way, the mean free paths are so short
compared with any scale lengths in the medium) in the interior of the star that any
disturbances can be washed out and the structure can be described as continuous. Naturally, this is, for the moment, only an assertion. We shall prove it
in due time.
Themost crucial point is that stars and all other cosmicmatter can be treated
as an ensemble object or system when we have carefully chosen some scales of
length and time. In a nutshell, the reason for this book is that we can very
often, at some magnification of scale or some rate of clock ticking, apply a fluid
approximation to the problems at hand. This book is meant to provide the
machinery, both computational and conceptual, with which to begin treating
dynamical and static problems posed by fluids in a nonterrestrial environment.
1.2
Equations of Motion
1.2.1
Distribution Functions
We start with a homogeneous medium of identical particles, forgetting for
the moment that this may be too restrictive an assumption. Imagine that this
group of particles is characterized by a global velocity distribution. Also, assume
that we can know this distribution function and that the positional information
can eventually be derived for the particles as well. Let us start with
a gas that consists of a collection of myriads of particles, all of identical mass.
If we assume that these particles execute collective motions, we will be able to
take ensemble averages and treat them as if they were a continuous medium.
This is what we mean by a fluid in an astrophysical context. But before we
can reach the stage of describing the matter as a classical substance, we need
to consider the microscale phenomena and how to incorporate them into a
macroscopic description of the motion and thermal properties. To do this, we
begin with a statistical mechanics treatment and then generalize from there.
Let us say that there exists a possibly time-dependent distribution function
f , which is a function of x, the particle positions, and v, their velocities, and
which provides a complete description of the chance of any single particle
having a specific position and velocity at any time. We assume that the particle
motions are individually governed by any forces imposed externally by the
medium and also by any mutual interactions (i.e., collisions). By this we mean
that the particles "see" each another through short-range interactions and also
collectively through bulk or ensemble interactions. A good example of the
former is the electrostatic interaction between charged particles in a plasma,
while the latter is exemplified by the integrated gravitational field resulting
from the distribution of the whole mass of the material. Both feed back into
the distribution function, both alter the microscale properties, and therefore both internal and external forces must be considered if we are to calculate the
physical attributes of the medium in the large.
Some constraints can be placed on the formof the distribution function right
from the start. For one thing, it should depend only on the magnitude of the
velocity (momentum), not on its direction. Another way of saying this is that
it should be symmetric with respect to the spatial and velocity components,
that is, f (x, v) = f (−x,−v). Since the distribution function is assumed to be
a measure of the probability that a particle will have a specific position and
velocity, f must be integrable and normalizable. It need not be algebraic; for
example, a delta function, δ(x)δ(v), is allowable. Now the hyperspace we are
dealingwith is well known. It is the phase space of the ensemble, that collection
of individual momenta and positions familiar from classical mechanics. We
can picture this collection as a group of free particles all passing through a
box in which we have placed an observer. This observer has no idea where
these came from or where they are headed, but can at least describe them in
the vicinity. They will arrive in this corner of the world, interact (perhaps),
and then exit. The overall result is that a complete distribution function can
be specified and, if this observer is not too egocentric, this function can even
be generalized to describe all of spacetime containing these particles.
A few things are then clear. The distribution function must be scalar and
depend only on scalar quantities. That is, it cannot depend on the placement
of the observerwithin the ensemble of particles. It must depend only on scalar
quantities, although these may themselves be combinations of many physical
properties. If the distribution function is to be global, it must be characterized
by some global parameter which is a constant for the system under study.
The assertion that the distribution does not change an inversion suggests that
it cannot be a pseudoscalar. So f must be positive everywhere. Since the fact
that the distribution function is defined in terms of a probability, we would not
know how to interpret negative values for f . But this property of probabilities
is very important for our considerations that follow.
If every particle in a gas has a position and a velocity, we might ask what the
mean value is of any quantity connected with this distribution. For instance,
wemaywish to knowthe average velocity, orwhat the average distance is that
a particle may be away from the statistical center of the distribution. These
are moments of the ensemble. Even though we cannot observe the motion of
every constituent component of a body, and cannot distinguish the histories of
the individual particle trajectories, we can still say something about the most
probable values that any of the measurable quantities will have.
Let us examine this physical picture in terms of simple probabilities, reducing
the distribution function to only one independent quantity. We must
be careful to choose a physically meaningful attribute. For instance, position
means something in an extended body. But color probably does not. Even if the particles have different colors, masses, or whatever, we can always ignore
these attributes until some quantity thatwe happen to be interested in requires
including them. Take, for example, the position of a particle. If the probability
of being some distance from a fixed point in space, x0 = 0, is P(x), then
the mean value for the displacement is (x) = xP(x)dx. Now assume that
we have a one-dimensional distribution, but one that extends over the range
(−∞,∞). Since the probability of being on the negative side or the positive
side of the reference point is assumed to be the same, the mean value for the
position must vanish; that is, on average the particle will be at the reference
point. Another way of saying this is that the integrand consists of a symmetric
and an antisymmetric part and therefore vanishes over the whole space.
But this clearly does not make sense if the ensemble is extended. There must
be some other way of treating the fact that many of the particles, although
perhaps equally distributed on the two axes, may not be concentrated at the
nominal zero point. We require a quantity that does not vanish on integrating
over the whole ensemble, (x2). This is a measure of the dispersion of the
particles in space, and unlike (x), (x2) is finite. Now we have both a symmetric
function and a symmetric interval and the mean value therefore does not
vanish.This has been a rather long digression. It is, however, prompted by the need
to place the process of taking moments in context.
Moments of the Distribution Function.
Of all the quantities that you can think of as characterizing this gas, the most
obvious ones are functions of velocity and density. This is just a product of
our Newtonian bias. We will separate the equations for the velocity into two
components. One is the mean velocity, which we shall write as Vi, and the
other is the random motion, which is assumed to have a mean of zero. This
velocity we shall call ui. All of the moments will be taken assuming that the
distribution function is taken over the random velocities only. For instance,
there are quantities around which classical descriptions in physics revolve:
the number density, n(x), the momentum flux, n(x)V(x), and the energy density,
1/2n(x)V · V. You will notice that each of these is a function of some power of
the velocity although each depends only on space and time, not on the internal
velocity distribution of the particles.
It is then not hard to see how to generalize this process to create as large a
collection of moments as we would like. Now you see why that long digression
was necessary. The principal reason for taking the various moments is to
remove the individual velocity components from the picture, to average over
that portion of phase space, and therefore to obtain mean physical quantities that characterize the macroscopic spatial distribution of the matter. To do this
within the limits of the function f (x, v), we proceed as follows.
If we integrate over the entire volume of phase space, we must recover the
total number of particles in the system.
We now have the prescription for taking moments!
Assume that we have components vi(x, t) = Vi + ui and that we are
free to choose any such components for examination. The subscript is then a
dummy, so that we can multiply these together as f vivj . . . vn, which we can
then integrate over the normalizable distribution function in velocity space.
The various moments are averages over the random velocity distribution
function. Since we cannot measure this in detail, we get rid of it via integration
(which is equivalent to averaging). Statistically, all of the macroscopic
properties of themedium are the expectation values of the distribution and its
moments. Historically, it was an important step forward when it was realized
that the proper treatment of thermodynamics, namely the statistical approach
rather than the vaguer mean-value methods of the mid-nineteenth century,
could also be taken over into dynamics of media composed of individual randomly
moving particles. It is no accident that the evolving theory of statistics
closely paralleled  -  and spurred  -  the development of statistical mechanics. It
provided a natural arena in which to display the ideas.
It is now time to begin taking the moments of the distribution. For example,
the density is clearly (from the previous discussion and definition) the
0th moment.

</text>
