<text id="J09" category="" words="2008" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Prostaglandin F2a Upregulates Uterine Immune Defenses in the Presence of the Immunosuppressive Steroid Progesterone" Author="Gregory S. Lewis and Meghan C. Wulster-Radcliffe" PublicationDate="August 1, 2006 p. 102-106" SampledFrom="American Journal of Reproductive Immunology " WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?hid=122&sid=7ad6228e-3a39-4fff-a0c4-971e9f9eb845%40sessionmgr110&vid=3">

Problem.
Uterine infections often develop in some livestock species during the
first luteal phase postpartum. Exogenous prostaglandin F2a (PGF2a)
induces luteolysis, reduces progesterone, and enables the uterus to
resolve infections. However, the effects of PGF2a on luteal function and
on immune functions are confounded. These effects must be disentangled
to determine whether alternatives to antibiotic treatments can
be successfully developed.
Method of study.
Treatments were in a 2 X 2 X 2 factorial arrangement. Main effects were
ovariectomy or sham on day 0 (i.e. estrus), exogenous progesterone or
sesame oil from day 0 to 11, and exogenous PGF2a or saline on day 9.
Intrauterine inoculations with Arcanobacterium pyogenes and Escherichia
coli were administered on day 6.
Results.
Ewes treated with exogenous PGF2a either did not have uterine infections,
infections were less severe, or infections were resolving when
uteri were examined on day 12, despite increased progesterone.
Conclusions.
Exogenous PGF2a has effects on the resolution of uterine infections that
are independent of its effects on luteal progesterone production.
Introduction.
Cattle, sheep, and pigs are resistant to uterine infections
when progesterone concentrations are basal,
and they are susceptible to uterine infections when
progesterone concentrations are increased. In
dairy cattle, this transition, and thus the development
of a non-specific uterine infection termed pyometra,
is coincident with the development of the
first postpartum corpus luteum. In livestock production
systems, non-specific uterine infections are
inevitable and typically not life threatening; however,
they reduce fertility and increase costs. The incidence of non-specific uterine infections in herds
and flocks ranges from 10% to 50% of the dairy cattle,
20% to 75% of the dairy buffaloes, and 5% to
10% of the dairy sheep. These infections are
considered non-specific because the initial colonizing
bacteria are not known, and the specific bacteria
causing the signs of infection are not known.
Nevertheless, Arcanobacterium pyogenes and Escherichia
coli are usually associated with non-specific uterine
infections in cattle and sheep.
Antibiotics are used commonly to treat uterine
infections in livestock, but many antibiotic-treatment
protocols have not been effective. There are general concerns about the relationship between
antibiotic use in livestock and the potential for accelerating
the evolution of antibiotic-resistant strains of
bacteria, although resistance to ceftiofur, an antibiotic
commonly used to treat uterine infections in
dairy cattle, does not yet seem to be extensive.
Despite that alternative treatments, such as exogenous
prostaglandin F2a (PGF2a), have been evaluated
and found to be effective for some conditions, especially
pyometra.
Because exogenous PGF2a is luteolytic, its mechanism
of action has been presumed to be related to
reductions in circulating progesterone concentrations
and the resultant upregulation of immune functions.
 But, the actual mechanism by which exogenous
PGF2a enhances the resolution of uterine
infections is not known. In fact, PGF2a has direct
and positive effects on immune functions. Thus,
we conducted this study with sheep to determine
whether exogenous PGF2a enhances immune functions
and improves the ability of the uterus to
resolve an infection, independent of the effects of
PGF2a on luteal progesterone production.
Materials and methods.
All procedures with animals were in compliance
with U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural
Research Service guidelines and U.S. Sheep Experiment
Station (USSES), Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee guidelines. All sheep were maintained
at the USSES, fed diets that met their nutrient
requirements, and given free access to water before
and during the experiment. Except that feed and
water were withheld for approximately 36 hr before
laparotomy to minimize the chances that ingesta
would escape from the rumen and be aspirated into
the lungs.
Estrous Cycle Regulation
Mature white-faced ewes (combinations of Rambouillet,
Columbia, Targhee, and Polypay genetics)
in synchronized estrus were assigned to eight randomized
treatment groups. Estrus was synchronized
during the autumn breeding season: pessaries containing
60 mg of medroxyprogesterone acetate (Veramix;
Pfizer Animal Health, Orangeville, ON,
Canada) for 12 d; 15 mg of PGF2a (Lutalyse; Pfizer
Animal Health, New York, NY, USA) i.m. on day 6
of the 12-day period; and 400 IU of eCG (Sioux Biochemical Sioux City, IA, USA) i.m. at pessary
removal. After pessary removal, vasectomized rams
were used to check ewes for signs of estrus. Ewes
standing firmly to be mounted were considered to
be in estrus. If ewes were not observed in estrus
after pessary removal, they were not used for this
experiment.
Experimental Protocol
The treatment groups were in a 2X2X2 factorial
arrangement, with eight ewes per group. The main
effects were ovariectomy, exogenous progesterone,
and exogenous PGF2a. Ewes were ovariectomized or
a sham procedure was performed on the day estrus
was detected (i.e. day 0). Sodium pentobarbital
(65 mg/mL) was infused i.v. to achieve and maintain
a surgical plane of anesthesia. The uterus and ovaries
were exposed through a midventral laparotomy,
the ovaries were removed, and the uterus was
returned to the abdominal cavity. Or, the uterus
and ovaries were exposed through a midventral
laparotomy and returned to the abdominal cavity.
The laparotomy was then sutured closed. Progesterone
(5 mg/2.5 mL of sesame oil; Sigma Chemical, St
Louis, MO, USA) or sesame oil (2.5 mL) was injected
i.m. at 06.30 and 18.30 hours daily from day 0
through day 11. PGF2a (15 mg in 3 mL) or saline
(3 mL) was injected i.m. at 06.30 hours on day 9.
On day 5, a catheter was positioned in the vena
cava, via a saphenous vein, at a point just cranial to
the site of entry of uteroovarian blood. On day
6, all ewes received intrauterine inoculations of
75X107 cfu of A. pyogenes and 35X107 cfu of
E. coli. Vena caval blood was collected on days
9, 10, and 11 to measure lymphocyte proliferation in
vitro and for progesterone and PGF2a immunoassays.
On day 12, ewes were anesthetized with sodium
pentobarbital (65 mg/mL) and exsanguinated. Catheter
placement was confirmed postmortem.
The uterus was collected postmortem from each
ewe. Uterine contents were flushed out with 0.9%
NaCl solution (wt/vol), samples were cultured for
bacteria, flushings were centrifuged, and the appearance
of the endometrium was evaluated to determine
whether a ewe developed a uterine infection
in response to the bacteria and whether a uterine
infection appeared to be resolving. Clear uterine
flushings, small amounts of sediment (&lt;5% by
volume), which contains bacteria and leukocytes, no
signs of endometrial inflammation, and the inability to culture dense colonies of A. pyogenes and E. coli from the flushings were signs that a uterus was not
infected. Cloudy uterine flushings, large amounts of
sediment (&gt;5%, but usually &gt;20%, by volume),
inflamed endometrium, and the ability to culture
dense colonies of A. pyogenes and E. coli from the
flushings were signs of infection. This method for
determining whether a sheep uterus contains an
infection and then classifying the severity of the
infection is consistent with a method used with cervical
mucus from cattle. Because all ewes received
intrauterine inoculations of bacteria, A. pyogenes and
E. coli, which are typically found in livestock environments,
were cultured from all uterine flushing.
However, sediment volume, density of bacterial colonies,
and appearance of the endometrium always
seemed to be positively related.
Vena caval blood was collected with syringes via
the catheters, transferred to heparinized tubes, and
held in an ice bath. Within approximately 1 hr after
blood was collected, a portion of each sample was
centrifuged, and plasma was harvested and stored at -20C. A solid phase RIA kit (progesterone; Diagnostic Products, Los Angeles, CA, USA) was
used to quantify progesterone.7,28 An EIA kit (Cayman
Chemical Co., Ann Arbor, MI, USA) was used
to quantify PGF2a.
Another portion of each blood sample was used
for lymphocyte isolation and culture to evaluate unstimulated
and mitogen-stimulated lymphocyte proliferation.
The isolation and culture procedures were
the same as those we have used previously, except
that a non-radioactive method, instead of [3H]thymidine
incorporation, was used according to the manufacturer's
instructions to quantify lymphocyte
proliferation (CellTiter 96 AQueous Non-Radioactive
Cell Proliferation Assay; Promega, Madison, WI,
USA). Concanavalin A (Con A; stimulates T
cells; 1.0 lg/well; Sigma) and lipopolysaccharides
(LPS; stimulates B cells; 0.5 lg/well; Sigma) were
the mitogens used.  The data were expressed
as optical density units (odu).
Statistical Analyses.
The General Linear Model (GLM) procedures of SAS
(SAS Inst. Inc., Cary, NC, USA) were used to analyze
the data. The anova model included terms for ovariectomy,
progesterone, PGF2a, ovariectomy X progesterone,
ovariectomy X PGF2a, progesterone X PGF2a,
ovariectomy X progesterone X PGF2a, ewe nested
within ovariectomy · progesterone · PGF2a, day, and
all interactions with day. Ewe nested within ovariectomy
X progesterone X PGF2a was the main plot error
term, and residual was the subplot error term. Unstimulated
lymphocyte proliferation was used as a linear
covariant in the anova models to analyze the data
for mitogen-stimulated proliferation. For volume
of sediment in uterine flushings, the model included
terms for ovariectomy, progesterone, PGF2a, ovariectomy
X progesterone, ovariectomy X PGF2a, progesterone
X PGF2a, and ovariectomy X progesterone X
PGF2a. The Duncan's option was used as needed, after
a prior significant F-test, to compare means.
Results.
Treatment groups will be abbreviated as, for example,
sham-oil-saline, which refers to ewes that were
sham ovariectomized on day 0, given sesame oil
injections from day 0 through day 11, and given an
injection of saline on day 9. Ovariectomy - progesterone - 
PGF2a refers to ewes that were ovariectomized
on day 0, given progesterone injections from day 0
through day 11, and given an injection of PGF2a on
day 9.
Vena caval progesterone concentrations were
consistent with the conditions of each treatment
group (Table I). Exogenous progesterone increased
(P &lt; 0.05) vena caval progesterone concentrations,
and exogenous PGF2a decreased (P &lt; 0.05) vena
caval progesterone concentrations in Sham ewes.
Progesterone concentrations on days 9, 10, and 11
in sham-oil-saline ewes were indicative of functional
corpora lutea. In sham - oil - PGF2a, progesterone concentration
decreased after PGF2a treatment on day
9; this indicates that exogenous PGF2a was luteolytic.
In sham - progesterone - saline and sham - progesterone - 
PGF2a, progesterone concentrations on
days 9, 10, and 11 were greater than they were in
all other groups. Progesterone concentrations in
ovariectomy - progesterone - saline and ovariectomy - 
progesterone - PGF2a were similar to those in
sham - oil - saline on days 9, 10, and 11 and in sham - 
oil - PGF2a on day 9, but they were greater than
progesterone concentrations in ovariectomy - oil - 
saline and ovariectomy - oil - PGF2a, which were
0.3 ng/mL or less on days 9, 10, and 11. The data
indicated that exogenous progesterone enhanced
vena caval progesterone concentrations in ovaryintact
ewes and maintained progesterone concentrations
in ovariectomized ewes. Ovariectomy produced  basal progesterone concentrations, and exogenous
PGF2a removed luteal progesterone. Thus, the treatment
groups produced the desired progesterone concentrations.
Ovariectomy decreased (P &lt; 0.05), exogenous progesterone
increased (P &lt; 0.05), and exogenous PGF2a
decreased (P &lt; 0.05) sediment volume, but none of
the interactions were significant (Table I). On the
basis of the criteria used, sham - progesterone - saline,
sham - progesterone - PGF2a, and ovariectomy - progesterone - 
saline ewes had uterine infections at the
time uteri were collected on day 12; infections
seemed less severe in sham - progesterone - PGF2a and
ovariectomy - progesterone - saline than in sham - 
progesterone - saline ewes. Ovariectomy - oil - saline,
ovariectomy - oil - PGF2a, and ovariectomy - progesterone - 
PGF2a ewes did not have uterine infections on
day 12. Sham - oil - saline and sham - oil - PGF2a ewes
seemed to be resolving uterine infections on day 12,
although determining whether a ewe was resolving
an infection or whether the infection was less
severe throughout the experiment is somewhat
subjective.
Ovariectomy decreased (P &lt; 0.05) and exogenous
PGF2a increased (P &lt; 0.05) vena caval PGF2a concentrations
(Table I). PGF2a concentrations varied
(P &lt; 0.05) with day (Table I). The concentrations of
PGF2a in sham - oil - PGF2a, sham - progesterone - 
PGF2a, and ovariectomy - progesterone - PGF2a ewes
were greater (P &lt; 0.05) on day 10, which was 1 day
after exogenous PGF2a, than they were on days 9
and 11. This increase seemed to account for the day
effect (Table I).
Exogenous progesterone reduced (P &lt; 0.01)
unstimulated lymphocyte proliferation, and the
PGF2a · day interaction was significant (P &lt; 0.01;
Table II). Unstimulated lymphocyte proliferation
on days 10 and 11 was greater in PGF2a than in
Saline ewes (PGF2a: day 10, 1.95 and day 11,
1.95 odu; saline: day 10, 1.52 and day 11,
1.28 odu); this seemed to be the source of the
interaction. 
Prostaglandin F2a treatment increased (P &lt; 0.05)
Con A-stimulated lymphocyte proliferation (Table II).

</text>
