<text id="J11" category="" words="2007" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="New Members of the Family Enterobacteriaceae" Author="J. MICHAEL JANDA" PublicationDate="New York ; [London] : Springer 2006" SampledFrom="In The prokaryotes: a handbook on the biology of bacteria. p. 5-40" WebAddress="http://www.springerlink.com/content/l367212007p22232/fulltext.pdf">

In the last edition of this chapter, Don Brenner
(Brenner, 1991) wrote:
"They are, nonetheless, important for a variety
of reasons. They have innate importance as members
of the family, to be compared and contrasted
with their relatives, in attempts to define
the phenotypic, phylogenetic, and ecological
boundaries of the family."
No words better define the current edition of
this chapter as the number of genera of Enterobacteriaceae
has risen 60%, from 15 to 24
(excluding Raoultella). This current list of 24 genera
does not even include such organisms as
Alterococcus agarolyticus and Saccharobacter
fermentatus, taxa that are not formally discussed
in this chapter, although they possess some characteristics
associated with the family Enterobacteriaceae
(Yaping et al., 1990; Shieh and Jean,
1998).
The exponential increase in new genera within
the family Enterobacteriaceae has been fueled
by molecular biology, including polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) technology and 16S (small
subunit) rDNA sequencing. This list of genera
will no doubt continue to increase. What has
resulted from this molecular onslaught is the
basic fundamental knowledge that the family
Enterobacteriaceae plays a critical role not only
in enteric disease of humans and animals, but
also as phytopathogens, as insect pathogens, and
in industrial processes. Members of the family
Enterobacteriaceae can be broadly classified
into four main categories for convenience,
although a number of these genera clearly overlap
into multiple categories (Table 1). Probably
the greatest explosion in our knowledge concerning
enterobacteria stems from new insight
into their role as endosymbionts of insects or of
the parasites that feed on insect larvae (Moran
and Baumann, 2000). Some genera, such as Photorhabdus
and Xenorhabdus, may serve as new
delivery vehicles of important bacterial toxins
with insecticidal activity, replacing such classic
agents as Bacillus thuringiensis (ffrench-
Constant and Bowen, 1999). Knowledge of the
association that genera, such as Brenneria and
Pectobacterium, have with plant diseases continues
to expand as our understanding of their correct
taxonomic position becomes apparent.
Phlyogenetic analysis has also revealed that
some agents, such as Calymmatobacterium granulomatis,
the causative agent of the sexually
transmitted disease, donovanosis (granuloma
inguinale), are actually members of the Enterobacteriaceae.
Thus, our knowledge regarding the
Enterobacteriaceae and factors regulating
molecular evolution of endosymbionts, disease
associations in humans, animals, and plants, biological
applications, and ecologic niches will continue
to expand at a rapid rate for the forseeable
future.
Arsenophonus (Androcidium)
In 1986, Werren et al. isolated the causative
agent (Arsenophonus nasoniae) of the son-killer
(sk) trait from infected tissues of the parasitic
wasp, Nasonia vitropennis. The sk trait, a sexratio
distorter, is carried by approximately 5% of
female wasps from natural populations (Gherna
et al., 1991). Infected wasps transmit the bacterium
to fly pupae (wasp host) during oviposition
and offspring then become infected perorally
(Werren et al., 1986). The bacterium causes the
death of only male wasp eggs (unfertilized) by
arresting their maturation. Werren et al. (1986)
recovered the slow-growing bacterium from
tryptic soy and brain heart infusion broth cultures
containing either infected sk-wasp tissues
or hemolymph of fly pupae parasitized by sk
females. Arsenophonus nasoniae was subsequently
proven to be the causative agent of the
sk trait by fulfilling Koch's postulates.
Arsenophonus nasoniae DNA was 0 - 5%
related to DNA from 54 representative species
of Enterobacteriaceae (Brenner, 1991). However,
total DNA from strain A. nasoniae SKI4
hybridized to an rRNA Escherichia coli
sequence enriched for, but not exclusive to,
members of the family Enterobacteriaceae
(Gherna et al., 1991). SKI4 was 62% related at
60°C and 42% related at 70°C to the Escherichia
coli probe. These values are similar to those exhibited by other members of the Enterobacteriaceae
including Providencia, Proteus mirabilis
and Xenorhabdus nematophilus. A phylogenetic
tree based upon rRNA sequences of selected
members of the family Enterobacteriaceae was
constructed and indicates that the genus Proteus
is the closest neighbor to strain SKI4 (Gherna
et al., 1991). This relationship is further supported
by the fact that the G+C content (39.5mol%) and fatty acid composition (large
amounts of C16:0 and 16:1 cis 9, smaller amounts
of 14:0) of strain SKI4 are very similar to that of
the genera Proteus and Providencia, respectively.
A second putative species in the genus Arsenophonus
has been detected as a "secondary (S)- endosymbiont" in the reduviid bug, Triatoma
infestans (Hyp a and Dale, 1997). A bacterial
culture TI1 was isolated from the hemolymph of
T. infestans. The TI1 bacteria could be propagated
in vitro by cocultivation with a mosquito
cell line (Aedes albopictus) but could not be cultured
in vitro. PCR amplification of a 16S rDNA
product (1361 bp) from TI1-A. albopictus cultures
and comparison to other 16S rDNA
sequences from eubacteria indicated that the
endosymbiont was a member of the γ-3 subdivision
of the class Proteobacteria (Hyp a and
Dale, 1997). The TI1 rDNA sequences are 96.2%
related to those of A. nasoniae and a phylogenetic
tree indicates that A. nasoniae is the most
closely related taxa to TI1. Because TI1 cannot
be cultured in vitro and valid biochemical tests
cannot be performed, Candidatus status (provisional
assignment) has been applied prior to the
vernacular epithet (Murray and Schleifer, 1994;
Hyp a and Dale, 1997). Whether Arsenophonus
contains the enterobacterial common antigen
(ECA) is unknown.
Arsenophonus nasoniae is a fastidious Gramnegative,
oxidase-negative, catalase-positive,
non-sporeforming, nonmotile rod that produces acid from D-glucose, fructose, and sucrose
(Brenner, 1991; Gherna et al., 1991). It is unusual
(with respect to the Enterobacteriaceae) in its
inability to grow on MacConkey agar and to
reduce nitrates. It grows optimally at 30°C, with
a range from 15 to 35°C. A description of biochemical
characteristics associated with A. nasoniae
can be found in Gherna et al. (1991). The
optimal pH range for growth is 7.2 - 7.8, with a
pH range from 6.2 to 8.7 (Brenner, 1991). Limited
antibiotic susceptibility studies indicate that
A. nasoniae is resistant to polymyxin, penicillin,
methicillin and erythromycin and is sensitive to
gentamicin, chloramphenicol, tetracycline and
sulfathiazole (Werren et al., 1986). Growth does
not occur in minimal salts plus glucose without
the addition of protein digests; amino acid supplements
do not support growth. Vitamins, trace
metals, and IsoVitalex also do not support
growth (Brenner, 1991). The addition of 1% proteose
peptone (Difco no. 0120) to conventional
media, however, has been shown to improve
growth (Gherna et al., 1991). "Candidatus Arsenophonus
triatominarum" is also Gram negative,
nonmotile, and non-sporeforming (Hyp a and
Dale, 1997). The rods are highly filamentous 
(&gt;15μm in length, 1 - 1.5μm in diameter).
Both A. nasoniae and Candidatus Arsenophonus
triatominarum are maternally transmitted,
and both are found in the central nervous system
(brain and neural ganglia) of infected insects.
Candidatus Arsenophonus triatominarum is
additionally found in the hemolymph, heart, salivary
glands, visceral muscles, nephrocytes, ovaries,
testes and dorsal vessels of T. infestans
(Hyp a and Dale, 1997). A sex-ratio distorter
trait due to.
Candidatus Arsenophonus triatominarum has
not been found in T. infestans.
The type strain of A. nasoniae is SKI4(= ATCC 49151).
Brenneria.
The genus Brenneria is composed of several
necrogenic phytopathogenic species that formerly
resided within the "amylovora group" of
the genus Erwinia. Phylogenetic investigations
conducted on 16 Erwinia species utilizing 16S
rDNA sequence data identified four distinct
clusters, one of which (cluster IV) contained the
species E. salicis, E. nigrifluens and E. rubrifaciens
(Kwon et al., 1997). Hauben et al. (1998a)
analyzed the 16S rDNA sequences of 29 plantassociated
strains and also identified four clusters.
In this later study, cluster III contained the
three species previously found to reside in cluster
IV by Kwon et al. (1997), in addition to E.
alni, E. paradisiaca and E. quercina. These six
species shared sequence similarities ranging
from 94.7 - 97.4%. The mean sequence relatedness
of cluster IV members to the genera
Erwinia and Pectobacterium were 94.5 and
95.4%, respectively (Hauben et al., 1998a). Signature
sequences identified among cluster III
members were conserved in all six species; these
sequences differed from those of cluster I
(Erwinia), cluster II (Pectobacterium) and cluster
IV (Pantoea). Based upon these results,
Hauben et al. (1998a) proposed the transfer of
these six Erwinia species to a new genus, Brenneria,
named in honor of the American bacteriologist
Don J. Brenner. Subsequent studies
investigating sequence divergence in the glyceraldehyde-
3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gapDH)
gene of the glycolytic pathway support the
genetic differentiation of the genera Brenneria
and Erwinia (Brown et al., 2000). However,
other phylogenetic studies have not demonstrated
such a robust separation between Brenneria
and Pectobacterium species (Spröer et al.,
1999). At the DNA level, E. salicis, E. nigrifluens
and E. rubrifaciens are 27 - 32% related to E.
quercina EQ 102; E. rubifaciens, E. nigrifluens
and E. quercina are 33 - 60% related to E. salicis
ATCC 15712 at 60°C (Brenner et al., 1974). Similar
relatedness values have been reported using
E. nigrifluens (29 - 47%) and E. rubrifaciens (25 - 
54%) as labeled DNA. The G+C content of
members of the genus Brenneria range from 50.1
to 56.1 mol% (Hauben et al., 1998a).
The genus Brenneria consists of Gramnegative,
oxidase-negative, catalase-positive
fermentative rods, 1.3 - 3.0 μm in length by 0.5 - 
1.0 μm in width (Hauben et al., 1998a). Biochemically,
Brenneria species are similar to Pantoea,
Pectobacterium and Erwinia in that they fail to
produce arginine dihydrolase and to decarboxylate
amino acids such as ornithine and lysine
(Lelliott and Dickey, 1984). Acid is produced
from the fermentation of D-glucose, D-fructose,
salicin, mannose and sucrose. Amylases are not
produced. Brenneria rubrifaciens produces a
pink diffusible pigment on YDC medium (1%
yeast extract, 1% D-glucose, 2% precipitated
chalk, and 2% agar). Most species are sensitive
to carbenicillin, cephalothin, chloramphenicol,
naladixic acid and tetracycline, and resistant to
bacitracin, erythromycin and gentamicin.
Differential characteristics useful in separating
members of the genus Brenneria are listed in
Table 2.
As former members of the Erwinia "amylovora
group," Brenneria species cause dry necrosis
or wilt in the specific host plants they infect.
Brenneria alni causes necrotic cankers in the
bark of the trunk, branches and twigs of the Italian
alder (Alnus cordata) and black alder (Surico
et al., 1996). In the warmer months, a watery
liquid is expressed from small cracks in the canker.
A similar disease called "drippy nut disease"
is caused by B. quercina in oaks. Brenneria nigrifluens
causes bark canker in the Persian
(English) walnut, while B. rubrifaciens causes
necrosis in the Persian walnut (Juglans regia).
Brenneria salicis is the causative agent of
"watermark disease" in willows (Salix sp.). This
vascular wilting disease is characterized by the
appearance of wilted, dried, brown-colored
leaves (Hauben et al., 1998b). Infection primarily
resides within the xylem vessels of infected
trees.
The type strains of Brenneria species are listed
in Table 3.
Buchnera.
The genus Buchnera consists of a single species,
B. aphidicola, which is an obligate intracellular
symbiont of the greenbug aphid, Schizaphis
graminum (Munson et al., 1991). Buchera aphidicola
cannot be cultured in vitro. The bacterium
exists within 60 - 80 huge specialized aphid cells
called "bacteriocytes" or "mycetocytes" located
within host-derived membrane vesicles termed
"symbiosomes" (Baumann et al., 1995). Buchnera
is vertically transmitted to eggs and offspring
by a process that is not completely
understood, thereby perpetuating the association
between bacterium and insect. Buchnera or
Buchnera-like endosymbionts also have been
reportedly found in a number of aphid species
including Rhopalosiphum maides, Rhopalosiphum
padi, Myzus persicae, Uroleucon sonchi,
Acyrthosiphon pisum, Diuraphis noxia, Chaitophorus
viminalis, Mindarus victoria, Pemphigus
betae and Melaphis rhois (Munson et al., 1991);
some species of the tribe Cerataphidini are
devoid of Buchnera endosymbionts (Baumann
et al., 1995).
Based upon 16S RNA sequence data, Buchnera
belongs to the γ-3 subdivision of the class
Proteobacteria and is most closely related to
members of the family Enterobacteriaceae
(Munson et al., 1991; Baumann et al., 1995). The
G+C content of Buchnera DNA is 30 mol%.
Buchnera aphidicola appears to have developed
a symbiotic association with a progenitor aphid
species approximately 150 - 200 million years ago
(Buades et al., 1999). The genome (630 - 643 kb)
is only about one-seventh the size of E. coli
(Wernegreen et al., 2000). However, the size of
Buchnera genomes recovered from different
aphid species is highly conserved (&lt;3% difference),
suggesting genome shrinkage early in the
evolutionary symbiotic process. Multiple copies
of the genome (&gt;120) exist within bacteriocytes
(Komaki and Ishikawa, 1999).

</text>
