<text id="J12" category="" words="2011" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="CD8 T Cells Modulate CD4 T-Cell and Eosinophil-Mediated Pulmonary Pathology in Pneumocystis Pneumonia in B-Cell-Deficient Mice" Author="Steve D. Swain, Nicole N. Meissner, and Allen G. Harmsen" PublicationDate="February 2006 p. 466-469" SampledFrom="American Journal of Pathology" WebAddress="http://ajp.amjpathol.org/cgi/reprint/168/2/466">

Pneumocystis spp. pneumonia (PCP) in humans and
in surrogate animal species typically occurs in the
absence of CD4 T cells, as takes place during acquired
immune deficiency syndrome. However, patients
treated with highly active anti-retroviral therapy
sometimes exhibit an exacerbation of diseases such
as PCP that coincides with resurgent CD4 T cells, a
phenomenon known as immune reconstitution disease.
We used an animal model of PCP using the
B-cell-deficient mMT mouse together with antibodymediated
depletion of various T-cell subsets to examine
the role of CD4 and CD8 T cells in the development
of pathology in PCP. Although overt pathology
occurs in the presence of CD4 T cells only, CD8 T cells
only, or both, pulmonary injury occurs via different
paths, depending on the complement of T cells
present. Surprisingly, profound damage occurred
when only CD4 T cells were present, and this pathology
coincided with enhanced recruitment and activation
of eosinophils and strong type 2 cytokine polarization
in the alveolar environment. In addition, CD8
T cells can act to moderate this CD4 T cell-mediated
pathology, possibly by increasing the ratio of putative
CD25+ suppressor CD4 T cells to CD25- effector
CD4 T cells. 
Because the respiratory system is constantly exposed to
potentially pathogenic microorganisms, it possesses the
capability of mounting vigorous innate and acquired immune
responses. However, it is these same vigorous
responses that are often the source of pulmonary impairments
and damage to the respiratory epithelium during
microbial infections. This type of inflammation-related
damage is evident in pneumonia caused by the opportunistic
pathogen Pneumocystis, which typically only occurs
in individuals with some form of immunosuppression.
In immunocompetent patients or experimental
animals, Pneumocystis infection is easily cleared without
significant ensuing pathology. However, in patients with
reduced CD4 lymphocyte numbers [such as acquired
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients], and in
mice in which CD4 lymphocytes have been experimentally
depleted, steady growth of Pneumocystis occurs in
the lung despite the accumulation of inflammatory cells,
including macrophages, CD8 lymphocytes, and, in later
stages, neutrophils. The considerable pathology that
ensues typically coincides with the accumulation of these
inflammatory cells; indeed SCID mice that are deficient in
lymphocytes demonstrate less respiratory impairment
than mice that are only deficient in CD4 cells, even
though they have comparable loads of Pneumocystis.
These observations have led to studies that examined
the type(s) of inflammatory cells potentially involved in the
host tissue damage seen in Pneumocystis pneumonia
(PCP). Although the influx of neutrophils into the alveolar
space coincides with the onset of severe pathology in
PCP, we have recently presented evidence that this is
only correlational and that the neutrophil defense mechanisms
may not be directly involved in the development
of lung pathology. In contrast, there is stronger evidence
that the presence of CD8 lymphocytes is required for the
full development of respiratory impairment in PCP, although
the mechanisms by which this damage occurs
are not yet clear. It is overly simplistic, however, to think
of pulmonary damage in a disease state occurring because
of the unmodulated actions of one cell type alone.
Not only are many types of inflammatory cell types capable
of producing host tissue damage, but there is also
abundant evidence of significant interactions between
inflammatory cell types that can potentially enhance or depress the potential for inflammatory damage by one the of cells in question. These types of interactions
may be relevant in immune reconstitution disease (IRD),
which occurs in some AIDS patients in whom highly
active anti-retroviral therapy results in markedly increased
levels of CD4 lymphocytes. In some of these
individuals, intense inflammatory responses can occur in
the lungs (involving CD4 cells and residual Pneumocystis
organisms) and requires vigorous therapeutic intervention.
This clinical syndrome highlights the potential
interaction of multiple inflammatory cell types and mechanisms
that may be involved in the pathology of PCP.
Furthermore, this scenario also points to the need for a
well-characterized animal model of PCP in which the
functions of CD4 lymphocytes can be investigated.
To address these questions we examined the onset of
Pneumocystis-related pathology in an animal model of PCP
using the B-cell-deficient MT mouse. Because these mice
cannot produce functional antibodies, they develop fullblown
PCP despite the presence of CD4 lymphocytes.By
depletion of specific lymphocyte subsets using antibodymediated
depletions, we examined the type and onset of
pathology during PCP in MT mice that were deficient in
CD4 lymphocytes, CD8 lymphocytes, or both CD4 and CD8
lymphocytes, as well as mice that were replete in both CD4
and CD8 lymphocytes. We report here that significant inflammatory
damage occurs in both CD4-depleted and
CD8-depleted MT mice during Pneumocystis infection, although
it may occur via different mechanisms. We also
report evidence that there is interaction between CD4 and
CD8 cells when both are present during Pneumocystis infection,
which alters the subsets of lymphocytes present,
the cytokine profile, and the type of pathology present at the
inflammatory site.
Materials and Methods.
Animals.
Breeder mice (MT; stock number 002249) were obtained
from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME) and
bred in our facility at Montana State University. Control
C57BL/6 mice were obtained from the National Cancer
Institute (Fredrick, MD). Mice were kept in ventilated
cages, so that incoming air was HEPA filtered, and given
autoclaved mouse chow and acidified water.
Depletion of T-Cell Subsets and Infection with Pneumocystis.
For depletion of CD4 T lymphocytes, mice were given intraperitoneal
injections of 300 mg of the anti-CD4 antibody
GK1.5 (American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA)
twice weekly. Depletion of CD8 T cells was done using
twice weekly injection of 300 g of the anti-CD8 antibody
TIB-210 (American Type Culture Collection). Some animals
received double depletions with twice weekly injections of
300 g each of both GK1.5 and TIB-210.
Respiratory Measurements.
Before tissue sampling, respiratory rates and tidal volumes
were measured on conscious mice using a wholebody
plethysmograph (Buxco Electronics, Sharon, CT).
Arterial blood gases were determined after warming the
mice for 5 minutes at 39°C, carefully nicking the ventral
tail artery, and then collecting 150 l of blood into a
heparinized capillary tube. The blood was mixed using a
small steel flea and magnet, and the samples were analyzed
on a clinical blood gas analyzer (Omni AVL; Roche
Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN) within 1 hour of sampling.
Bronchoalveolar Lavage.
Mice were sacrificed by pentobarbital anesthesia (100
g/g body weight) followed by exsanguination. The trachea
of each mouse was nicked with fine scissors, and
then a tube was inserted. Five 1-ml aliquots of Hanks'
balanced salt solution with 3 mmol/L ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid were then applied to lavage the alveolar
contents. Samples from each 5-ml pooled lavage were
spun onto a slide using a cytospin centrifuge and then
stained with Diff-Quick dye (Dade Behring, Newark, DE).
Proportions of each cell type were determined microscopically
using a X100 objective lens. The bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid (BALF) supernatant was collected by
centrifugation at 200 X g for 10 minutes, and aliquots
were used for the following assays. Albumin and lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) concentrations were determined
with commercial kits (631-2; Sigma Diagnostics, St.
Louis, MO, and CytoTox 96: Promega, Madison, WI).
Eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) activity in the BALF was
measured using a modification of the method of Duguet
and colleagues; briefly, aliquots of BALF were incubated
either with O-phenylenediamine, H2O2, and the
specific inhibitor 3-amino-1,2,3-triazole or with O-phenylenediamine
and H2O2 alone. After 30 minutes of incubation
at room temperature, absorbance at 405 nm was
measured. EPO-specific activity was estimated as the
absorbance measured in wells without the inhibitor
3-amino-1,2,3-triazole minus the absorbance in wells
containing the same sample with 3-amino-1,2,3-triazole.
Flow Cytometry and Cytokine Analysis.
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells were resuspended in
a minimal volume of phosphate-buffered saline with 2%
calf serum and an anti-mouse Fc receptor antibody
(Trudeau Institute, Saranac Lake, NY) to block nonspecific
binding. These cells were then stained with a cocktail
of fluorophore-conjugated antibodies against the
mouse CD antigens CD4, CD8, CD28, and either CD25 or
CD62L (PharMingen, San Diego, CA) and analyzed on a
FACSCalibur flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Mountain
View, CA). Lymphocytes obtained from spleens of
control uninfected mice were used as a basis of comparison.
Flow cytometry-based bead ELISA kits (mouse Th1-
Th2 and Mouse Inflammation; Becton Dickinson) were used to measure cytokine concentrations in undiluted samples of BALF.
Enumeration of Pneumocystis.
After lavage, the trachea was ligated and two-thirds of the
lung were removed, placed into 5 ml of sterile Hanks'
balanced salt solution, and homogenized by pushing
through a metal mesh screen. An aliquot of this material
was diluted 1:20 and applied to a glass slide using a
cytospin centrifuge. After drying, the slides were stained
for an extended period of time in Diff-Quick dye (40 to 60
minutes). Pneumocystis nuclei (both cysts and trophozoites)
were then enumerated in a minimum of five X60
fields, up to a maximum of 50 (if nuclei were not readily
apparent). The average counts were then converted to
log Pneumocystis nuclei per lung. With this technique in
this laboratory, the limit of detection was (log) 4.43 when
50 fields were counted. Although the previous lavage
removes some Pneumocystis organisms from the lung, it
is a small fraction of what is present in the lung (&lt;10%),
and this was consistent among different groups of mice.
Histology.
One-third of the lung (the large left lobe) was fixed for 24
hours in phosphate-buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin,
sectioned at 5 m, and stained with either hematoxylin
and eosin (H&amp;E) or Alcian Blue with periodic acid-
Schiff using standard histological techniques.
Statistical Analysis.
The software program Graph Pad Prism (San Diego, CA)
was used for all statistical tests of significance (to P &lt;
0.05). Where greater than two groups were being compared,
one-way analysis of variance with Tukey's post
hoc pairwise comparisons were made. When only two
groups were compared, we used a two-sided t-test, with
Welch's correction if the groups had unequal variances.
In cases in which a deviation from a normal distribution
was observed, a nonparametric test (Mann-Whitney test)
was also applied. In those cases, we found that both the
t-test and Mann-Whitney test indicated the same result
(ie, both indicated significance or nonsignificance); however,
typically one test gave a more conservative P value
(larger, but still 0.05). The P values we report are always
the conservative values.
Results.
Although the common mouse model of Pneumocystis pneumonia
(PCP) is that of wild-type mice depleted of CD4
lymphocytes, it has previously been shown that MT mice,
which are deficient in B-cell and antibody production, also
develop serious and progressive infections with Pneumocystis,
even with normal numbers of CD4 lymphocytes.
We first compared these two models and found that at 28
days after inoculation MT mice exhibited a burden of
Pneumocystis that is only slightly lower than that seen in
CD4+ depleted wild-type mice infected at the same time
(Figure 1). However, there were some subtle differences in
the Pneumocystis-related pathology found in these two
models. Although there were no statistical differences in the
indicators of BAL albumin, BAL LDH, or respiratory rates,
arterial blood oxygen was significantly lower in MT mice
(Table 1). MT mice also recruited considerably more cells
into the alveolar compartment than did CD4-depleted wildtype
mice. These included lymphocytes (mostly CD8 lymphocytes)
and most strikingly, large numbers of eosinophils
(Figure 1). The CD4-depleted wild-type mice had fewer
accumulated CD8 lymphocytes in their lungs and, as would
be expected, had no CD4 lymphocytes and few eosinophils
in the BAL during Pneumocystis infection (Figure 1). However,
if CD4 lymphocytes were depleted from MT mice,
then the Pneumocystis disease took on characteristics very
similar to that of CD4-depleted wild-type mice. This was true
with respect to Pneumocystis burden (Figure 1), physiological
impairments (Table 1), and cellular influx into the lung
(Figure 1).
Previous research has implicated CD8 lymphocytes as a
cause of host tissue damage in Pneumocystis, and this initial
study would seem to agree, as both B-cell-deficient and Band
CD4-cell-deficient mice had extensive host tissue damage.
To examine further the role of the CD8 cells, we infected
MT mice that were depleted of CD4 lymphocytes,
CD8 lymphocytes, or both CD4 and CD8 lymphocytes as
well as undepleted MT mice with Pneumocystis.

</text>
