<text id="J15" category="" words="2011" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="PRACTICAL METHODS FOR THE CLINICAL ASSESSMENT OF INFORMATION PROCESSING SPEED" Author="SAMUEL T. GONTKOVSKY and WILLIAM W. BEATTY" PublicationDate="November 1, 2006 " SampledFrom="International Journal of Neuroscience " WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?hid=122&sid=ab291ca8-7ec1-4d34-a1b7-535f49e4d60e%40sessionmgr111&vid=3">

The rate at which individuals are capable of processing information is considered a
sensitive indicator of brain dysfunction, particularly among clinical populations
whose neurocognitive impairments generally are considered relatively mild in
nature. Assessment of information processing speed often is confounded, however,
by comorbid impairments in other constructs of neurocognition, including
attentional capacity, visuospatial perception, language, immediate memory, and
motor speed/coordination. This investigation examined the effect of controlling
for various potential confounders on the strength of associations among several potential measures of information processing speed. Participants were 64 patients
diagnosed with clinically definite multiple sclerosis. Analysis indicated consistent
significant and positive associations among measures of processing speed, which
generally persisted despite simultaneous statistical control of potential confounding
factors. Results imply that examined confounding variables are similarly related to
the measures of processing speed. Therefore, any of the measures of information
processing speed considered in this study may be used as a proxy for the more direct
measure of this construct derived from the Sternberg Memory Scanning Test. 
The rate at which individuals are capable of processing information is
considered a sensitive indicator of brain dysfunction. Impairments on tasks that
require speeded performance have been observed repeatedly in persons with
otherwise mild cognitive deficits, including patients with multiple sclerosis
(MS, Rao et al., 1991), systemic lupus erythematosus (Shucard et al., 2004),
chronic fatigue syndrome (DeLuca et al., 2004), diseases of the basal ganglia
(Cummings, 1990), and mild to moderate traumatic brain injury (Levin, 1993).
Processing speed also declines early in the course of Alzheimer's disease
(Beatty et al., 2003) as well as in normal aging (Salthouse, 1991).
Assessment of processing speed is complicated because test scores on
any measure of speeded performance may be influenced, or confounded, by
the patient's capacity for attention, visuospatial perception, language, and
immediate memory as well as by motor speed/coordination and the integrity of
sensory systems.
Perhaps the purest measure of processing speed is the Sternberg Memory
Scanning Test (Sternberg, 1969). On this task, subjects first memorize a set
of 1, 2, or 4 digits. They are shown single digits on a computer screen and
must decide by pressing one of two keys whether the digit matches one of
those held in memory. Plots of reaction time against the size of the memory
set yield two measures: slope, which is taken as the measure of information
processing speed (usually expressed as ms/bit of information), and intercept,
which reflects overall response speed. Factors such as attention, visuospatial
perception, language, and sensory/motor ability either are irrelevant to the
task or exert influences unrelated to memory set size. These factors would be
expected to affect the size of intercept, but not the slope. Impairment in memory
might affect the slope, but if this was a serious problem for a particular patient,
an increase in the proportion of errors (normally nearly 0)would be expected. As
a practical assessment matter, one probably would not be especially concerned
about obtaining a precise estimate of information processing speed for a patient
who could not remember four single-digit numbers following rehearsal.
Rao et al. (1989) tested patients with MS and controls on the Sternberg
Memory Scanning Test. The patients and controls differed in mean slope (100
ms/digit vs. 68 ms/digit) and mean intercept (741 ms vs. 541 ms), but error
rates were low (1.9% vs. 0.9%) for both groups and not significantly different.
Thus, based on their steeper slopes, the patients exhibited slowed information
processing of central origin that could not be attributed to sensory or motor
deficits or to difficulties in attention or immediate memory. They also showed
overall slowing based on their higher values for the intercept.
As a relatively uncontaminated measure of processing speed, the Sternberg
Memory Scanning Test has many virtues, but the length of the task
(approximately 30 min) probably is too long for most clinical settings. A
number of shorter alternatives have been used to infer patients' abilities to
process information rapidly based on the timing element involved in their
completion. The present study examined the effect of controlling for various
possible confounders on the strength of associations among several potential
measures of information processing speed that are sufficiently brief and
therefore widely used in clinical practice. If the patterns of association among
the various measures were similar and statistically significant without and with
adjustment for the confounding variables, the implication would be that the
confounding variables have minimal to modest influences on the measures of
processing speed or, at least, that their influences are similar for all of the
processing speed measures.
METHOD
Participants
Participants were 64 patients who met inclusionary/exclusionary criteria
and volunteered to participate in a prospective investigation examining the
sensitivity of three screening measures to the cognitive impairments associated
with MS (Aupperle et al., 2002). Patients were recruited from the MS Clinic at
the Oklahoma City Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center (DVAMC)
and from the practices of collaborating area neurologists. The sample consisted
of 27 males and 37 females. Four participants were African American,
1 participant was Hispanic, and 59 participants were Caucasian. Twenty (31%)
of the patients were employed full time; the remaining either were retired or
unemployed. All of the accepted volunteers met criteria for clinically definite
MS (Poser et al., 1983), were residing at home, and had adequate vision (e.g.,
ability to read newspapers, magazines, and the consent form without specialized aids) and hand function (e.g., legible signature of normal size on the consent
form) to complete all measures. Thirty-three patients had been diagnosed
with a relapsing-remitting disease course, and 31 had been diagnosed with a
progressive disease course (5 primary progressive, 26 secondary progressive).
Each potential participant initially was sent a letter describing the study
and subsequently was contacted by telephone to determine eligibility and
willingness to participate. Patients with any of the following conditions were
excluded from participation: history of head injury with loss of consciousness
for more than one hour or documented chronic cognitive impairment, history
of alcohol or drug abuse treatment, history of learning disability, myocardial
infarction during the prior twelve-month period, uncontrolled hypertension or
metabolic disease (e.g., diabetes, thyroid, or liver disease), chronic lung or
kidney disease, history of any central nervous system disease other than MS,
severe psychiatric disease (e.g., Schizophrenia or Bipolar Disorder), Major
Depressive Disorder or any anxiety disorder that clearly antedated the diagnosis
of MS. Based on these criteria, 8 volunteers were excluded (4 for poor vision,
1 for a learning disability, 1 who could not hold a pencil, 1 for a severe traumatic
brain injury, and 1 who was confined to bed). An additional 12 patients
(8%) who met the inclusionary/exclusionary criteria refused to participate.
Patients continued to take medications at optimal doses as prescribed by their
attending physicians (see Aupperle et al., 2002 for specific details). All other
patients provided written informed consent; the protocol was approved by the
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center Institutional Review Board
and the Research Committee of the Oklahoma City DVAMC.
Procedure
All testing of participants occurred at least one month following recovery
from an exacerbation of MS symptomatology. Measures were administered
and scored according to standardized procedures in the following order:
(1) Ambulation Index (AI; Hauser et al., 1983), (2) Mini-Mental State Exam
(Folstein et al., 1975), (3) Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS; Krupp et al., 1989), (4)
Chicago Multiscale Depression Inventory (CMDI; Nyenhuis et al., 1995), (5)
State-TraitAnxiety Inventory (STAI; Spielberger, 1983), (6) RepeatableBattery
for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS; Randolph, 1998),
Screening Examination for Cognitive Impairment (SEFCI; Beatty et al., 1995),
and Neuropsychological Screening Battery for Multiple Sclerosis (NPSBMS;
Rao et al., 1985; Rao et al., 1991) and, (7)Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (Heaton
et al., 1993). The order of administration for the three neuropsychological screening batteries listed in number six was controlled by between-subjects
counterbalancing. Additionally, a brief rest period was imposed between these
three batteries in order to minimize potential interference effects.
For the purposes of the present investigation, the following timed tests
from the neuropsychological batteries were selected as measures of information
processing speed: the Controlled OralWord Association Test with the letters F,
A, and S from the NPSBMS, the Coding and Semantic Fluency subtests from
the RBANS, the oral version of the Symbol DigitModalities Test (Smith, 1982)
from the SEFCI, and the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT) with
a 3-interstimulus interval (ISI) from the NPSBMS. The 3-second ISI version
of the PASAT was used because 11 patients were unable to complete the more
difficult 2-second ISI version. Control factors were the Digit Span Test from
the RBANS for auditory attention, the Figure Copy test from the RBANS for
visuospatial function, the Picture Naming test from the RBANS and the Shipley
Vocabulary Test (SILS-V; Zachary, 1986) from the SEFCI for language, the
ImmediateMemory Index from the RBANS for immediate memory, the AI for
motor ability, and the FSS for fatigue.
The number of patientswho refused to attempt various testswas as follows:
1-Coding and 3-Figure Copy from the RBANS; 1-oral version of the Symbol
Digit Modalities Test from the SEFCI; 3-PASAT from the NPSBMS. The
patient who refused to attempt the Coding subtest and the SDMT suffered from
ophthalmoplegia. Reasons for the other refusals are unknown. These patients
were excluded from statistical analyses, which were performed on the data of
the remaining 60 subjects who completed all measures.
RESULTS
Correlational analysis revealed no significant associations between the use
of any class of medications and performance on the cognitive tests. Likewise,
cognitive performance was not correlated with scores on any of the scales of the
CMDI or the STAI (see Aupperle et al., 2002). Table 1 shows the correlations
among the five measures of processing speed. Zero-order correlations are
shown in standard font and partial correlations in bold font. The partial
correlations were computed controlling for auditory attention, visuospatial
function, naming, vocabulary, immediate memory, motor ability, and fatigue
simultaneously. All of the zero-order correlations were statistically significant;
those between Coding or SDMT and other variables were at least moderate in
size (r ≥ .40). Associations between the verbal fluency and PASAT measures
were small in magnitude. After adjustment for the seven control factors, all but one of the correlations remained significant, although the strength of all
associations was reduced.
DISCUSSION
The present findings reveal consistent associations among probable measures
of processing speed, which generally persist despite simultaneous statistical
control of seven potentially confounding factors. The results imply, at
minimum, that the confounding variables are related to the measures of
processing speed in a similar way. Hence, any of the measures presumably
can be used as a proxy for the more direct measure derived from the Sternberg
Memory Scanning Test.
Of these, the oral version of the SDMT, which takes only about twominutes
to administer (with instructions), appears to be the test of choice for examination
of information processing speed. The SDMT has adequate norms adjusted for
various demographic characteristics, including age and gender (Richardson &amp;
Marottoli, 1996; Uchiyama et al., 1994; Yeudall et al., 1986) and can be scored
easily with a template. The stimuli are large, so visual acuity rarely is a problem,
although patients with eye movement disorders may not produce valid scores.
Elsewhere, Beatty (2002) found that the SDMT, the FAS, and semantic
fluency are moderately correlated, aswas found in the present study, and each of
the tests has similar sensitivity and specificity for discriminating patients with
MS from demographic controls. Fluency tests are brief and adequate norms are
available (see Spreen &amp; Strauss, 1998).
Performance on the coding test from the RBANS was highly correlated
with performance on the SDMT, which was expected because the tasks are the
same although the symbol keys and the response mode (oral vs. written) differ.
Because these tests are so highly correlated, they likely provide very similar
information about processing speed. Hence, the examiner probably can safely
select the test that uses the patient's least impaired response mode. Most often
this will be the oral administration of the SDMT.
Finally, the PASAT is longer than any of the other tests examined in
this investigation and often requires repetition of the instructions.

</text>
