<text id="J16" category="" words="2011" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Characterization of the Vaccinia Virus A35R Protein and Its Role in Virulence" Author="Rachel L. Roper" PublicationDate="January 2006, p. 306 - 313" SampledFrom="JOURNAL OF VIROLOGY" WebAddress="http://jvi.asm.org/cgi/reprint/80/1/306">

The vaccinia virus A35R gene is highly conserved among poxviruses and encodes a previously uncharacterized hydrophobic acidic protein. Western blotting with anti-A35R peptide antibodies indicated that the protein is expressed early in infection and resolved as a single sharp band of 23 kDa, slightly higher than the 20 kDa predicted from its sequence. The protein band appeared to be the same molecular weight on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, whether expressed in an in vitro transcription/translation system without microsomes or expressed in infected cells, suggesting that it was not glycosylated. A mutant virus with the A35R gene deleted (vA35) formed wild-type-sized plaques on all cell lines tested (human, monkey, mouse, and rabbit); thus, A35R is not required for replication and does not appear to be a host range gene. Although the A35R protein is hydrophobic, it is unlikely to be an integral membrane protein, as it partitioned to the aqueous phase during TX-114 partitioning. The protein could not be detected in virus-infected cell supernatants. 
A35R localized intracellularly to the virus factories, where the first stages of morphogenesis occur. The vA35 mutant formed near-normal levels of the various morphogenic stages of infectious virus particles and supported normal acid-induced fusion of virus-infected cells. Despite normal growth and morphogenesis in vitro, the vA35 mutant virus was attenuated in intranasal challenge of mice compared to wild-type and A35R rescue virus. Thus, the intracellular A35R protein plays a role in virulence. The A35R has little homology to any protein outside of poxviruses, suggesting a novel virulence mechanism.
Poxviruses are large double-stranded DNA viruses with genomes
that range from 130 to 379 kbp. Poxviruses have
worldwide distribution and infect a wide variety of animals,
including insects, birds, and mammals. While smallpox
was eradicated from nature, variola virus continues to present
a bioterrorism concern, and several other poxviruses infect
humans, causing morbidity and mortality: molluscum contagiosum
virus (MCV), monkeypox virus, Tanapox virus, Yaba-like
disease virus, cowpox virus, and Cantagalo virus (evolved from
a vaccinia virus [VV] vaccine strain). The prevalence of poxviruses in animals and humans and
their propensity for recombination and gene acquisition suggest
that it would be unwise to discount them as important
human pathogens. This is especially true, since most emerging
infectious diseases are zoonoses, crossing from animals to humans,
and poxviruses are known to acquire mutations and
become highly pathogenic in a new animal species.
The complex poxvirus replication cycle occurs in the cytoplasmic
areas of dense viroplasm called virus factories. Gene
expression is temporally regulated, with early, intermediate,
and late gene expression. Early genes include those encoding
intermediate transcription factors, components of the DNA
replication machinery, inhibitors of cellular apoptosis and proteins
that interfere with immune clearance of virus-infected
cells. Among the last group, there are inhibitors of complement;
alpha interferon (IFN-a), IFN-b, and IFN-y; major histocompatility
complex class I expression; antigen presentation;
interleukin 1-converting enzyme; Fas-induced killing; chemokines;
and interleukins. While a great many viral
pathogenic strategies have been described, my colleagues and
I have documented that of the 90 most widely conserved poxvirus
genes, 25 remain uncharacterized. This fact underscores
the large amount that is still unknown about poxviruses
and highlights the need for further study of these viruses and
genes.
Most poxvirus research has focused on VV, the prototypical
poxvirus that was used as the live smallpox vaccine. Poxvirus
morphogenesis is complex with multiple viral forms. The
spherical immature virus particle matures into the intracellular
mature virus (IMV) concomitant with proteolytic cleavage.
The IMV is infectious, but to escape the cell during infection,
IMV must undergo a second membrane-wrapping event, during
which the IMV acquires two additional membrane layers
derived from the trans-Golgi network or early endosomes,
forming the intracellular enveloped virus (IEV). The IEV fuses out, losing its outermost membrane and releasing the extracellular enveloped virus (EEV). Seven proteins have been identified that are
specifically incorporated into the IEV and/or EEV membranes:
an 89-kDa hemagglutinin (encoded by the VV A56R
gene), a 42 kDa protein (B5R), a 43- to
50-kDa protein (A36R), the 65-kDa (F12L) protein, the acylated 37-kDa (F13L) protein (3, 24), and two variably glycosylated 21- to 24-kDa proteins encoded by A33R and
A34R. The A33R, A34R, and A36R envelope
genes are contained within a small contiguous region of the
genome interrupted only by the A35R open reading frame
(ORF). The location of the A35R and its hydrophobic nature
suggested that it might also be an envelope-associated protein.
This report describes the first characterization of the A35R
protein and its role in virulence.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells. HeLa cells were used for growth of virus stocks as previously described
(12). BS-C-1 cells were routinely used for plaque assays, immunostaining, immunoprecipitations,
and Western blotting. For titrations of VV and analysis of
plaque size, monolayers were fixed and stained with 0.1% crystal violet in 20%
ethanol.
RK13 cells were used to propagate virus for CsCl purification of virus particles.
Cells were grown in Eagle's minimum essential medium with 10% fetal bovine
serum, and infections were carried out in Eagle's minimum essential medium
with 2.5% fetal bovine serum. Cell lines used for host range studies are listed
with the American Type Culture Collection number in parenthesis: RK-13,
normal rabbit kidney (CCL-37); CV-1, normal African Green monkey kidney
(CCL-70); HeLa, human cervical adenocarcinoma (CCL-2); human, thymidine
kinase-negative (TK) (CRL-8303); African green monkey normal kidney, BSC-
1 (CCL-26); human lung carcinoma, A549 (CCL-185); normal human lung
fibroblast, MRC-5 (CCL-171); and hamster kidney, BHK-21 (CRL 8544).
Antibodies. Polyclonal rabbit sera were raised to three A35R peptides (supplied
by J. Coligan, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases). Sequences
were derived from hydrophilic regions of the predicted amino acid
sequence of A35R. The peptide A35R-55 sequence was CQKCYFSYKGKIVP
QDSND (residues 55 to 72), the A35R-102 peptide sequence was CDIEDKH
QPFY (residues 102 to 111), and A35R-85 was YRSKNTIIIACDYDC (85 to
98). Cysteine residues (underlined) were included to aid in peptide coupling.
Peptides were coupled to keyhole limpet hemocyanin using the Imject Activated
Immunogen Conjugation kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL). A total of five injections
were given, and the rabbits were bled to prepare antiserum.
Cloning and in vitro expression of A35R. The Sal L opp plasmid (a gift from
Nelson Cole) was cut with NcoI and SpeI restriction enzymes to release a DNA
segment containing the A35R gene, from 1 nucleotide before the ATG translation
start site to 37 nucleotides after the stop codon. The A35R segment and
NcoI- and SpeI-cut pGem5Zf (Promega) and pTM1 plasmids were gel
purified using the Geneclean II kit, ligated, and transformed into Escherichia
coli. Ampicillin-resistant colonies were picked and screened for inserts. In vitro
expression was carried out using the TNT reticulolysate system (Promega) in the
absence of microsomal membranes.
vA35R mutant virus construction. DNA segments containing the A35R
flanking regions were joined with the E. coli xanthine guanine phosphoribosyl
transferase (gpt) gene under the p7.5 promoter by recombinant PCR.
The flanking sequence that included part of the adjacent A34R gene was amplified
by using the primer pair CCAGATTGCCTAGACCGGATACTAG and
GCGGGTGGGTTTGGAATTAGTGTGGCGGCGTACGTTAACGACTTA.
Sequences of the gpt gene (underlined) were incorporated into the primers for
sequential amplification and joining of the gpt and A35R flanking regions. The
flanking sequence that included part of the adjacent A36R gene was amplified
using the primer pair CCTGGCACTGCCGGGCGTTCATAAAAGTTGTAA
AGTAAATAATAAAAC and TCATTCCTAGAAATATTATCTACG. Primers
used to amplify the gpt cassette were CACTAATTCCAAACCCACCCGCTT
and AACGCCCGGCAGTGCCAGGCGT. The three DNA segments were amplified
by PCR individually, purified by using Promega PCR Preps, and then
joined by recombinant PCR in a stepwise fashion. The final PCR product was
purified, TA cloned (Invitrogen), and sequenced using a Prism Dye Deoxy
Terminator Cycle Sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Calif.) in
conjunction with a model 373 DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems). The TA
plasmid containing the A35A construct was transfected with N-[1-(2,3-dioleoyloxy)
propyl]-N,N,N-trimethylammonium methyl-sulfate (DOTAP; Roche) into
cells infected with the wild-type VV strain Western Reserve (WR). Viruses were
grown under semisolid agarose (GIBCO/BRL, Grand Island, N.Y.) containing
mycophenolic acid (Sigma) for selection of recombinant virus. Viruses were
plaque purified three times and amplified. Recombinant viruses were PCR
screened for the presence of the gpt gene and the absence of the A35R gene
using primers flanking the A35R locus. Protein expression was analyzed by
Western blotting.
vA35-Res virus construction. The A35R gene and flanking sequences were
PCR amplified using primers CCAGATTGCCTAGACCGGATACTAG and
TCATTCCTAGAAATATTATCTACG. The PCR product was cloned into the
TA cloning vector (Invitrogen). Plasmids were sequenced to confirm the correct
sequence and transfected into vA35A-infected cells. vA35-Res recombinant viruses
were selected on STO cells in the presence of 6-thioguanine to select
against viruses containing the gpt gene. Expression of A35R protein was
confirmed by Western blotting.
Immunoprecipitation and Western blotting. Immunoprecipitation and Western
blots were performed essentially as described previously (46). Rabbit anti-
A35R sera were used at a 1:1,000 dilution in Western blots.
Triton X-114 partitioning of integral membrane proteins. BS-C-1 cells were
infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10 for 24 h. The medium was
removed, and cells were extracted in cold buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH
7.4), 150 mM NaCl, and 2% Triton X-114 (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Following a
15-min incubation, lysates were centrifuged for 7 min at 14,000 X g to remove
insoluble matter. Supernatants were wmed to 37°C, underlaid twice with 6%
sucrose, and centrifuged for 10 min at 1,000 X g to separate the upper aqueous
phase from the lower detergent phase. Samples were analyzed by immunoprecipitation
and sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Immunofluorescence microscopy. Fluorescence microscopy was performed as
previously described. Infected HeLa cell monolayers on coverslips were
washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde,
and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100. Rabbit anti-A35R sera were used at
a 1:1,000 dilution. The secondary antibody was Alexa 568-labeled goat anti-rabbit
immunoglobulin G (Molecular Probes, Inc.) diluted 1:400, and DNA was stained
by 500-ng/ml Hoechst 33258 (Sigma). Samples were viewed and images were
collected with a Zeiss IIIRS immunofluorescent microscope.
One-step growth curve. Confluent BS-C-1 cell monolayers in six-well plates
were infected with VV at an MOI of 10 for 2 h. The inocula were removed, the
cells were washed, and fresh medium was added. At intervals, the medium from
an individual well was harvested and centrifuged at 1,800 X g for 5 min to pellet
detached cells. The resulting cell pellet was combined with infected cells that had
been scraped from the plate into 1 ml of fresh medium. Cells were frozen, thawed
three times, and sonicated. Viruses from the media and cells were individually
titrated in duplicate on BS-C-1 cell monolayers.
Virus purification. Virus particles were separated and purified based on differential
buoyant density centrifugation in CsCl, as described previously.
Briefly, RK-13 cells were infected at a multiplicity of infection of 10 for 48 h. For
EEV, supernatants were harvested and centrifuged twice at 3,000 rpm in a
Sorvall RT 6000B to remove cells. Then, supernatants were centrifuged at 22,000
rpm in a Beckman L8-70 M for 80 min to pellet virus. For IMV, cells were
scraped into 10 mM Tris (pH 9.0) and Dounce homogenized. After a low-speed
centrifugation, virus was pelleted through a 36% sucrose cushion. Afterwards,
both the EEV and IMV were purified on a CsCl gradient (layered densities of
1.3, 1.25, and 1.2 g/ml) and centrifuged at 32,000 rpm with slow acceleration for
60 min in a Beckman L8-70 M.
Syncytium formation. Confluent BS-C-1 cell monolayers were infected at an
MOI of 10 for 2 h, washed, and incubated in medium for an additional 10 h as
described previously. Cells were washed and treated with fusion buffer
[phosphate-buffered saline with 10 mM 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid
and 10 mM HEPES] at pH 5.5 or 7.4 for 2 min at 37°C. Afterwards, fusion buffer
was replaced by medium, and the cells were incubated at 37°C and then observed
by phase-contrast microscopy.
Determination of virulence in mice. Groups of six female BALB/c 6-week-old
mice were anesthetized and intranasally challenged with 104 to 106 PFU of
vA35A, WR, vA35-Res virus, or PBS in 20 	ml 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9.0). Virus
titers were determined on the day of challenge to confirm virus dose.

</text>
