<text id="J23" category="" words="2019" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Peace process : American diplomacy and the Arab-Israeli conflict since 1967 " Author="Quandt, William B." PublicationDate="2005" SampledFrom="Washington, D.C. : Brookings Institution Press ; Berkeley : University of California Press" WebAddress="http://www.netlibrary.com/Reader/">

The Johnson Presidency.
Yellow Light: Johnson and the Crisis of May - June 1967.
Lyndon Baines Johnson brought to the presidency
a remarkable array of political talents. An activist and a man of
strong passions, Johnson seemed to enjoy exerting his power. As majority
leader in the Senate, he had used the art of persuasion as few other
leaders had; building consensus through artfully constructed compromises
had been one of his strong suits. His political experience did not, however,
extend to foreign-policymaking, an area that demanded his attention,
especially as American involvement in Vietnam grew in late 1964 and
early 1965.
Fortunately for the new president, one part of the world that seemed
comparatively quiet in the early 1960s was the Middle East. Long-standing
disputes still simmered, but compared with the turbulent 1950s, the
situation appeared to be manageable. The U.S.-Israeli relationship had
been strengthened by President Kennedy, and Johnson obviously was prepared
to continue on this line, particularly with increases in military assistance.
His personal sentiments toward Israel were warm and admiring. To
all appearances he genuinely liked the Israelis he had dealt with, many of
his closest advisers were well-known friends of Israel, and his own contacts
with the American Jewish community had been close throughout his
political career.
Johnson's demonstrated fondness for Israel did not mean he was particularly
hostile to Arabs, but it is fair to say that Johnson showed little
sympathy for the radical brand of Arab nationalism expounded by Egypt's president Gamal Abdel Nasser. And he was sensitive to signs that the
Soviet Union was exploiting Arab nationalism to weaken the influence of
the West in the Middle East. Like other American policymakers before
him, Johnson seemed to waver between a desire to try to come to terms
with Nasser and a belief that Nasser's prestige and regional ambitions
had to be trimmed. More important for policy than these predispositions,
however, was the fact that Johnson, overwhelmingly preoccupied by Vietnam,
treated Middle East issues as deserving only secondary priority.
U.S.-Egyptian relations had deteriorated steadily between 1964 and
early 1967, in part because of the conflict in Yemen, in part because of
quarrels over aid. By 1967, with Vietnam becoming a divisive domestic
issue for Johnson, problems of the Middle East were left largely to the
State Department. There, the anxiety about increased tension between
Israel and the surrounding Arab states was growing after the Israeli raid
on the Jordanian town of Al-Samu' in November 1966, and especially
after an April 1967 Israeli-Syrian air battle that resulted in the downing
of six Syrian MiGs. Under Secretary of State Eugene Rostow was particularly
concerned about the drift of events, suspecting that the Soviets were
seeking to take advantage in the Middle East of Washington's preoccupation
with Vietnam.
If the tensions on the Syrian-Israeli border provided the fuel for the
early stages of the 1967 crisis, the spark that ignited the fuel came in the
form of erroneous Soviet reports to Egypt on May 13 that Israel had
mobilized some ten to thirteen brigades on the Syrian border. Against the
backdrop of Israeli threats to take action to stop the guerrilla raids from
Syria, this disinformation apparently helped to convince Nasser the time
had come for Egypt to take some action to deter any Israeli moves against
Syria and to restore his own somewhat tarnished image in the Arab
world. The Soviets, he seemed to calculate, would provide firm backing
for his position.
On May 14 Nasser made the first of his fateful moves. Egyptian troops
were ostentatiously sent into Sinai, posing an unmistakable challenge to
Israel, if not yet a serious military threat. President Johnson and his key
advisers were quick to sense the danger in the new situation. Because of
his well-known sympathy for Israel and his forceful personality, Johnson
might have been expected to take a strong and unambiguous stand in
support of Israel at the outset of the crisis, especially as such a stand might
have helped to prevent Arab miscalculations. Moreover, reassurances to
Israel would lessen the pressure on Prime Minister Levi Eshkol to resort
to preemptive military action. Finally, a strong stand in the Middle East would signal the Soviet Union that it could not exploit tensions there
without confronting the United States.
The reality of U.S. policy as the Middle East crisis unfolded in May
was, however, quite different. American behavior was cautious, at times
ambiguous, and ultimately unable to prevent a war that was clearly in the
offing. Why was that the case? This is the central puzzle in Johnson's
reaction to the events leading up to the June 1967 war. Also, one must ask
how hard Johnson really tried to restrain Israel. Some have alleged that
Johnson in fact gave Israel a green light to attack, or in some way colluded
with Israel to draw Nasser into a trap. These charges need to be carefully
assessed. And what role did domestic political considerations play in Johnson's
thinking? Did the many pro-Israeli figures in Johnson's entourage
influence his views?
Initial Reactions to the Crisis.
Nasser's initial moves were interpreted in Washington primarily in political
terms. Under attack by the conservative monarchies of Jordan and
Saudi Arabia for being soft on Israel, Nasser was seen as attempting to
regain prestige by appearing as the defender of the embattled and threatened
radical regime in Syria. Middle East watchers in the State Department
thought they recognized a familiar pattern. In February 1960 Nasser
had sent troops into Sinai, postured for a while, claimed victory by deterring
alleged Israeli aggressive designs, and then backed down. All in all,
a rather cheap victory, and not one that presented much of a danger to
anyone. Consequently the initial American reaction to Nasser's dispatch
of troops was restrained. Even the Israelis did not seem to be particularly
alarmed.
On May 16, however, the crisis took on a more serious aspect as the
Egyptians made their initial request for the removal of the United Nations
Emergency Force (UNEF). This prompted President Johnson to sound out
the Israelis about their intentions and to consult with the British and the
French. On May 17 Johnson sent Eshkol the first of several letters
exchanged during the crisis, in which he urged restraint and specifically
asked to be informed before Israel took any action. "I am sure you will
understand that I cannot accept any responsibilities on behalf of the
United States for situations which arise as the result of actions on which
we are not consulted."
From the outset, then, Johnson seemed to want to avoid war, to restrain
the Israelis, and to gain allied support for any action that might be taken.
Two possible alternative courses of action seem not to have been seriously
considered at this point. One might have been to stand aside and let the
Israelis act as they saw fit, even to the extent of going to war. The danger,
of course, was that Israel might get into trouble and turn to the United
States for help. Johnson seemed to fear this possibility throughout the crisis,
despite all the intelligence predictions that Israel would easily win a war
against Egypt alone or against all the surrounding Arab countries.
The second alternative not considered at this point was bold unilateral
American action opposing Nasser's effort to change the status quo. Here
the problems were twofold. A quarrel with Egypt might inflame the situation
and weaken American influence throughout the Arab world. The
Suez precedent, and what it had done to British and French positions in
the region, was very much in the minds of key American officials. Nasser
was not noted for backing down when challenged. Moreover, U.S. military
assets were deeply committed in Vietnam, ruling out a full-scale military
confrontation with Egypt. But even if American forces had been
available, Congress was in no mood to countenance unilateral military
action, even in support of Israel. Therefore, the initial United States effort
was directed toward restraining Israel and building a multilateral context
for any American action, whether diplomatic or military.
Eshkol's reply to Johnson's letter reached Washington the following
day, May 18. The Israeli prime minister blamed Syria for the increase in
tension and stated that Egypt must remove its troops from Sinai. Then,
appealing directly to Johnson, Eshkol requested that the United States
reaffirm its commitment to Israeli security and inform the Soviet Union in
particular of this commitment. Johnson wrote to Premier Aleksei Kosygin
the following day, affirming the American position of support for Israel
as requested, but suggesting in addition a "joint initiative of the two powers
to prevent the dispute between Israel and the UAR [United Arab
Republic, or Egypt] and Syria from drifting into war."
After Egypt's initial request for the withdrawal of the UNEF on May
16, there was danger that Nasser might overplay his hand by also closing
the Strait of Tiran to the Israelis. The opening of the strait to Israeli shipping
was Israel's one tangible gain in the 1956 war. American commitments
concerning the international status of the strait were explicit. It
was seen as an international waterway, open for the free passage of ships
of all nations, including Israel. The Israelis had been promised that they
could count on U.S. support to keep the strait open.
The UNEF had stationed troops at Sharm al-Shaykh since 1957, and
shipping had not been impeded. If the UNEF withdrew, however, Nasser
would be under great pressure to return the situation to its pre-1956 status. Israel had long declared that such action would be considered a
casus belli.
In light of these dangers, one might have expected some action by the
United States after May 16, aimed at preventing the complete removal of
the UNEF. But the record shows no sign of an urgent approach to UN secretary
general U Thant on this matter, and by the evening of May 18 U
Thant had responded positively to the formal Egyptian government
request that all UNEF troops leave Egyptian territory.
The strait still remained open, however, and a strong warning by Israel
or the United States about the consequences of its closure might conceivably
have influenced Nasser's next move. From May 19 until midday on
May 22, Nasser took no action to close the strait, nor did he make any
threat to do so. Presumably he was waiting to see how Israel and the
United States, among others, would react to withdrawal of the UNEF. The
United States made no direct approach to Nasser until May 22, the day
Nasser finally announced the closure of the strait. It issued no public
statements reaffirming the American view that the strait was an international
waterway, nor did the reputedly pro-Israeli president respond to
Eshkol's request for a public declaration of America's commitment to
Israel's security.
On May 22 Johnson finally sent a letter to the Egyptian leader. The
thrust of the message was to assure Nasser of the friendship of the United
States while urging him to avoid any step that might lead to war. In addition,
Johnson offered to send Vice President Hubert Humphrey to Cairo.
Johnson ended the letter with words he had personally added: "I look forward
to our working out a program that will be acceptable and constructive
for our respective peoples." The message was not delivered by
ambassador-designate Richard Nolte until the following day, by which
time the strait had already been declared closed to Israeli shipping and
strategic cargoes bound for Israel.
Johnson informed Eshkol the same day that he was writing to the
Egyptian and Syrian leaders, warning them not to take actions that might
lead to hostilities. In addition, another message from Johnson to Kosygin
was also sent on May 22. Reiterating his suggestion of joint action to
calm the situation, Johnson went on to state, "The increasing harassment
of Israel by elements based in Syria, with attendant reactions within Israel
and within the Arab world, has brought the area close to major violence.
Your and our ties to nations of the area could bring us into difficulties
which I am confident neither of us seeks.

</text>
