<text id="J24" category="" words="2007" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title=""It's the Job that I Love": Bike Messengers and Edgework" Author="Jeffrey L. Kidder" PublicationDate="March 1, 2006  p. 31-54" SampledFrom="Sociological Forum " WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?hid=122&sid=4b8b677d-a584-4a4c-af98-eb6277ceb59f%40sessionmgr114&vid=3">

Bike messengers work in a dirty and dangerous occupation with low pay and
no benefits. At the same time, many messengers consider their occupation to
be their primary source of identity. In contrast to "dirty work" studies, which
focus on organizational structures and workgroup ideologies, this paper explores
how the creativity and spontaneity of courier labor allows messengers
to become emotionally attached to their job. Bike messengering brings the
thrill-seeking of leisure pursuits into the workplace, which creates an authentic
self intimately tied to the occupation - an exceedingly difficult feat in an
increasingly rationalized system of labor.
INTRODUCTION: DIRTY WORK AND CENTRAL LIFE INTEREST.
In The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Weber (1958)
envisioned the future as life in an iron cage. Within the cage, spiritualized
values and meanings are superceded by capitalism's internal logic
of accumulation. "Doing one's job" becomes a task with no higher purpose.
Conversely, decades of occupational research has shown that even
the most rationalized work is not completely devoid of meaning. Workers
in stigmatized occupations pose a particular challenge to sociologists
(Ashforth and Kreiner, 1999). Bike messengers are an excellent example of "dirty work" (Hughes, 1951). Not only is the job physically dirty and
dangerous, but also because couriers regularly disregard traffic rules in
performing their tasks, many non-messengers find the job morally reprehensible.
As a columnist for the Washington Post ranted, "In my gentler
moments, I've called them law-flouting, obscenity-spewing, bath-needing,
wild-riding, pedestrian-smashing madmen" (Levy, 1989:E4). Despite such
condemnations, many couriers forge exceedingly strong identities from
their occupation. The messengers in this study do not simply work as
bike couriers; their entire lives are wrapped up inside a distinct messenger
lifestyle that cherishes the thrills and threats of dodging cars as they speed
through the city.
For Ashforth and Kreiner (1999), dirty workers overcome the physical,
social, and moral taint of their occupations by reframing, recalibrating,
and refocusing the stigma of outsiders. In Thompson and Harred's (1992)
study of exotic entertainers, for example, dancers rationalize and neutralize
negative opinions by denying any moral wrong doing, condemning the
condemners, and appealing to higher moral issues (e.g., making money
to support one's children or putting one's self through college). In their
later work (Thompson et al., 2003), they also address the issue of cognitive
and emotive dissonance. Dancers perform deviant acts by constructing
fictional personas capable of behaving in ways their "real selves" would
not.
Missing from the research on dirty and dangerous occupations is an understanding
of emotional involvement in the creation of the self. For Dubin
(1992), activities become central life interests - they feel meaningful - when
they involve emotional commitment. Emotions become involved when situations
allow for creative and spontaneous action. In this paper, I address
a gap in the occupational literature by connecting the strong selfidentification
of bike messengers to the affective attributes of the job. That
is, if self-identity is created through emotional involvement, the analysis of
workers in dirty occupations must not only describe how work cultures subvert
outsiders' opinions or detach insiders' emotions.Against the dirty work
literature, I argue that it is primarily the emotional investment made possible
by the game-like potential of messengering that makes the occupation
a central life interest.
I first provide an overview of the literature on the consequences of
rationalized labor, the emotional components involved in the creation of
authentic selves, and the shortcomings of dirty work studies. I next explain
my research methods. Third, I give an account of messenger life,
explaining why it is a dirty occupation. Fourth, I detail how messenger
work allows for the creative spontaneity usually found in leisuretime
pursuits. I conclude by discussing the relevance of this paper to research on alienation and the implications for future studies of stigmatized
occupations.
LITERATURE REVIEW: FROM ALIENATION TO EDGEWORK.
Like Weber, Blauner (1964) argues that bureaucratic organizations
and complex divisions of labor divest workers from a sense of purpose
at work. Further, individuals rarely have control over the terms of their
labor. Together, such powerlessness and meaninglessness leads to selfestrangement.
The estranged individual - like Weber's (1958) modern economic
man - feels no attachment to her occupation. "Particularly when an
individual lacks control over the work process and a sense of purposeful
connection to the work enterprise, he may experience a kind of depersonalized
detachment rather than an immediate involvement or engrossment in
the job task" (Blauner, 1964:26). In Sennett's (1998) study of bakery workers,
the potential for pride and satisfaction in the craft of baking has been
eliminated through computerization. Blauner's powerlessness and meaninglessness
are compounded by unfulfilled potential as the strength, dexterity,
and thought formerly required in industrial work is replaced with
routinized button pushing. In Leidner's (1993) ethnography of McDonald's
employees, the same corrosion of character is seen in the service industry.
Everything in McDonald's, including the width of the pickles, has been
standardized. Through semi-automated food preparation and computerized
cash registers, non-scripted encounters with customers - even requests as
simple as selling a cup of half decaffeinated, half regular coffee - are not
possible.
The rationalization of the workplace has brought play and leisure to
the fore in experiencing an authentic self (Aronowitz, 1973; Caillois, 1961;
Dubin, 1992; Gecas, 1994; Lasch, 1978; Lyng, 1990). "[T]he declining possibilities
for creative self-realizing action in the economic and other institutional
spheres in modern society can be compensated for in skillful
leisure-time pursuits of play, particularly those forms of play that involve
skill" (Gecas, 1994:146). The importance of leisure in the development of
the self can be seen in Wolf's (1991) ethnography of an outlaw motorcycle
club. For the outlaw biker, the frustrations of limited occupational
mobility are dampened by making creative mechanical variations to their
self-customized motorcycles, and demonstrating the skills required to ride
such "hogs" at excessive speeds. At the opposite end of the class spectrum,
Mitchell's (1983) study of primarily upper-middle class mountain climbers
equally demonstrates the urge to exercise one's creativity and skill in ways
not utilized in one's occupation. Mountaineering involves not only physical exertion, but also involves innovative tasks of problem-solving (e.g., routes
of ascent and descent, tool choices, assessment of weather conditions,
etc.).
The common thread in both outlaw biking and climbing is the use of
creativity and skill to manage the uncertainty of self-created dangers. That
is, the hogs bikers build for themselves - with customized handlebars that
extend upwards above shoulder level - are intentionally difficult to operate.
Mountaineers are less concerned with making it to the tops of mountains
and more concerned with the technological limits they place on themselves
in getting there (i.e., the less equipment a climber uses on her way to the
peak the better, and if she uses too many tools, her peers might not recognize
the climb). Intentionally entering life-threatening situations to test
one's ability is what Lyng (1990) calls "edgework." "Edgework involves not
only activity-specific skills but also a general ability to maintain control of a
situation that verges on total chaos" (871).
As Dubin (1992) explains, contemporary work tends to lack emotional
involvement. In Mead's (1962) conception of the mind, the self comprises
the "I" and the "me." The "me" is the mediating voice of society that directs
the spontaneous action of the "I." As Leidner (1993) shows, work has exceedingly
separated itself from the "I" and fallen into the realm of socially
required, but emotionally flat, roles of the "me." Under the constraints of
rationalization, labor lacks spontaneity. Work increasingly consists of routinized
behaviors revolving around credentialization and economic status - 
one-dimensional humanity (Marcuse, 1964). For Lyng (1990), such overreification
is countered by the intoxicating thrills provided in edgework. In
edgework, the "me" disappears as survival becomes purely a matter of the
moment-to-moment responses of the individual - the "I." "The experience
of self in edgework, then, is the direct antithesis of that under conditions of
alienation and reification. If life under such circumstances leads to an oversocialized
self in which numerous institutional 'me's' are present but ego is
absent, edgework calls out an anarchic self in which ego is manifest but the
personal, institutional self is completely suppressed" (878).
Subsumed by the moment, the edgeworker loses track of time. Such
non-reflexive awareness is the exact opposite of Blauner's (1964) selfestrangement.
It is the loss of time which is essential to genuine play.
"While clock-watching is a characteristic disease of those burdened with
alienated labor, those engrossed creatively are oblivious of the passage of
social time or the dimensions of physical space. We 'lose ourselves' and
cease to measure our activities in so many units of minutes and hours"
(Aronowitz, 1973:62). Of course, it is not only in tempting death that one
can become "engrossed creatively." Csikszentmihalyi's (1990) concept of "flow" is a more general process of self-actualization. In flow, a person's
tasks are perfectly matched by her skills. In a game of tennis, for example,
playing against an opponent far below one's skill level is boring, whereas
playing against someone with far superior skills is stressful. In either case,
the players are consciously aware of themselves and the game. Matched
against someone of equal talent, however, the game takes on an entirely
different character. At the threshold of boredom and anxiety, players can
truly focus their attention in the moment, and - as they do not in normal,
reflexive thought - only in the moment.
Dubin (1992) has argued for the connection between the spontaneity of
the "I" and the emotional involvement of the individual. Through creative
management of risk, activities can become the foundation for one's "true
self." The risk Dubin is referring to does not necessarily involve the mortal
threats found in edgework; the issue is simply having agency over uncertain
outcomes. Dubin champions the classic professions as the remaining bastion
of meaningful labor in contemporary society. However, less prestigious
jobs can also contain elements of spontaneous creativity. In Burawoy's
(1979) ethnography of factory labor, workers transformed their tasks into
a flow-inducing game of "making out." In making out, workers willingly
chose to increase their output in an effort to earn a higher rate of pay.
While workers desired the extra pay, the ultimate motivations for playing
the game were not financial. As Burawoy notes, "Playing the game eliminated
much of the drudgery and boredom associated with industrial work"
(89). Decades earlier, Roy (1953) wrote of the same factory experience,
"[T]he writer was finding values in the piecework system other than economic
ones. He struggled to attain quota 'for the hell of it,' because it was
a 'little game' and 'keeps me from being bored.'" (510). Echoing Caillois's
(1961) insistence that the outcome of play must be uncertain, both Burawoy
and Roy note that making out was only enjoyable if the end result of the
day's game was unknown. Most importantly, when the worker makes time
pass faster, the labor loses its alienated quality - it becomes engrossing.
The literature on dirty work has ignored the connection between
meaning, identity, and the involvement of the "I." In Hood's (1988) study
of custodial work, satisfaction and dissatisfaction with one's job are determined
primarily by the presence or absence of outsiders. On the night shift,
workers can have a sense of control and ownership of their assigned areas.
During the day shift, workers are continually reminded (through interactions
with the building's tenants) that they are low-status workers cleaning
other people's messes. Control and ownership is also the focus of Perry's
(1978) ethnography of garbage collectors. Through owning shares in their
company, workers have a sense of belonging to a collective and working for something greater. Conversely, in Rosecrance's (1985) study of backstretch
workers at horse-racing tracks, workers fail to form community relations,
and the stigma of their dirty labor is not successfully neutralized. The research
on degraded occupations is summarized by Ashforth and Kreiner
(1999), who argue that strong work cultures are the result of cognitive efforts
to subvert outsider's designations. As demonstrated by Thompson's
and Harred's (1992) topless dancers, dirty workers are socialized into an
occupational ideology that negates and ignores condemnation.
While the literature on dirty work has tended not to engage the affective
elements of culture, some passages in Perry's (1978) work note the
importance of novel situations.

</text>
