<text id="J25" category="" words="2018" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="School Participation among Immigrant Youths: The Case of Segmented Assimilation in the Early 20th Century" Author="Sharon L. Sassler" PublicationDate="Sociology of Education, Vol. 79, No. 1 (Jan., 2006), pp. 1-24" SampledFrom="Sociology of Education" WebAddress="http://www.jstor.org/stable/pdfplus/25054299.pdf">

Research on the educational enrollment of immigrants has typically asserted that today's immi
grant children are educationally disadvantaged and that earlier waves of immigrants were
more readily absorbed into the American educational system. This article addresses these
assumptions, drawing on traditional assimilationist and status competition approaches to
racial and ethnic stratification. Data from the 1920 IPUMS census database are used to ana
lyze the school participation of 15 to 18 year olds who were living in their parents' homes. The
findings demonstrate that the process of assimilation was not uniform for all groups. Some
groups achieved parity with the native stock by the third generation, and others took at least
an additional generation or experienced declines in the proportions who were enrolled in
school. In general, the results suggest strong parallels between the educational experiences of
white ethnic youths in 1920 and those of today's immigrant youths.

Throughout its history, the educational
system in America has shaped the life
time opportunities of immigrant chil
dren and youths. However, much of the cur
rent research on schooling has asserted that
today's immigrants are disadvantaged com
pared to foreign-born youths who arrived in
the United States at the turn of the century
(Fernandez, Paulson, and Hirano-Nakanishi
1989; Gans 1992; Portes and Zhou 1993).
Such studies have generally assumed that
early 20th-century immigrants accepted the
importance of schooling within one or two
generations?demonstrating "the time-hon
ored portrayal of growing acculturation and
parallel integration into the white middle
class" (Portes and Zhou 1993:82). In con
trast, much of the contemporary literature
has argued that today's immigrants often
experience downward mobility, termed "sec
ond-generation decline" or "segmented
assimilation" (Gans 1992; Massey 1995;
Portes and Zhou 1993; Zhou 1997).
Transformations in the economy may have
affected educational incorporation and, cor
respondingly, general levels of success.
Whereas today's technological society places
a premium on highly skilled and educated
workers, the industrializing America of the
early 20th century provided jobs for numer
ous unskilled workers. Still, many parallels
exist between immigrants who arrived in the
early and concluding years of the 20th centu
ry. Immigrant and second-generation chil
dren historically lived in families that experi
enced economic hardship and poverty
(Haines 1981; Perlmann 1988; Sassler 1995).
Schools in large cities were frequently over
crowded and had few resources (Jacobs and
Greene 1994; Meyer et al. 1979; Perlmann
1988). Furthermore, while some immigrant
groups welcomed schooling as a means of improving their children's life opportunities,
many parents worried about their children's
exposure to the negative influences of school
or expressed concern that school officials
were impinging on their parental authority
(Kessner 1977; Zelizer 1985). As a result,
immigrant children's adaptation to life in
America may not have encompassed enroll
ment in school to the extent that contempo
rary scholars of education have assumed.
Whether the descendants of immigrants
who arrived at the early 20th century
remained disadvantaged in the final years of
the 20th century and how more recent immigrants have fared in this competition contin
ue to be widely debated (Alba, Lutz, and
Vesselinov 2001; Borjas 1999). Immigrant
youths' experiences in the early years of the
century demonstrate patterns of ethnic
group adaptation to life in the United States
that were far from uniform, whether in terms
of school enrollment (Jacobs and Greene
1994; Lieberson 1980; Perlmann 1988) or the
combination of education and employment
(Horan and Hargis 1991; Sassier 1995;
Walters and james 1992). In the interest of
expanding contemporary studies of segment
ed assimilation, this article examines the link
among the generational status, ethnicity, and
secondary school attendance of working-age
young adults in 1920. That time is an ideal
one to situate such a study, since it followed
several decades of exceedingly high immigra
tion to the United States, along with the
expansion of schooling, and preceded the
restrictions on immigration that were legislat
ed in the 1920s.
This analysis differs from prior research in
several important ways. First, whereas con
temporary studies have been limited to two
generations (Hirschman 2001; Rumbaut
1994) and historical studies have examined
school enrollment among at most three generations (Jacobs and Greene 1994; Perlmann
1988), the unique data from the Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) census
database allowed me to construct four generations of white ethnics.1 Second, I explore
how children of mixed-ancestry fared in the
educational market. Although intermarriage
is assumed to be the final stage in the assimilation process (Gordon 1964), historical stud
?es of the outcomes of the offspring of inter-marriages have been rare. I conclude by dis
cussing how the results of historical studies of
school participation may shed light on contemporary immigrant youths' patterns of
adaptation to life in the United States.
THE CHANGING CONTEXT OF SCHOOL ENROLLMENT.
Two important factors helped shaped the
environment of the American educational sys
tem in the early decades of the 20th century.
The first was the large and steady stream of
foreign-born persons who arrived in the
United States. As of 1920,13.2 percent of the
population of the United States was foreign
born (Gibson and Lennon 1999), and even
larger shares of Americans had at least one
foreign-born parent. Immigrant origins shift
ed in the late 19th century. In the middle of
the 19th century, western and northern
Europeans, including more than 5 million
Irish and Germans, dominated the influx to
the United States. By 1920, a substantial pro
portion of these "old" immigrants were second- or third-generation U.S. residents.
Despite continued immigration from these
countries, by the end of the 19th century, the
bulk of immigrants arrived from southern,
eastern, and central Europe. These "new"
immigrants differed sharply from the "old"
immigrants and their descendants in their
rates of literacy, ability to speak English, and
familiarity with the skills that were needed in
an urban environment (Kessner 1977;
Lieberson 1980).
Second, in response to the influx of immigrants and the children they brought with
them or bore in the United States, school
became one mechanism to encourage immigrant youths to acculturate and eventually
assimilate. Secondary school enrollment
expanded rapidly in the early decades of the
20th century (Walters 1984). Nonetheless,
high school graduation remained a relatively
rare event. In most states, school attendance
was compulsory only through age 15 (Jacobs
and Greene 1994). As a result, the shares of
young adults who were enrolled in school declined with age, and less than one-third of
young adults aged 14-17 (31.2 percent)
were enrolled in either public or private
school during the 1919-20 academic year
(U.S. Department of Education 1999). Of this
select group, even fewer actually graduated;
only 231,000 young adults received high
school diplomas in 1920 (U.S. Department of
Education 1998). For most young adults, a
year or two of high school sufficed.
declined with age, and less than one-third of
young adults aged 14-17 (31.2 percent)
were enrolled in either public or private
school during the 1919-20 academic year
(U.S. Department of Education 1999). Of this
select group, even fewer actually graduated;
only 231,000 young adults received high
school diplomas in 1920 (U.S. Department of
Education 1998). For most young adults, a
year or two of high school sufficed. 
Immigrants, Educational Prospects, and Mobility.
A sharp disconnect exists between research
on the educational participation of immigrant
youths and historical studies of the expansion
of school enrollment, partly because of differences in areas of specialization, with sociolo
gists of education and scholars of immigration drawing from distinct theoretical tradi
tions (Hallinan 2000). Indeed, historical
research on the expansion of school enrollment, particularly that dealing with ethnic
variation in primary and secondary school
education, has tended to rely on functionalist,
class-conflict, or status-competition perspectives (e.g., Bowles and Gintis 1976; Collins
1971; Fuller 1983; Meyer et al. 1979; Walters
1984). In contrast, immigration scholars have
drawn on the assimilation paradigm when
examining ethnic-group adaptation, in general, and educational participation, in particu
lar (Hirschman 2001; Jacobs and Greene
1994; Kao and Tienda 1995).
The assimilation perspective is concerned
primarily with how the foreign born shed
their distinctive behaviors and come to
resemble the native-stock population in terms
of educational and occupational attainment,
to name but two key outcomes of interest.
The central premise is that with increasing
duration in the United States and familiarity
with behaviors that are common among
long-term residents, the foreign born and
their descendants will eventually come to
resemble this population and shed the distinguishing traits of ethnicity (Gordon 1964;
Park and Burgess 1969). Numerous studies of
early 20th-century immigrants have asserted
that ethnic differences declined with each
succeeding generation in the United States (Alba 1985; Jacobs and Greene 1994;
Lieberson and Waters 1988). According to
this "straight-line" conceptualization, the
pursuits of first-generation immigrants differ
in important ways from those of longer-term
U.S. residents. Such distinctions should narrow by the second generation. The process of
assimilation is assumed to be complete by the
third generation. It should come as no surprise, then, that the key focus of immigration
scholars has been on the duration of native
ethnic distinctions.
Contemporary scholars of immigration
have challenged the standard assimilation paradigm and its unilinear conception of adapta
tion. Although straight-line assimilation may
have been theoretically appropriate for
explaining the adaptation process of newcomers who arrived in America in the early 20th
century, they have suggested, American society offers vastly different prospects for mobility
to today's immigrants (Gans 1992; Portes and
Zhou 1993; Rumbaut 1994; Zhou 1997). The
American landscape now consists of various
separate, segregated, and unequal sectors
(Massey 1995; Massey and Dent?n 1993;
Portes and MacLeod 1996). There is a wider
array of possible avenues for acculturation and
assimilation. The educational prospects of
young adults in disadvantaged central cities,
for example, should hypothetical^ differ from
those of young adults in affluent suburbs. In
addition to the traditional monotonie progres
sion of the classic straight-line assimilation
framework, then, today's immigrants also face
the distinct possibility of experiencing down
ward mobility (Gans 1992). In such an
instance, the second generation does not sur
pass the achievements of their foreign-born
counterparts.2 Contemporary scholars who
have explored why different patterns of adaptation emerged among late-20th-century
immigrants have labeled this theoretical
approach "segmented assimilation" (Portes
and Zhou 1993; Zhou 1997).
It is not surprising that the segmented
assimilation perspective focuses more heavily
on those who fail to achieve mobility or those
who experience downward mobility, rather
than on the usual success stories. Immigrants
who fail to achieve status mobility, it appears,
have fewer familial and individual resources and lower levels of human capital and are res
idential^ concentrated in poor areas where
youths have low educational and mobility
aspirations (Hirschman 2001; McKeever and
Klineberg 1999; Neckerman, Carter, and Lee
1999; Portes and Zhou 1993). Evidence of
downward mobility is reflected in the lack of
educational progression of today's racial
minorities (Hirschman 2001; Portes and
MacLeod 1996; Waters 1999), although support for segmented assimilation has been
mixed, at best (Glick and White 2003;
Hirschman 2001).
Less well appreciated is that educational
mobility is also a function of the structure of
educational opportunity and educational
access - a point that immigration researchers
have tended to overlook, despite its centrality
to educational scholars (Hallinan 2000).
Educational historians, in particular, have
focused on whether school enrollment
expanded because industrial elites sought to
inculcate working-class children with the values that were needed for success as factory
workers (Bowles and Gintis 1976), as a
response to technological innovation that
required increasingly skilled workers (Fuller
1983; Meyer et al. 1979), or as particular
groups sought to maintain their status advantage over others (Collins 1971). Even though
the connection between schooling and
assimilation has been a central concern of
educational historians (Bowles and Gintis
1976; Ralph and Rubinson 1980; Rubinson
1986), these studies have overlooked how the
impact of ethnicity may change across the
generations.
The historical literature contains abundant
testimony to the sacrifices that immigrant
families made to send their children to
school, suggesting that education was seen
as a way to improve employment opportunities.  
Nonetheless, empirical support for a
functionalist explanation of school expansion
has been scant. Furthermore, the data at
hand have allowed researchers only to infer
reasons for changes in immigrant youths'
school enrollment.

</text>
