<text id="J26" category="" words="2009" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Shattered dreams ? : an oral history of the South African AIDS epidemic. " Author="Oppenheimer, Gerald M & Bayer, Ronald" PublicationDate="2007" SampledFrom="New York ; Oxford : Oxford University Press" WebAddress="http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/oso/public/content/publichealthepidemiology/9780195307306/toc.html">

Facing AIDS: Denial, Indifference, and Fear.
First Signs.
The second South African epidemic emerged slowly, like water seeping languidly to the surface. Raziya Bobat, a pediatrician born in Durban in 1954 and trained in its "nonwhite" medical school, encountered her first AIDS patient in 1987 at King Edward VIII Hospital at about the same time as the first Black cases appeared in the Transvaal. Only recently aware that AIDS existed in South Africa, she had just begun reading about the disease, when one of her colleagues alerted her to an anomalous case: 
She was an African child about five years old; 99 percent of our patients are Black African. Our specialist had looked at the skin and said that there was something strange about this child; and the more she looked at her, the more she seemed to fit this description that everybody was talking about, about HIV. Of course, then all of us looked at this kid; then we took out the books and we read about it. And everybody sort of said, "Yeah, this certainly seems like it." 
It was also in 1987 that James McIntyre, then 31 years old and working on the vast campus of Baragwanath Hospital, serving the populous Black township of Soweto, had to grapple with a deeply disturbing piece of news. Already aware, as a gay man, of the extent of infection in his own community, he now faced laboratory evidence that HIV was making its presence felt in the impoverished populations he treated.
The South African Blood Transfusion Service brought in their test kits and decided to try them on some stored blood specimens that they had from us and found, to their shock and horror, that some of them were positive for the HIV antibody. They didn't know what to do because there was no patient consent. There had been no discussion with anybody at that stage. Worried about the women, we then called them back in. 
His colleague in pediatrics, Glenda Gray, saw her first HIV case, a Black child, a year later. Slowly she was discovering AIDS, case by case, in her township patients. "We started seeing a few, occasionally," she said. "But, basically, it was quite rare at that stage." Also at Baragwanath in those years was another politically committed doctor, Saul Johnson, who was involved with the ANC underground in the late 1980s and remembered a trickle of HIV cases and a flood of other diseases in Soweto. "I saw very little HIV disease. I think we were starting to see a little bit of pediatric disease, because the pediatric disease clinically pre-dates the adult disease."
It was not easy to identify those first cases. Although AIDS had been treated in South African gay men for over five years, most doctors, given their specialties, the segregation of hospitals by race, and their avoidance of the gay epidemic, had no experience with the disease. Henry Sunpath, who would eventually assume a leadership role in the care of AIDS patients at Durban's McCord Hospital, was still a young doctor, just starting out at Durban's public R. K. Khan Hospital. He was candid about how little he knew then: 
Initially, we began seeing a few cases: young people with strokes. We began seeing people wasting, people with chronic diarrhea, and a few people with myocarditis or with cardiac failure. And in our investigations of these patients, having done everything else, we came to the diagnosis of HIV by exclusion. 
Even clinicians with years of professional experience were stymied. Jerry Coovadia, already a seasoned pediatrician at King Edward VIII, recalled that "in 1988 we began to see these kids, and we didn't know how to diagnose them; the serology was there, but for babies it was no good."
Reflecting the pace at which cases emerged in the epidemic's first years, doctors acknowledged into the mid-1990s their difficulty in recognizing AIDS. Baffled by clinical symptoms that should have responded to conventional interventions, they began to discover that the manifestations of HIV disease could take many forms. Lucky Ndokweni, who had trained at the University of Natal and had specialized in orthopedics, struggled to find a diagnosis before he finally identified his first AIDS case in 1993: 
That case was a middle-aged male, about 30, who was thrown from pillar to post through all the departments of the hospital. We investigated that person in orthopedics because the presenting complaint was stiffness in the lower back and difficulty in mobility. I never seemed to come up with a reasonable diagnosis. He improved, and we subsequently discharged him, but he came back again. I then decided to take help from my consultant, and we both worked him up. Then, out of the blue, my consultant said, "Why don't we investigate this person for HIV?" And when we investigated, that it was. That it was. 
In the large crowded wards of public hospitals, where patients suffering from communicable diseases were common, it was all too easy for doctors to fail to recognize that the typical infectious illnesses they had seen for years were now the consequence of an underlying immune disorder - until ordinary disease patterns changed dramatically. Pinky Ngcakani, now a private practitioner, was a 26-year-old intern in 1994 in Port Elizabeth, an industrial and commercial city in the Eastern Cape, when anomalous cases started to accumulate in the wards. "We would see a lot of ordinary cases, but they were just too bizarre. We'd see a lot of chest infections coming out of nowhere. We knew that TB was endemic, but it was getting out of proportion." As the number of "ordinary" patients with diseases that eluded cure proliferated, Ngcakani and her colleagues began to ask them for consent to test for HIV. To her amazement, about 8 percent of those tested were already positive.
Even those who had begun to develop experience in diagnosing AIDS could still find it difficult. Tugela Ferry, approximately 140 miles northwest of Durban, is a desperately poor, dry, densely populated rural settlement studded with traditional, round, thatched-roofed, single-roomed huts. There, François Eksteen, a devoutly Christian doctor who traces his ancestry to a 1740 Dutch immigrant to South Africa, headed the pediatric services at the Church of Scotland Hospital. Although by 1995 the hospital had already identified a few patients with AIDS, it had not yet faced a full-scale epidemic among its patients. Eksteen knew to be alert to peculiar cases where illnesses proved resistant to treatment.
You often realize that something more is wrong with the child. It might be marasmus or kwashiorkor, with clinical symptoms that are associated with severe malnutrition, and you realize the child is not responding to the usual approaches. You diagnose tuberculosis, but you realize that this child is not doing well. Eventually we would do the HIV test, and it would come back positive. And regularly what we saw was that the mother was still quite healthy, but the baby was already quite sick. 
Having discovered cases of HIV infection in heterosexual men and women and in young children, doctors began to realize that other cases might have passed unnoticed. What meager statistics were assembled by those who first encountered AIDS were almost certainly an undercount. In ruminating on her first HIV case, Glenda Gray concluded, "We probably had been seeing a lot of younger children who died of opportunistic pneumonias which we didn't even think was HIV. We probably had missed a whole lot of the rapid progressors, because we just weren't thinking of it."
Once the flow of patients increased, sooner in some regions than others, doctors began to recognize new cases more readily and became more sensitive to the gravity of their situation. In 1992, Haroon Saloojee, then a 31-year-old politically engaged pediatrician, started his own informal surveillance of newborns at Baragwanath.
We were suddenly beginning to see more kids dying. Obviously at that stage we weren't doing a lot of testing. It wasn't routine to test every child who potentially had HIV/AIDS. We began to recognize this syndrome: there was this group of children with lymphadenopathy who looked malnourished and obviously had much more serious illnesses than other children. Some of us were already beginning to say that we were not doing enough about this problem. 
Epidemic Takeoff.
Saloojee was unusual in that he had a sense of foreboding. "There's a doomsday scenario in ten years' time; now is an opportunity." Such concerns were shared by those who had worked abroad and who had come face to face with AIDS in countries already ravaged by the epidemic.
In the first years of the 1980s, Robin Wood, a British-born, Oxford-trained physician who, a decade later, would work at Somerset Hospital with Frank Spracklen treating gay men with AIDS in Cape Town, ran a small clinic in Lusaka, Zambia. At that time, he was responsible as a doctor for "groups participating in game hunting and safaris in the far east of the country, treating crocodile bites and leopard maulings." There, he began to see men dying soon after he diagnosed them with oral candida or wasting syndrome. He and his colleagues tried to make sense of this new phenomenon, in the process following the trajectory of hypotheses proposed by researchers in the United States for what appeared to be a similar disease.
We would be reading the journals and the information coming out of the States, and we would look at each other and say, "They think it's due to poppers, inhalation of amyl nitrite, by gay men," and we would look at each other and shake our heads and say, "No, that's not right." Next, they thought anal injection of semen was immunosuppressive. Eventually someone put forward that it looked like hepatitis B and was transmitted sexually, and that sounded as though it could be right. But we had no concept of the underlying pathology. 
Some years later, in 1987, Clarence Mini, who would return to South Africa only after the apartheid government had lifted the ban on the African National Congress, was working as a doctor in a hospital in Harare, Zimbabwe, treating the military forces of the ANC. There he was mentored by an Indian professor of medicine with an avid interest in HIV and Kaposi's sarcoma, the cancer that is one of the hallmarks of full-blown AIDS. "He would go around taking biopsies of all these funny skin lesions, and at the time it was something new to us. He was doing research, so he was really forcing all of us who were working there at the time to follow those cases." In addition, Mini and his colleagues were ordered by his professor to test anybody diagnosed with shingles for HIV infection. Testing occurred, of course, in the absence of effective treatment.
In time, Mini began to realize that the wasting he now recognized in Zimbabwe he had previously seen in Lusaka among ANC cadres passing through from military training in Angola to underground warfare in South Africa. There, he had been puzzled by the paradox of significant weight loss and tuberculosis in these well-fed young fighters. With alarm and concern, he concluded these men were viral carriers, bringing the disease with them as they crossed borders.
We were saying to ourselves, now these guys are in transit, these guys are going home, and at some stage, if they are going to meet up with girls, this virus is going to spread. When we get home, we would say to ourselves, we just have to immerse ourselves in this and not have it devastating our country like in Zimbabwe. 
A few others, like James McIntyre, already foresaw the epidemic's potential sweep. As a Zimbabwean and a gay man with personal and professional ties to Steven Miller, Dennis Sifris, and others involved in gay HIV treatment and organizations, he was more aware of the epidemic forecasts being made at home and overseas. By the early to mid-1990s, McIntyre recalled, he was predicting that the HIV prevalence rate in South Africa would peak at 30 percent of the population.

</text>
