<text id="J28" category="" words="2011" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Introduction: New Approaches to the Psychology of Leadership " Author="David M. Messick & Roderick M. Kramer " PublicationDate="2005 p. 1-6" SampledFrom="In The psychology of leadership new perspectives and research  David M. Messick & Roderick M. Kramer (eds)" WebAddress="http://www.netlibrary.com/Reader/">

Most of the chapters in this volume were presented as papers at a small
research conference held in 2001 at the Kellogg School of Management
of Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois. The purpose of this conference
was to explore new ideas about the psychology of leadership, an
important and long-enduring research topic within the field of social psychology.
It was the opinion of the editors of this book and the conveners
of the conference that the social psychological study of leadership had
launched off into several new, interesting, and important directions. It
was also our belief that interest in the topic, within both social and organizational
psychology as well as within the business community, had
grown rapidly. It was an ideal time, therefore, to ask some of the world's
leading scholars to come together to describe their thinking and research.
This book is the result of those efforts. The contributions span traditional
social psychological areas as well as organizational theory. They examine
leadership as a psychological process and leadership as afforded by 
organizational constraints and opportunities. Our goal has not been to
focus the chapters on a single approach to the study and conceptualization
of leadership but rather to display the diversity of issues that surround
the topic.
Leadership scholars have identified a host of approaches to the study of
leadership. What are the personal characteristics of leaders? What is the
nature of the relation between leaders and followers? Why do we perceive
some people to be better leaders than others? What are the circumstances
that evoke leadership qualities in people? Can leadership be taught? And
so on. The contributions to this book examine these important questions
and fall into three rather coherent categories. Part I concerns conceptions
of leadership. How has leadership been defined? What are the social and
psychological processes that constitute leadership? There are four chapters
that fall within this category.
Part II includes contributions dealing with factors that influence the
effectiveness of leadership. Some conditions make leadership relatively
unimportant, whereas others make good leadership essential. Some modes
of relating to other people enhance the effectiveness of leaders, whereas
others reduce the influence of leaders. This part of the book contains five
chapters.
Part III examines a less popular but essentially important topic in leadership
scholarship, namely the effects of being in a position of leadership
on the leader himself or herself. If we were to observe that leaders have
some qualities in common, it could either be that people with these qualities
ascend to positions of leadership, or that the position of power or influence
creates these qualities in whomever accepts the role. The arrow of
causality could point in either or both directions.
In chapter 2, Michelle Bligh and James Meindl examine the thousands
of books that are available on the topic of leadership. They ask if there
are some "natural" categories into which these titles fall. By coding these
legions of books by their characteristics, and using a "natural learning"
process for classification, they find that seven distinct categories of leadership
books emerge. These categories range from books about leading
change in organizations to books about leadership and religion. This vast
range of books not only signals the breadth of interests in the topic of
leadership, it also sets the stage nicely for the variety of approaches to
leadership that are offered in this book.
One of those approaches, and a rather modern one, is described by
Michael Hogg in the chapter 3. Hogg sees leadership as a relational concept,
as does Messick in chapter 4. However, Hogg's emphasis is on the fact that the leadership relationship often occurs in a group that has assumed
qualities and characteristics. Hogg's theory notes that many groups can be
thought of as having a "prototypical" member, someone who most embodies
the qualities of the group. This member will be perceived to be more
influential than others, will be liked more than others, and, partly as a
result, will be seen has having better leadership qualities than the other
members. This person will also have an edge in maintaining the perception
of leader over time. One interesting implication of this theory, an implication
that derives from the social identity theory of group psychology, is
that a person need not actually be more influential than others to be seen
as a leader. If one is prototypical, one may be better liked and seen as more
central than another, and be believed to be influential and charismatic.
This perception may then become a self-fulfilling prophecy; such a person
may actually derive more influence because of these perceptions. Hogg
guides the reader through some of the clever research literature that supports
these hypotheses.
Messick's relational theory is of a different sort; it asks why people
voluntarily become leaders and/or followers. Coming from more of an
interdependence perspective, Messick asks what the benefits are that are
afforded to both parts of this relationship. His theory identifies five dimensions
along which such benefits may be exchanged. Like Hogg's theory,
this is a relational theory, but it is one in which social identity plays only a
modest role. Instead, it highlights the important psychological benefits followers
gain from the relationship. In particular, Messick argues that followers
are often given vision, protection, and achievement by leaders. These
are among the task effectiveness dimensions that have been discussed by
past theorists. They are also given social inclusion and respect, qualities
that are subsumed by the traditional role of social-emotional leadership.
Leaders in return, get focus, loyalty, and commitment, respectively, from
their followers. They also get self-sacrifice and pride in the social domain.
The proposal by Messick is that the exchange is not a contractual quid pro
quo but rather an exchange that results from mundane social psychological
processes. From this view, leadership and followership are social roles
that emerge from everyday ordinary psychological activities.
The final chapter in Part I of the book is Goethals' reevaluation of
Freud's theory of leadership from the perspective of modern social psychological
theory. Although Freud has been largely dismissed by modern
psychologists, Goethals notes that aspects of his theory strike a modern
chord. He seems to predate the concept of charismatic leadership in some
of his descriptions, for instance. Moreover, his analysis seems to highlight the extent to which the leader exemplifies prototypical traits of the followers,
as emphasized by social identity theorists like Hogg. Leaders influence
followers through the stories that they tell, according to Freud, presaging
the approach to leadership taken by Howard Gardner in his book,
Leading Minds. Leaders' ideas, the ideas that can motivate and influence
people, are communicated by stories that delimit and expand the leaders'
vision, that communicate the "message" to the people who are the followers.
Finally, Goethals notes the "illusion of equal love," the perception that
all are the same in the eyes of the leader. This point is made again by Tyler
in a later chapter, although Tyler would argue that the equal and respectful
treatment of members of a group or organization should not be a mere
"illusion," it should be genuine to the extent possible. Goethals thus suggests
that Freud presaged the idea of charismatic leadership, highlighted
the role of storytelling as a form of communication, emphasized the common
social identity of leaders and their followers, and he glimpsed the
importance of what we now refer to as procedural justice in leadership.
The second part of this book deals with the conditions under which
leadership is more or less effective. What are the dimensions of effective
leadership? What do leaders attempt to promote among team members?
Are there better or worse ways of achieving these ends? Part II begins
with a chapter by Richard Hackman that calls into question the standard
research approach of many social psychologists and leadership researchers.
Hackman questions the assumption that excellent team performance is the
product of excellent leadership, an assumption he refers to as the "leader
attribution error." In chapter 6, Hackman reviews evidence that suggests
that leaders may provide the conditions under which teams may excel or
fail, but that these conditions should not be confused with "causes" in the
traditional social science sense of the word. Hackman then outlines four
conditions that tend to increase the chances that groups will function well.
These conditions include creating real (as opposed to bogus) teams, giving
the teams compelling directions in which to work, giving them an enabling
design (a structure that does not handicap them from the outset), and providing
expert coaching to help with the rough patches. Hackman not only
spells out and illustrates these points, he also discusses the timing of the
conditions. Perhaps his most original contribution is in noting that some
types of teams are so constrained that the quality of leadership is immaterial
to their performance. What difference does it make how well a plane's
flight crew works together if the plane is being flown on automatic pilot?
Chapter 7, by Peterson and Behfar, adopts the framework of selfregulation
to group functioning. These authors identify three conditions for successful group performance to balance the often-conflicting demands of
getting the problem right while maintaining group cohesion, maintaining
both group identity as well as recognition for the individuals involved, and
keeping the right mix of willingness to change and stability. These three
conditions are a sense of group self-awareness, having clear standards and
goals, and developing the willingness and the ability to make changes.
Peterson and Jackson make the intriguing proposal that leadership may
derive from a person's ability to help groups maintain these three functions.
Leaders, in other words, function as regulatory mechanisms that
aid groups in understanding themselves, in maintaining their goals and
their knowledge of where they are with regard to the achievement of these
goals (a feature highlighted in chapter 6 by Hackman), and in providing
the encouragement for and resources to enable change within the group.
This chapter not only overlaps nicely with the preceding and succeeding
chapters, it also provides a conceptual framework that allows the authors
to generate novel hypotheses about the functions of effective leadership.
Tyler (chapter 8) offers a theory of process based leadership, which
builds directly from his previous research on the social psychology of procedural
justice. At the heart of this important chapter is the core idea that
procedural fairness, more than positive outcomes, is the power that motivates
people to cooperate in groups, to refrain from disruptive behaviors,
and to work for a common collective good. To the extent that this characterization
is true, it has important implications for leadership because it
suggests that it may be more important for leaders to be fair and just in the
processes they adopt than it is for them to provide rich rewards and successes
for their members. This is precisely the picture that Tyler paints in
his chapter. Summarizing research from several prior studies, he marshals
evidence that people are more sensitive to the fairness of procedures than
to the favorability of their outcomes in determining their commitment to
organizations and in their willingness to follow rules and abide by group
principles. In places, the story that Tyler tells echoes the theory of Hogg in
highlighting social identity; in places it resembles Peterson and Jackson's
thoughts about self-regulation and the mechanisms that maintain it. But
Tyler probes into the sources of people's concerns with fair process and
concludes that the major source of this concern has to do with the ability to
construct and nurture a positive image of oneself. Pride and positive selfregard
seem to be the drivers of the system, and leaders who understand
the importance of this psychological need are likely to excel as leaders. 
One cannot be an effective leader unless one is in a position to exercise
leadership. This observation leads to the puzzling question raised by Bowles and McGinn, as to why it is, when the bulk of the research evidence
says that women are at least as good at being leaders as men, that
women hold proportionally fewer leadership roles in organizations than
men.

</text>
