<text id="J29" category="" words="2029" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Introduction: Family Talk  (In Family talk : discourse and identity in four American families) " Author="Shari Kendall (ed.) by Deborah Tannen, Shari Kendall, Cynthia Gordon. " PublicationDate="New York : Oxford University Press, 2007" SampledFrom="e-book" WebAddress="http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/oso/private/content/linguistics/9780195313895/p016.html">

Introduction: Family Talk.
Families are the cradle of language, the original site of everyday discourse, and a touchstone for talk in other contexts.1 Families are created in part through talk: the daily management of a household, the intimate conversations that forge and maintain relationships, the site for the negotiation of values and beliefs. Yet there has been a greater focus on language in workplaces and other formal institutions than on discourse in this first institution. The chapters in this volume fill this gap in socio-linguistic research by bringing together a variety of linguistic studies based on a single set of data: the naturally occurring, face-to-face interactions of four American families. The studies emerged from a three-year socio-linguistic project carried out at Georgetown University to examine how parents in dual-income families use language to constitute their identities as parents and professionals at home and at work, as well as the interactional and social consequences of these ways of speaking. Since the workplace has received relatively more attention in studies of discourse, this volume focuses on the language the four women and four men use as they interact with one or more family members, with the addition of one father's social talk about family at work.
The volume contributes to the discourse analysis of naturally occurring interaction in general, and of family interaction in particular, while also making significant contributions to theories of framing in interaction and the linguistic creation of identity. Together, the chapters extend our knowledge of family discourse and identify new ways in which family members construct, negotiate, and enact the individual and collective identities that constitute a family. Furthermore, whereas the vast majority of work on family discourse focuses on mothers, several chapters consider the relatively understudied language of fathers. Likewise, a substantial amount of research on family discourse has been based on mealtime interactions recorded in the presence of researchers (Blum-Kulka 1997; Erickson 1982; Ochs &amp; Taylor 1995; Ochs et al. 1992; Pontecorvo &amp; Fasulo 1999; Paugh 2005). In contrast, the studies in this volume are based on interactions that occur in a wide range of settings, which more fully represent these families' experiences. As such, the chapters contribute to the sociolinguistic analysis of face-to-face interaction, some in areas that have been studied primarily through experimental observation, self-report surveys, and interviews. The data set is unique in discourse analysis because the audio recordings span a more extended period of time than previous studies, encompass a wider variety of contexts, and are relatively uncen-sored, as recordings were made with no researcher present. In addition, we, the researchers, were able to get to know the speakers well enough to place their utterances in context; and we have kept in contact with the families and have thus been able to observe how the families have changed during the seven years since the recordings were made. The volume is also unique in the fact that the same families are considered from multiple perspectives by different authors. This is especially notable in those instances in which different authors examine the same interactions for different purposes.
Three broad themes emerged in the authors' considerations of family discourse in these four families: the underlying dynamics of power and solidarity in the family context in general, and in the interactional framing of individual and shared family identities in particular; the negotiation of gendered identities in conjunction with family identities, especially in relation to the challenges dual-income couples face; and, finally, the complex discursive means through which family members actively assert, negotiate, and confirm their family's beliefs and values when children are present to create individual and shared family identities. These themes are explored further in the next section. In subsequent sections, I describe the genesis of the volume, explain the research methodology, introduce the families, and provide an overview of the chapters and the organization of the volume.
Themes in Family Discourse.
Interactional Dynamics: Framing, Power, and Solidarity.
The chapters in this volume use an interactional sociolinguistic approach, each drawing on research in one or more areas: linguistic anthropology and the ethnography of communication (e.g., Erickson 1975; Gumperz &amp; Hymes 1972); discourse strategies (e.g., Becker 1995; Gumperz 1982; Tannen 2007 [1989]); dimensions of power and solidarity in interaction (Tannen 1994a); framing theory (e.g., Bateson 1972; Goffman 1981; Tannen 1994b; Tannen &amp; Wallat 1987); and those frameworks similar to framing in their use of stance, alignment, and/or positioning (e.g., Davies &amp; Harré 1990; Ochs 1993; Schiffrin 1996). Two of these frameworks in particular are fundamental to understanding language in interaction in general and family discourse in particular: the frameworks of power and solidarity and framing. In previous work, Tannen (1994a) develops a framework of the ambiguity and polysemy of power and solidarity, arguing that in studying interaction, scholars need to understand that power (or hierarchy, or control) and solidarity (or connection, or intimacy) are not separate, but inextricably intertwined. Tannen (2003) applies the model to family discourse to address the trend to focus exclusively on the power dimension of discourse in families at the expense of the equally influential dimension of intimacy and connection (Blum-Kulka 1997; Ervin-Tripp et al. 1984; Ochs &amp; Taylor 1995; Varenne 1992; Watts 1991). She considers the role of "mother" to illustrate that both family relationships and gender identities within families are negotiated along the dimensions of both power and connection.
In her contribution to this volume (chapter 2), Tannen further demonstrates that family interaction is an ideal site for exploring the complex interrelationship between power and solidarity as relationships among family members are "fundamentally hierarchical" and also "intensely connected." She argues that discourse analysts must consider an utterance's 
potential for being both a power maneuver and connection maneuver simultaneously. Marinova (chapter 5) uses Tannen's framework to explain the challenges parents (in this case, a father) face in balancing connection and control as children get older. Although it is not the focus of her analysis, Johnston (chapter 7) uses Tannen's framework to reconcile a seeming contradiction between what some parents say and what they do. She suggests that parents may simultaneously serve as gatekeepers in domains such as caregiving and financial management while explicitly expressing egalitarian views for professional and parental role sharing because retaining control of these domains may fulfill family members' co-existing needs for connection and control.
Within interactional sociolinguistics, framing theory is equally crucial for understanding conversational dynamics in family discourse. In the first sociolinguistic volume on framing, Tannen (1993) demonstrates that framing theory is fundamental to linguistic discourse analysis and, conversely, that discourse analysis provides valuable insight into the linguistic means by which frames are actively created. Drawing on Bateson (1972), she explains that "no communication move, verbal or nonverbal, can be understood without reference to a metacommunicative message, or metamessage, about what is going on - that is, what frame of interpretation applies to the move" (Tannen 1993:3). In 1974, Goffman elucidated the levels and types of framing that constitute everyday interaction; and, in his later work (1981), he focused more specifically on language in examining "footings," which he used to capture the subtle shifts in framing and the multiple layers of framing in everyday life. Several chapters in this volume use a framing approach - drawing on the concepts of framing, footing, positioning, and alignment - to show how family members use particular linguistic resources to effect shifts in framing that, among other functions, contribute to family members' negotiations of shared family identities (Tannen, chapter 3), and the individual family identities of "mother" (Gordon, chapter 4) and "father" (Marinova, chapter 5).
Gender, Work, and Family.
The second theme in family discourse addressed in this volume is the discursive creation of gendered identities in the family, especially in relation to the links between work and family. Studies of gender in the family are surprisingly rare, given the significance of gender in this domain and the substantial literature on gender and language in other domains. As Kendall suggests elsewhere (2004a), the relative lack of research on gender in family discourse may be a reflex of the women's movement of the 1970s, when the study of gender in linguistics emerged (Lakoff 1975). In a sense, women were demanding choices besides marriage and motherhood, so the focus was on getting women out of the home, not back into it. For this reason, discourse analyses of gender have focused on women's discourse in the workplace (e.g., Ainsworth-Vaughn 1998; Kendall 2004b; Tannen 1994b, c; Kotthoff 1997; McElhinny 1993; West 1990). In addition, although sociologists, anthropologists, and feminists have long recognized the family as a social institution, the study of gender in the family has been excluded from research in this area. For example, Drew &amp; Heritage (1992:59 fn. 1) explicitly exclude family discourse from institutional language: "Notwithstanding the standard sociological usage within which the family is also a social institution, we will avoid using the term to describe activities that would be glossed as family dinners, picnics, and the like."
Gender infiltrates nearly all the chapters in this volume but is fore-fronted in three chapters that focus on gender as an achieved identity in a social constructivist paradigm. Scholars have found that women and men create gendered identities by using discursive strategies that index socio-cultural expectations associated with gender as these individuals use language to accomplish other tasks (e.g., Ochs 1992; Tannen 1994b). Gordon (chapter 4) builds on this research and other work on language and identity to identify the discursive strategies through which one woman creates a gendered parental identity in a common domestic encounter: the babysitting report.
Other chapters bearing on gender contribute to our understanding of how language is used to negotiate, perpetuate, and mitigate challenges faced by dual-career families with children, particularly those families who have made a commitment to sharing childrearing responsibilities. The families participating in the research project represent a growing trend in the United States for both mothers and fathers to be employed outside the home (Clark 2002; Coontz 2000; Waite &amp; Nielsen 2001). This change in the structuring of families raises the question of whether and how this shift influences families' daily lives and the gendered identities that mothers and fathers create both at home and in the workplace. These sociocultural factors provide the backdrop for the chapters by Kendall (chapter 6), Johnston (chapter 7), and Gordon, Tannen, and Sacknovitz (chapter 8). The chapters by Kendall and Johnston examine the interactions between spouses 
to consider how these women and men negotiate caregiving roles (Johnston) and caregiving and breadwinning roles (Kendall). Gordon et al. approach this question from the perspective of the workplace, examining how one man talks about family at work and relating the patterns to past findings on gender and social talk at work.
Family Values, Beliefs, and Shared Identities.
The third theme of family discourse in this volume is the linguistic negotiation of family values, beliefs, and identities. In linguistics and linguistic anthropology, the study of family discourse has appeared primarily in the work of researchers in child language acquisition, such as Shoshana Blum-Kulka (1997) and Elinor Ochs and her colleagues and students (e.g., Ochs &amp; Taylor 1995). These and other scholars have considered how parents socialize children to embrace family values: points of view and beliefs that characterize a family (Liebes &amp; Ribak 1991, 1992; Liebes et al. 1991; Ochs 1992, 1993; Ochs, Smith &amp; Taylor 1996; Pontecorvo &amp; Fasulo 1997, 1999; Ribak 1997; Tulviste et al. 2002). Research on family discourse has focused on the socialization of interactional patterns that vary by culture, such as narrative practices (e.g., Blum-Kulka 1997); and it has been based primarily on mealtime interaction (e.g., Ochs, Smith &amp; Taylor 1996; Pontecorvo &amp; Fasulo 1999; Paugh 2005). Three chapters in this volume contribute to the extensive work addressing the socialization of family values and beliefs. However, these chapters do not focus on the child's language but instead widen the lens to identify new ways in which family members jointly assert, negotiate, and confirm their family's beliefs and values when children are present: through multiple, intertextual discourse strategies in the creation of a family's shared political identity (Gordon, chapter 9); by creating "common ground" in discussions about physical space (LeVine, chapter 10); and through dialogic interaction with the television (Tovares, chapter 11).

</text>
