<text id="J30" category="" words="2027" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Psychology's grand theorists :  how personal experiences shaped professional ideas " Author="Demorest, Amy" PublicationDate="2005 p. 20-25" SampledFrom="Mahwah, N.J. : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2005" WebAddress="http://www.netlibrary.com/Reader/">

THE PSYCHODYNAMIC APPROACH: SIGMUND FREUD.
Sigmund Freud was just over 40 when he conceived of writing
the book that would become The Interpretation of Dreams. By all accounts
it was his greatest work, introducing a model of the human
psyche that was to profoundly change the way that later generations
would think about themselves and their world. Although the
book appeared in print in November 1899, the publication date
printed on the title page was 1900, as if to lay claim to the emergence
of a new era. Freud himself wrote of it in his 1931 preface
to the third English edition: "It contains, even according to my
present-day judgement, the most valuable of all the discoveries it
has been my good fortune to make. Insight such as this falls to one's
lot but once in a lifetime." But at the dawn of the 20th century, an
analysis of dreams would seem an unlikely topic for an important
work, especially for a man who considered himself a scientist, not
a mystic. So it is worth asking what led Freud to undertake such a
thing. Before we look directly at the book itself and the theory it
presents, let us see what led Freud to the study of dreams.
In the late 1890s Freud held a medical degree from the University
of Vienna and had set up practice in Vienna as a specialist
in neurology. As a specialist of physical disorders in the nervous
system, in this time and place, the most frequent illness that he
encountered in treatment was hysteria. Hysteria was an astonishing
syndrome that baffled the medical community. It was characterized
by various physical problems that on superficial analysis
seemed to be based in neurological damage: problems such as
blindness, deafness, paralysis, or anesthesia of limbs. But fuller
examination would reveal the impossibility of a physical cause.
For one thing, it was not uncommon for the symptoms to move
from one part of the body to another. A patient might first show
signs of blindness, then weeks later appear with loss of hearing,
later with paralysis in a leg, and later still with lack of feeling in a
hand.
One account tried to explain this by viewing hysteria as resulting
from a generally weak nervous system that produced random
effects. But there was a further problem: Some of the symptoms
made no sense neurologically. Take one common symptom of
hysteria, glove anesthesia, which involves loss of feeling in the hand.
Anatomically, there are three separate nerves that run the length
of the arm from shoulder to fingertips, and this means that damage
to any one would result in partial loss of feeling in the whole
arm. Despite its psychological reasonableness, there is no way to
account neurologically for total loss of feeling in the hand only.
An alternative explanation of hysteria, proposed by confused
and no-doubt frustrated practitioners, held that the syndrome
was just an expression of malingering, intentional fakery by the
patient in order to get attention or to avoid responsibility. Support
for this account could be inferred from another feature of
the disorder, this one involving mental functioning. Patients with
hysteria often alternated between two different states of consciousness:
one a normal state and the other a hallucinatory state. In
the hallucinatory state, patients would behave as if experiencing
events that were not actually occurring, and would fail to experience
events that were occurring in front of their eyes. A woman
might carry on a conversation with an imaginary figure, but make
no response to her husband despite his attempts to get through to
her.
But there was also counter-evidence to the account of intentional
fakery to explain hysteria. For example, some patients appeared
with hysterical pregnancies that involved actual physical
changes, such as swelling of the stomach and breasts, which could
not be faked. In other patients, symptoms such as partial blindness
were discovered in the course of a medical examination that had
not been noticed previously by the patient or by others in her life.
In the midst of these flailing attempts to come to terms with this
remarkable disorder, there was one man in Vienna who had suggested
a wholly new approach to hysteria. This innovative thinker,
Josef Breuer, was a renowned researcher and a highly esteemed
clinician. Freud was a medical student when he first met Breuer,
and he was fascinated when Breuer told him of his treatment of a
hysterical woman whose case has since become famous under the
pseudonym of "Anna O."
Anna O. was 21 when she first developed symptoms of hysteria,
after nursing her father for months through what was to be a fatal
illness for him. Over the course of her hysteria she developed
a host of symptoms: paralyses and anesthesias in her arms, legs,
and neck; deafness and visual disturbances; the loss of ability to
speak her native German. (For a period she spoke only in English,
without knowing that she was doing so, having disputes with her
nurse who could not understand a word.) She also experienced
a delirious state in which she had hallucinations, at one point
in her illness hallucinating day after day the actual events that
had occurred exactly 1 year before. At first Breuer was unable to
make any sense of Anna O.'s hallucinations, for she was unable
to relate to him while in her delirious state, and was unable to
recall her hallucinations when she returned to a normal state of
consciousness. But one day he discovered that she could answer his
questions about the hallucinations if she was in a state of hypnosis.
What he learned from her answers was that her hallucinations
were always related to her current symptom. Further, he was astonished
to discover that if she was given the opportunity to talk out
all memories associated with the symptom she was experiencing at
the time, that symptom would suddenly disappear when the final
memory was recounted. For example, in the course of her illness
she developed a visual disorder in which she saw objects as large
and blurred. Under a state of hypnosis, she recounted to Breuer a
series of memories of times when she had visual difficulties, until finally arriving at one that originated from early in her father's
illness. In this memory she sat by her father's sickbed, crying while
he slept. When her father awoke and asked her the time, she swallowed
her sobs and tried to blink back her tears so that he would
not know she was crying. To answer his request she had to bring
the clock close to her face to read it through her tears. This made
the timepiece looked large and blurred, as all objects looked in the
symptom that developed after this experience. But as soon as she
recounted her memory of this experience to Breuer with its associated
feelings, her visual symptom suddenly disappeared.
According to the story that Breuer told to the transfixed young
Freud, each of Anna O.'s symptoms was cured one by one as she
was able to recall emotionally disturbing memories that were associated
with the symptoms. Each ultimately went back to a memory
of her time nursing her fatally ill father. This suggested to Breuer
that hysteria was both caused and cured by psychological processes.
It was not, as most physicians assumed, a disorder caused
by physical damage to the nervous system to be cured by physical
intervention. Nor was it, as others proposed, a sham to get
attention that should be dismissed as a nonillness. Rather it was
an illness in which pathological processes took place in a mental
domain rather than in a physical one.
Breuer's proposal was that hysteria results when psychologically
traumatic events create an excess of emotion that cannot be expressed.
As a result, the unexpressed emotional experiences find
symbolic expression in physical symptoms. In Anna O.'s case, the
trauma of the fatal illness of her beloved father led to painful
but censored emotional experiences (e.g., she sought to hide her
tears while crying at her father's sickbed). These found symbolic
expression in symptoms that related to her emotionally disturbing
memories of his illness (e.g., her visual disturbance). If the
experiences could be remembered and their associated emotions
expressed, there would no longer be any need for the symbolic
symptoms. It was a radical conceptualization of the disorder in
psychological terms, requiring a psychological treatment.
Freud was deeply impressed by Breuer's work, and as he set up
his own medical practice in Vienna he was determined to take a
psychological approach to hysteria. But there was a challenge to
identifying the psychological origins of a patient's disorder, for
Breuer had found that they could not be recalled in a normal waking state. Freud originally began his treatment of hysteria by
trying Breuer's method of hypnosis. He found hypnosis unsatisfactory,
however, partly because he was never very good at it. And
so he began to search for other ways to access information that his
patients seemed to know at some level, but were unable to report
in a normal waking state. In pursuing this search, Freud came to
the study of dreams. In his patients' dreams Freud was able to
find clues to the meanings of their symptoms. It was with the goal
of finding the meaning and cure of this remarkable syndrome of
hysteria, then, that Freud first came to the analysis of dreams.
As it turns out, however, it was not only in his work with patients
that Freud found the fruitfulness of dream analysis. In the 1890s,
he also began to analyze his own dreams. For Freud himself suffered
from a neurosis. This neurosis was most pronounced during
the years 1897 to 1900, when he pursued his self-analysis most
systematically and wrote the book on dreams at the same time.
Although Freud at times referred to his neurosis as "hysteria,"
he probably meant anxiety hysteria, a disorder different from that
described earlier and what today would probably be called panic
disorder. His primary symptoms were mood related, involving a
change of mood from periods of elation to periods of anxiety and
depression; in particular, he suffered fears about dying (what he
called "death deliria") and about traveling by train ("travel anxiety").
A heart arrhythmia was probably also a neurotic symptom,
which he described as "the most violent arrhythmia, constant tension,
pressure, burning in the heart region; shooting pains down
my left arm... and with it a feeling of depression, which took the
form of visions of death and departure." He also suffered from
gastrointestinal problems or irritable colon, which is common in
people with panic disorder.
So Freud had turned to dream analysis in part to find the meaning
of his own neurosis, and the discoveries that he reported in
The Interpretation of Dreams are discoveries that had revealed to him
the source of this disturbance. A hint of the source of Freud's
neurosis can be found in two events in the late 1890s that coincided
with the worsening of his symptoms. Both events involve the
loss of intimate male authority figures: his mentor Josef Breuer
through estrangement and his father through death. For over a
decade, Josef Breuer was not only Freud's collaborator in studying
hysteria but also a supportive mentor with whom Freud shared an affectionate relationship. Breuer had provided Freud friendship
and advice, as well as substantial financial loans. Yet by the
1890s this relationship began to deteriorate, primarily because of
a disagreement over how hysteria should be conceptualized. In
1896 there was such bad feeling between them that Freud would
write to a friend "I simply can no longer get along with Breuer
at all; what I had to take in the way of bad treatment and weakness
of judgement that is nonetheless ingenious during the past
months finally deadened me, internally, to the loss."  
But despite
this claim, Freud continued to be deeply affected by their break,
and he wrote to the same friend only one week later "I would like
indeed to have Breuer's letter; in spite of everything, I find it very
painful that he has so completely removed himself from my life."

</text>
