<text id="J34" category="" words="2004" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="ENHANCEMENT AND OVERLAP IN THE SPEECH CHAIN" Author="SAMUEL JAY KEYSER and KENNETH NOBLE STEVENS" PublicationDate="March 2006 p. 33-63" SampledFrom="LANGUAGE, VOLUME 82, NUMBER 1 (2006)" WebAddress="http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/language/v082/82.1keyser.pdf">

A model of speech production is proposed in which the input is a planning stage at which
lexical items are arrayed, accompanied by the full panoply of phonological representations from
distinctive features to their attendant tree structures. A set of instructions for control of the vocal tract is calculated leading to a sound output. Two parallel processes are involved in the calculation of these instructions, both of which replace the planning-stage representation by the appropriate motoric instructions. One of these processes is universal and involves replacing each distinctive feature with an appropriate set of motoric instructions, either unmodified or modified by the process of overlap. We postulate a parallel language-specific process that is sensitive to those features in danger of losing their perceptual saliency as a consequence of the environment in
which they appear. This process, referred to as ENHANCEMENT, adds additional motoric instructions
to enhance the saliency of the jeopardized features. We provide a number of examples to illustrate
how enhancement works. We conclude from these examples that whereas defining gestures related
to distinctive features are, in many instances, weakened or even absented from the speech stream,
enhancement gestures, once added to the set of motoric instructions, appear never to be subject
to obliteration by overlap.
INTRODUCTION: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS. 
We assume as a starting point the correctness
of distinctive feature theory. This statement may to many seem on a par with
a theoretical physicist claiming to have made his/her peace with, say, quantum mechanics.
That said, there are many working in the field of phonetics for whom distinctive
feature theory is by no means so firmly entrenched. Such researchers are not swayed
by results of phonology such as accounts that distinctive feature theory makes possible
for omnipresent phenomena such as diachronic sound change, or the morphological
variation one finds in such systems as the English plural. Rather they are swayed by
the tremendous amount of variation in the instantiation of phonemes in a given language,
for example, the multitude of realizations of English /t/.
This skepticism is discounted in phonological circles because of the tremendous
gains in explanation offered by distinctive feature theory. But that in and of itself does
not make the reasons for the skepticism disappear. There is, indeed, substantial variation
in the realization of distinctive feature configurations, and it is an important question
for those working at the interface of phonology and phonetics to try to come to grips
with it. The purpose of this article is to address the question of variability head-on
while maintaining the integrity of distinctive features as a cornerstone advance in our
understanding of human language.
In what follows we develop the theory of enhancement presented in earlier manifestations
(e.g. Stevens et al. 1986, Stevens &amp; Keyser 1989, Keyser &amp; Stevens 2001).
Our strategy involves preserving the character of a given segment's distinctive feature
representation as suggested by phonological considerations in the face of phonetic
properties that seem completely unrelated. A paradigm example is the rounding that
accompanies the production of /f/ in English as opposed to the lack of rounding in
English /s/. There is no reason to suppose that rounding is a distinctive part of the
representation of the segment /f/. But this is true only from a phonological point of view. There is no contrast between a rounded and an unrounded /f/ or a rounded and an
unrounded /s/. For the phonologist, then, rounding is extraneous. But to the phonetician
it is important. In English no description of /f/ that does not include rounding can be said
to be complete.
In the face of this, some phoneticians might take the position, not unreasonably, that
however one describes the segment, rounding must be a part of that description. From
our perspective we are forced to ask the question: if rounding is not distinctive for /+/
and /s/ in English, why is it there at all? This question makes sense only if one is
willing to honor the intentions of both phonologists and phoneticians. In what follows
this is what we try to do.
THE PLANNING STAGE. 
There is widespread agreement (e.g. Ladefoged &amp; Maddieson
1996, Johnson 2003) that speech production begins in discrete representation and
ends in continuous sound. This shift takes place in the vocal tract and its attendant
musculature, the arena where representation becomes sound-producing gesture. Underlying
this view is the assumption that representation and sound are fundamentally
different in character. The former is digital in that it is composed of a variety of discrete
entities: for example, features, syllables, feet. The latter, however, is primarily - though
not exclusively - a continuous sound stream generated by a flow of gestures in the
vocal apparatus from one intention to the next. This dichotomy between a discrete
representation and an analogue output device is represented schematically in Figure 1
with the box labeled GESTURE CALCULATIONS mediating between the two.
The existence of a gestural stage has led some researchers to conclude that lexical
and gestural representation should be collapsed into a single stage. Were it true, this
conclusion would greatly simplify the system. That is, instead of going from a distinctive
feature representation and its attendant representations (foot structure, syllable structure,
etc.) to gestures to sound, one would go directly from gesture instructions to sound
(see Browman &amp; Goldstein 1986).
Phonologists have, in general, rejected the view that gestures are lexical, the main
reason being that phonological representation in the form of distinctive features allows for the expression of a vast number of what appear to be true generalizations about
language, for example, phenomena of vowel harmony, vowel lengthening and shortening
in specific phonological environments, the Great Vowel Shift in English, stress
placement, and so forth.
While there is some truth in the gestural notion of representation, it can be argued
that gestural representations should not be localized in the lexicon, but must occur at
a later stage in the speech process. One type of evidence for this view comes from a
consideration of speech-error phenomena. These phenomena argue for the existence
of something called a PLANNING STAGE in the production of speech utterances. We
suggest that gestures must occur after this stage (see §4.2 below). Here we focus on
arguments for the existence of the planning stage itself.
Consider two typical speech errors drawn from Fromkin (1973:245 - 46). Suppose a
speaker wants to produce a form like wind mill but, in fact, produces the utterance [mìnd
wìl] by transposing the onsets of each member of the compound. The erroneous [mìnd
wìl] does not occur as a separate entry in the lexicon nor is it the result of phonological
rules. Similarly, Fromkin reports the phrase hash or grass becoming the erroneous hass
or grash as a result of final consonant transposition. Here, too, the resultant utterance
contains nonsense words which could not possibly have been drawn from the lexicon.
Speech-error theorists have postulated that these errors must occur outside the lexicon
and the phonology but prior to articulation. They propose a level that we call the planning
stage. Errors occur here (see Shattuck-Hufnagel 1986, Levelt et al. 1999).
We assume the planning stage is a level at which discrete items drawn from the
lexicon and modified by the phonological component are arrayed in a serial fashion.
In Figure 2 we expand on Fig. 1 by inserting the planning stage after phonological representations. Representations in the planning stage are fully articulated. That is to
say, at this stage we find the full panoply of phonological representation.
GESTURE CALCULATIONS.
THE BASIC FUNCTION. 
In the simplest case, representations in the planning stage
are read off by a component whose function it is to replace representations by gestures.
We suppose that the component that the planning-stage string feeds into is one that
calculates how the various articulators in the vocal apparatus should be controlled,
including the relative timing of the movements of these articulators.
To see how this component works, let us imagine that the planning stage contains
the sequence the tag (see the spectrogram in Figure 3a). We focus on the gestures that are
needed to produce the consonant /t/, which has the features [anterior, consonantal,
continuant, sonorant, stiff vocal folds]. We note also that this segment is in
syllable-initial position, which coincides with word-initial position, and that the entire
word is dominated by a single syllable. The gesture-calculations component needs to
turn this representation into a series of instructions to the musculature of the vocal
apparatus which produces the relevant acoustic event. Thus, this component encounters
the feature [anterior] and translates it into an instruction to position the tongue blade
anterior to the alveolar ridge. The features [consonantal, continuant] require that
this articulator make a complete closure in the midsagittal region of the vocal tract,
followed by a release. An acoustic consequence is a noise burst with spectrum energy
at high frequencies, as the spectrogram shows. During the time that this closure is
made, the pressure should build up behind the constriction, as specified by the feature
[sonorant]. The feature [stiff vocal folds] requires that the tension in the vocal
folds be increased during the closure interval and be relaxed following the release of
the consonant. As a consequence of these instructions, the vocal apparatus produces
an acoustic pattern that reflects the set of features for this segment. This acoustic pattern
extends from the closure through the release of the alveolar consonant. We see later
that these instructions are modified by additional calculations that are not derived directly
from the planning stage.
Note that while the input to the gesture-calculations component is a phonological
representation, the output is not. Rather, the output is a series of instructions to the
musculature. This entails that the phonological representation disappears at this point,
being replaced by motor instructions. Hence, if the birthplace of lexical representation
is in the lexicon, its demise is in the gesture-calculations component.
VARIABILITY IN GESTURE SEQUENCES. 
Consider now the difference in the tag and
top tag, focusing on the gestures relevant to /t/ in tag. While the gestures for /t/ in both
expressions are identical, the output is not. In particular, the tongue-blade closure for
the second occurrence of /t/ in top tag usually occurs during the time when the lips
are closed for the preceding /p/. Thus, unlike the tag, the time of closure for /t/ is not
registered in the sound. The absence of evidence for the /t/ closure is illustrated in the
spectogram in Figure 3b. Likewise, the release for /p/ occurs while the tongue blade
is in the closed position, and consequently this release is either not registered or only
weakly registered in the sound. However, acoustic evidence for the tongue-blade feature
is still present in the release of the /t/, just as acoustic evidence for the labial is still
present in the closure of the /p/. This masking of acoustic evidence is the result of
overlap of gestures for two different articulators (Browman &amp; Goldstein 1990). In the
case of top tag the closure of the /p/ masks the closing gesture of the /t/ and the closure
for the /t/ masks the release of the /p/. Of course, in careful speech there can be an acoustic record of the /p/ release and the /t/ closure. Such an utterance is illustrated in
the spectrogram in Figure 3c. Such overlap is a universal phenomenon and reflects a
universal tendency to conserve time and, presumably, energy (see Lindblom 1990).
Overlap pervades the speech stream. Consider the /nt/ sequence in teen tag. For both
segments the instruction from the planning stage is to make a closure of the tongue
blade and then to release it. In this case, however, the closure is retained through both
segments and there is, in effect, no separate release for /n/ and no separate closure for
/t/. In the phrase teen bag (see the spectrogram in Figure 3d) the closure for the labial
/b/ would normally occur during the alveolar closure for /n/. Soon after this labial
closure the soft palate is raised and pressure is built up in the oral cavity.

</text>
