<text id="J36" category="" words="2029" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Resistance, repression, and gender politics in occupied Palestine and Jordan " Author="Hasso, Frances Susan" PublicationDate="2005" SampledFrom="Syracuse, N.Y. : Syracuse University Press" WebAddress="http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=acls;cc=acls;idno=heb04709.0001.001;view=toc">

Civil War in Jordan, 1969-1971.
THE 1970-71 CIVIL WAR IN JORDAN fundamentally redefined what was possible in Palestinian and Jordanian politics. It also facilitated Jordanian- and Palestinian-origin distinctions in the country, which played a pivotal role in the direction taken by the Democratic Front branch that was later established in the country. The DFLP's most important central party structures and partisans were in Jordan between the front's establishment in February 1969 and the end of the civil war in late 1971. Partisans were active in the civil war itself and the rise of the Palestinian resistance movement that preceded it, and were dramatically impacted by these experiences.
The main bases for PLO military activity between 1967 and 1987 were the largely unwilling Arab host countries of Jordan and Lebanon. Jordan was the primary ground for these early activities by dint of its contiguousness with the West Bank and Israel, its large Palestinian population, and the lack of legitimacy of the Jordanian military and security apparatus with the loss of the West Bank to Israeli occupation (Brand 1998, 99). By 1970, resistance organizations expanded to such a degree that the Palestinian Resistance Movement had established parallel political, military, and social institutions in Jordan. Moreover, the influence of the PRM was such that between mid-1967 and 1971 it became the "backbone" of the Jordanian opposition, whose programs and activities became "Palestinianized," focusing on "the liberation of Palestine, anti-imperialism, and rejection of UN Resolution 242" (al-Khazendar 1997, 104-5). In turn, the identities of the PRM and the Palestine Liberation Organization were forged in relation to conditions in Jordan during this
period, and thus very much Jordanized. The constituent organizations learned from the Jordan experience to be cynical toward the professions of Arab state support for the Palestinians, the costs of frontal challenges to the authority and self-interest of Arab states, and the unlikelihood
that Palestinian self-determination could be won in all of historic Palestine. Soon after the 1970-71 civil war, the focus of the PRM turned to gaining international legitimacy for the PLO, and most Palestinian organizations came to support a two-state solution, often with ambivalence.
Buildup to War.
A month after the June 1967 Israeli occupation of the West Bank, the Jordanian government reiterated the "all-Arab" nature of the Palestinian cause and the "sacredness" for Jordan of the unity of the two banks, a bond that, according to the prime minister, "will never be broken under the leadership of King Hussein" (Abu-Odeh 1999, 140). Within two months, the East Bank, where Fateh was supported by many Jordanian military personnel and residents, became a staging ground for cross-border guerrilla (fedaa'i) raids against Israel (158). Popular support was eventually corroded by hundreds of Israeli reprisals and air strikes on Jordanian villages and Palestinian refugee camps, which drove the guerrillas deeper into Jordanian cities such as Amman (174). The Jordan regime's desire to reign in the PRM was difficult given regional popular support for Palestinian resistance, the military power and influence of Egypt (Brand 1988, 57), and the threat of Syrian intervention from the north. Nevertheless, on 2 February 1968, the Jordan royal forces attacked Fateh guerrillas in Karameh, reportedly the only area from which the guerrillas were undertaking attacks against Israel(Hawatmeh 1973, 86). Tension between the PRM and the Hashemite regime came to a head on 10 February 1970 when, after returning from a Cairo conference that included state representatives of Syria, Egypt, and Iraq, King Hussein clamped down on the PRM (Abu-Odeh 1999, 175). On 25 June 1970, Nasser accepted the U.S.-sponsored Rogers Plan (earlier rejected by Israel), and on 29 August of the same year Hussein accepted it. The Rogers Plan called for implementation of the substantive aspects of UN Security Council Resolution 242, which emphasized the "inadmissability of the acquisition of territory by war" and called for Israeli withdrawal to its pre-June 1967 borders in return for recognition of its right to exist by Egypt and Jordan. A major flaw in the Rogers Plan from a Palestinian perspective was that it would have reestablished Egyptian and Jordanian sovereignty over the West Bank and Gaza Strip, excluding the possibility of Palestinian self-governance. By 1970, increased U.S. financial aid had allowed the Hashemite regime to expand the state to the point that it was the country's largest employer of Jordanians, many of whom were now invested in its stability. Moreover, since pan-Arabist opposition organizations had disintegrated, Palestinian opposition to the state was increasingly isolated (Brand 1988, 171), although the PRM included many nonPalestinians. Confrontations intensified between the Jordanian state and the PRM, and on 15 September King Hussein formed a military cabinet and ordered the disarming of the guerrillas. The major battle of the civil war ensued from 17 September to 27 September 1970 ("Black September") in Amman and its surrounding areas, which ended with what turned out to be a brief reconciliation between Hussein and Arafat that was mediated by Nasser, who died of heart trouble on 28 September (58). Clashes between Jordanian and PRM forces continued until the second major battle between 12 July and 17 July 1971, when the army evicted the last of the guerrillas from their remaining strongholds in the mountainous woods of 'Ajlun and Jerash (Abu-Odeh 1999, 177-87). During and following the civil war, thousands of Palestinian activists surrendered to Jordanian military forces and were imprisoned or expelled, others were forced to work underground, and the PLO "closed" its institutions in Jordan. The International Committee of the Red Cross estimated that three thousand people had been killed and ten thousand wounded in the war, largely refugee-camp residents (Quandt, Jabber, and Lesch 1973, 128; Brand 1988, 171).
Modernity and Leftism in the Early DFLP.
The leading DFLP partisans brought with them the ideologies they had developed within the Arab Nationalists Movement. They believed that Zionism could not be defeated without a "national democratic revolution" that challenged the class interests of economic elites and the political interests of Arab governments (particularly Jordan), since both were local beneficiaries of imperialism (Hawatmeh 1973, 85). A modernist orientation with political, economic, and socializing aspects structured party ideology and practices. For the leftist guerrillas active in the Jordan civil war, modernity included a commitment to rationality, socialism, heavy industrialization, agrarian reform, and an organized political strategy, as opposed to feudalism, sectarianism, tribalism, and fatalism. Such an orientation would "avoid the errors of the past," particularly the military defeats that led to the colonization of Arab lands by the Zionist movement and later the State of Israel (Franjieh 1972, 76; Kadi 1969, 153). The radical socialist orientation of many of the post-1967 leftist guerrillas was constituted in relation to the worldwide revolutionary movements (and postcolonial states) of the 1950s and 1960s. Their concerns with modernity, however, were similar to those expressed by Arab organic and traditional intellectuals in their critiques and analyses immediately following the 1948 defeat (Hasso 2000).
On the ground in Jordan, DFLP partisans incorporated MarxistLeninist, Maoist, Guevaran, and other liberation ideologies and took lessons from the Vietnamese, Cuban, and Chinese revolutionary experiences, among others. Much of the DFLP's early political education, according to a leftist French intellectual who lived with the PRM in Jordan between 1969 and 1970, was designed to encourage "rational and scientific thought," in addition to "greater ideological homogeneity" (Chaliand 1972, 91). DFLP mobilizing narratives often focused on creating class consciousness:
We have learned that the liberation of Palestine is the Palestinians' own business. And the poor are the ones most able to fight for their own interests. The problem is to understand why we want to use arms: not to kill the Jews, but to liberate ourselves from all the foreign and national classes who are the cause of our poverty. Our struggle is both a national and a social [read: class] struggle. You have been stripped of everything. Why? Not by the will of God, but because of exploitation by the rich and by the Arab governments who represent them....
The government protects the wealthy classes and is always ready to knock you on the head if you protest.... It has been happening since 1948, and it happened before that. So when you fight, you are not only fighting Zionism but also to liberate yourselves. (Chaliand 1972, 112) The early DFLP leaders and cadres were greatly impacted by European New Left ideologies, and the party attracted "dozens, perhaps hundreds, of European youths who flocked to its camps" in Jordan (Y.
] Sayigh 1997, 231). A number of DFLP partisans in Jordan also reported being shaped by the anti-Soviet and anti-Maoist "third path" orientations of New Left ideologies during studies and political work in European universities (al-Nimri 2000). Jamil al-Nimri, a former partisan of Jordanian origin who was a high school student in the late 1960s, remembered a difference between the focus of the party's core activists and the competitive militia logic of building a guerrilla movement in Jordan: There was a distance between the theoretical and cultural level of the
party leaders and the system that was applied [in militia work]....And the DFLP was not different from other organizations in this respect.., because the effort was to... build a militia with the most numbers.... Of course, they worked on raising awareness, etcetera, but the process was very difficult and the lecture that we used to present was complicated-Marxist thought is not easy. So there was a problem.., between the atmosphere at the base, a militia atmosphere like the rest of the organizations, including a little bit of corruption, and between the leadership atmosphere, which was a very appealing environment. (al-Nimri 2000) Fateh, PFLP, and DFLP Perspectives on the Civil War Interviews conducted with Fateh, PFLP, and DFLP leaders in early 1972, following a period of systematic evaluation and assessment of the civil war experience, indicate that the Palestinian resistance viewed Jordan as a natural base from which to attack Israel, particularly given its large proportion of Palestinian refugees. Allowing Palestinians to fight to regain their land was seen as part of the obligations of Arab masses and states. By mid-1969, the DFLP was insistently calling for "resolving the duality of power in Jordan" between the PRM and the Jordanian government, on the recognition that the regime was making the resistance movement rather than Israel its target, and began developing "elected people's councils" to prepare for this (Hawatmeh 1973, 91-92; Y. Sayigh 1997, 248). Nayef Hawatmeh believed that the period between February and July 1970 would have been the most feasible for directly battling the regime for power, but this idea was rejected by Fateh (1973, 94). During the emergency session of the PNC on 27-28 August 1970, both the PFLP and DFLP "formally advanced proposals.., calling for the overthrow of the royal regime," and even Fateh reportedly "created a secret apparatus" to work toward this end while urging the "synthetic groups [PFLP and DFLP] to stay out of Jordanian politics" (Abu-Odeh 1999, 179, 188). According to Hawatmeh, who attended this meeting, the central committee of the PNC agreed to "organize the revolutionary process so that it would lead to the establishment of nationalist rule in Jordan" (1973, 92). After September 1970, leftist forces argued that the PRM in Jordan should go underground and "intensify the struggle for establishing a national democratic regime in the country," but "all these appeals found no response among the Fateh leadership" (94). The conflict was exacerbated by competition (muzayada) between the DFLP
and PFLP (Y. Sayigh 1997, 244). By the end of the civil war in 1971, all the leaders believed, in the words of Fateh's Khaled al-Hassan, that there was a fundamental contradiction "between the submissive nature of the regime and the militant nature of the Palestinian revolution, between the regime's will to surrender and the resistance's will to struggle" (1973, 39). According to the PFLP's George Habash, the PRM should have treated the regime as a colonial creation with goals similar to Israel's (1973, 69, 70). Habash believed that the PRM was duped, imagining "that the Jordanian regime could be friendly or neutral-because it did not obstruct the revolution after the June War, because of its own deceitful slogans, and because of the Arabic name it bears" (70).

</text>
