<text id="J38" category="" words="2013" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Nachituti's gift : economy, society, and environment in central Africa " Author="Gordon, David M." PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Madison : University of Wisconsin Press" WebAddress="http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/pageviewer-idx?c=acls;cc=acls;rgn=full%20text;idno=heb06881.0001.001;didno=heb06881.0001.001;view=image;seq=17;node=heb06881.0001.001%3A1;page=root;size=100">

Nachituti's Gift.
The Kazembe Kingdom and Owners of the Land.
My first encounter with the story of Nachituti was in October
1997, during a visit to Lunde, the royal graveyard of the Kazembe rulers. Mwata Kazembe XVIII Munona Chinyanta, who died less than one year later, invited me to a ceremony to introduce me to Lunda customs; he also wanted me to photograph the ceremony and to transport
dignitaries in my vehicle. The ceremony was unprecedented. Before his
imminent death, Munona wanted to pay respect to his ancestors and ensure that the graveyard was clean and well maintained. En route to the graveyard, situated in Chief Kanyembo's area about five miles off the main road that runs through the valley, our trucks stopped at streams and termite mounds, which signified past boundaries and sacred places of rest. Lunda aristocrats fired muzzle-loading guns at each stop, and the Mwata requested permission from the gravekeepers and owners of
the land to pass through their lands. When we finally reached the graveyard, the rough dirt track, which resembled no more than a footpath, ceased at a wooden barrier beyond which lay a field recently cleared of bush scrub and trees. We climbed out of our trucks, took off our shoes, and tied white cloth on our arms, for we were about to enter the burial place of chiefs and needed to show respect and protect ourselves from their spirits. We proceeded from one grave to the next with the keeper of Lunde reciting the praises of the dead kings and, together with the Mwata, giving libations of millet beer and throwing white earth called impemba (or ulupemba). Munona then placed copper plaques on the twelve previously unmarked mounds (five kings are buried outside the royal graveyard). After a drenching thunderstorm, we trudged in the mud for about one hundred feet to another grave on the outskirts of Lunde, where the Mwata began to give offerings. There was no copper plaque for this grave, so I asked my research assistant to whom it belonged. 
"Nachituti," I was told, "the queen of the Lunda." His answer was unexpected. Although I knew that the people of Luapula had strong matrilineal affiliations and women had often attained 
positions of political significance, I thought that royal and aristocratic descent in Kazembe's eastern Lunda kingdom was patrifilial, with women playing a relatively minor role in the affairs of state. Yet here was a woman important enough to be buried next to the royal graveyard, the
highest honor for anyone associated with the eastern Lunda kingdom. During that research trip, I heard more about Nachituti, especially from the elders in their stories of how the Lunda came to rule Luapula. I reread the classic ethnographic and missionary texts about the Luapula Valley and indeed found that Nachituti featured in the idiosyncratic narratives of the missionary Dan Crawford, the articles and book by the Rhodes-Livingstone anthropologist Ian Cunnison, and the oral history of the Lunda written down by a collection of elders under the direction of Mwata Kazembe XIV Chinyanta Nankula. Yet her importance, and that of the valley's matrilinealages in general, were always submerged under the history of the eastern Lunda kingdom and the Kazembes patrifilial descent, first drawn by Ian Cunnison and since then frequently reproduced and much discussed (for an updated version see figure i). I returned to the Luapula Valley two years later, convinced that my previous study had underestimated the importance of the stories of the valley, and especially that of Nachituti. I suspected that the people of Luapula explained the elusive rules that governed the politics of access to their resources-the land, rivers, and lakes of the valley-and articulated relationships between owners of the land and lagoons and the Kazembe Kingdom through such oral traditions. To further explore these stories and their political impacts, I extended a study of patterns of production to consider how productive resources were embedded within cultural narratives. Specifically, I examined how narratives provided a "constitution" that explained and legitimized resource access at least until the coming of the colonial states in the early 189os, and even afterward.
Historians and anthropologists have long noted that narratives, especially those that describe traditions of "genesis," are ways of describing contemporary culture, society, and political struggles rather than historical facts. Even Jan Vansina, who defends the historical validity of
oral tradition against the many critiques of structural anthropologists, admits that such traditions "are expressions of present and past world views, that may reflect past events but do not necessarily do so."
Vansina describes oral traditions as "palimpsests" that do not "reflect  exactly and necessarily the world view held now, but still incorporates elements of different ages." Used with care, the intellectual or cultural historian can employ an oral tradition to explore the relationship between cosmologies and sociocultural and political change. A bourgeoning field in historical anthropology has been the exploration of how hegemonic fictional narratives articulate with and impose themselves on existing cosmologies, especially in processes of conversion, where biblical narrative sequences influence the representation of everyday life and hence quotidian agency in social, political, and economic realms. John and Jean Comaroff, for example, argue that missionary narratives replaced southern Tswana forms of representation and became instruments of cultural hegemony; J. D. Y. Peel has offered a more dialogical approach whereby biblical narratives appear persuasive to potential converts when they adapted to existing, vernacular narratives. It is because of the strength of previous narrative traditionsrather than their weakness, as argued by the Comaroffs-that biblical narratives became so influential.5 In the case of northeast Zambia, Robert Cancel has demonstrated a narrative tradition rich in allegory. The Nachituti narrative provides an opportunity to explore the relationship between narrative and social agency in a precolonial setting. In telling and interpreting Nachituti's story, I am less concerned with historical accuracy than with the fiction that has provided the idiom and ideology that structured political relationships between the peoples of the valley and allotted "charters" of rule and ownership over the land and lakes. Rather than verify the story of Nachituti's gift, this chapter explores how the story came to define Lunda political control and Shila ownership over the land and lakes. The purpose is not to deny or prove the historical validity of oral traditions but rather, followingJ. M. Schoffeleers, to demonstrate some historical dimensions to the ideological confrontations found within oral traditions. In doing so, this chapter will not provide a historical reconstruction of the Kazembe Kingdom; those interested in a detailed history of the kingdom should consult the work of Giacomo Macola.8 However, we will locate the emergence of the Nachituti narrative in the early nineteenth century and follow its spread as a charter of rule and ownership in the latter half of the century when the Kazembe Kingdom weakened and came to rely on the agency of dispersed aristocrats and owners of the land and owners of the lagoons (abine ba mpanga/kabanda, sing. umwine wa mpanga/kabanda).
In the Luapula Valley, a story about the past was an integral part of the present. Characters in historical narratives were not ossified in the past; ancestral personae were adopted in the present through "positional succession" and old kin relations kept alive by what Ian Cunnison 
called "perpetual kinship." Historical narratives defined political titles or offices, which would have an ongoing historical presence. Thus, the stories of the characters in Nachituti's narrative, like "Mwata Kazembe," "Nkuba," "Kalandala," and "Nachituti" herself, could refer to the activities of a number of different individuals who occupied that title at different times (with the partial exception of the Kazembes, who have distinct historical personae due to praise poems for each "Kazembe" combined with a chronological king list, an invention of the twentieth century). If the dynamics of this system are not well understood, attempts at historical reconstruction will be flawed; on the other hand, historians possess raw material in the form of living political relationships that are the articulation of past kin ties. Details about identities and relationships between lineages were preserved as political offices as long as the ancestors continued to be inherited by the living. Past kin relations thereby had ongoing implications for contemporary life. This was a two-way process: contemporary conflicts also impacted on
the history that was told. For example, a fight between perpetual relatives, say an uncle and nephew, might have transformed the emphasis of a story or superimposed another narrative on the original. Once we understand the dialectical interplay of past and present in Luapula, we can begin to explore the web of relationships between the narration of a story, the politics of the narrators, and the making of history. The story of Nachituti's gift is a story of two gifts, both of which describe relationships of economic and political reciprocity between giver and recipient." The first gift is the head of Nachituti's brother, Nkuba, which the Lunda aristocrats, Kalandala and Nswana Ntambo, gave to Kazembe. By doing so, Kazembe was indebted to the Lunda
aristocrats for his first bride, Nachituti, freed from her dead brother, Nkuba. The giving of this gift was reenacted through the continued giving of aristocrats' sisters and sisters' daughters as the Kazembes' brides (ntombo). Kazembe thereby remained obligated to his aristocrats, who 
described themselves as "owners" of the king. The second is Nachituti's gift of the land and lakes to Kazembe; this ensured that Kazembe was indebted to Nachituti and recognized her people, the autochthones of the valley, as owners of the land and lagoons. Nachituti's people continued to give Kazembe produce from the lands and lakes-cassava, millet, game meat, fish, and other wild produce-and in return Kazembe bestowed on their leaders the titles of owner of the land or owner
of the lagoon. 
The Narration.
Eastern Lunda oral traditions link the beginnings of the Kazembe Kingdom in the Luapula Valley to a series of encounters between emissaries of Mwaant Yaav, the central Lunda paramount, and southern
Luba lineage heads. Chinyanta, a warrior who had previously surrendered to Mwaant Yaav, led an expedition to Luapula to find the Lunda blacksmith Lubanda, who had fled some years earlier. Instead, Chinyanta found salt pans. When he attempted to inform Mwaant Yaav of his lucrative discovery, Mutanda, the owner of the salt, murdered Chinyanta by drowning him. Mwaant Yaav appointed Chinyanta's son, Ng'anga Bilonda, as "Kazembe" and told him to avenge the death of
his father by killing Mutanda. These are the murky tales of the beginnings of eastern Lunda rule
on the Mukelweji and Luapula Rivers. We know with some certainty that Kazembe conquered and settled in the Luapula Valley toward the middle of the eighteenth century. The Kazembe or eastern Lunda entourage called those whom they conquered 'AbaShila," meaning fishers; this became a generic term for Luapula's autochthones. The most famous and common story of eastern Lunda conquest of the Shila, which is still told in the valley and has become part of the "universal"
history of the valley accepted by both Shila and Lunda narrators, is related to a period of Lunda expansion under Mwata Kazembe I Ng'anga Bilonda's son, Mwata Kazembe III Ilunga. In the first part of this chapter, I will concentrate on the telling of the story in the late twentieth century and suggest some reasons for its particular emphasis. The remainder of the chapter will locate the emergence of the story in the mid to late nineteenth century. It was during the reign of Mwata Kazembe III "Ilunga" [approx. 1760 to 1805]. The Lunda capital was at Kasankila near Mofwe
Lagoon. At that time, the Lunda did not cultivate land, they did not even catch fish. This is why they had to be in the middle of the Luapula Valley, where the Shila people could bring them food.
Nachituti and Nkuba lived on Chisenga Island. Nkuba had many wives and among them he loved one greatly. One day he found his nephew, the son of Nachituti, with this most beloved wife. In a jealous rage, he killed his nephew, skinned him, carefully dried the skin, and kept it under his mat.

</text>
