<text id="J39" category="" words="2014" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Dictatorship and demand : the politics of consumerism in East Germany " Author="Landsman, Mark" PublicationDate="2005" SampledFrom="Cambridge, MA : Harvard University Press" WebAddress="http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=acls;cc=acls;idno=heb06662.0001.001;view=toc">

Production and Consumption: Establishing Priorities.
But the point of departure must be to make do with what we have - Bruno Leuschner, July 1947.
The best provisioning to the best worker - Die Versorgung, November 1947.
In the years immediately following the Second World War, Germany
was a site of destruction, chaos, and misery. Its major cities were in ruins; its transport network was severely damaged; its economy had collapsed. Its inhabitants, uprooted and traumatized, presented a vision of the despairing and the demoralized: "rubble women" and refugees,
returning soldiers and "displaced persons," the abject defeated and
their foreign occupiers. Having controlled nearly the entire European
continent at the apogee of its wartime power, Germany now found itself at the mercy of its wartime enemies.
For most Germans everyday life was now defined by the struggle to
survive in the face of chronic hunger, inadequate housing, a lack of
heating fuel and other basic commodities. To capture the desperate,
febrile quality of life in these years, historians have employed labels like
the "survival society," the "society in collapse," the "rations society," the
"society of provisioned classes.", With daily rations falling far below the
two thousand calories calculated by the League of Nations as the minimum requirement for a working adult, people had no choice but to steal, engage in furtive black market exchange, make repeated foraging trips to the countryside in overly packed trains, and scrounge for
heating fuel amid the twigs and tree branches of city parks.
Further heightening the sense of insecurity and confusion were the
many administratively launched upheavals. Throughout occupied Germany authorities made efforts to denazify and reeducate, to dismantle industrial plant and extract reparations, to reform patterns of landholding and reorganize business structures, to reestablish old political
parties and create new ones. And if we widen the lens further, we bring
into view the breakdown of the wartime alliance and the emergence of
the Cold War, the fault lines of which, running through German territory, introduced cause for even more profound uncertainty about the future.
In histories of the occupation period the year 1947 is commonly
viewed as the year of transition. Through a rapid succession of events it
signaled an alarming increase in tension between the Allies, a shift on
the part of occupiers from policies of punishment to those of reconstruction, and concomitantly a decisive shove forward along the path toward the division of Germany. The first half of the year alone witnessed the economic fusion of the American and British zones into the Bizone (January), the proclamation of the Truman Doctrine (March), the failure of the Moscow Foreign Ministers Conference (March-April), and the famous Harvard speech of U.S. Secretary of State George Marshall, announcing the plan that became most widely associated with his name (June).
On the eve of Marshall's speech, the Soviet Military Administration in Germany (SMAD) made its own contribution to the widening rift by creating the German Economic Commission (Deutsche Wirtschaftskommission or DWK). The DWK was to be the first centralized Soviet-zone  administration run by Germans and, as such, the first forum for developing the principles and policies of economic planning. No task faced by the apprentice planners of the DWK was more formidable than that of provisioning consumer goods under the difficult living conditions
of the immediate postwar years. Nor was their task eased by the vision
for reconstruction pursued by Soviet-zone authorities. Under close Soviet supervision, DWK planners drew a road map marked primarily by metallurgy, machine building, coal mining, and electrical engineering.
The path to a better future, as they conceived it, lay exclusively in the privacy of heavy industry. This emphasis on capital goods, however, necessarily came at the expense of consumption goods. And yet the consumption needs of Germans could not be entirely ignored. At the
most basic level, workers had to be fed, clothed, and housed if they
were to be productive. As the political confrontation between East and
West intensified, Soviet-zone authorities had to take steps to garner the support of the inhabitants in their zone. This chapter shows how those authorities began to try to accommodate the requirements of consumption within the larger imperative of production.
One thing DWK planners had working in their favor was the fact that the experience of hunger and food shortages was hardly novel. For nearly thirty years the lives of Germans had been punctuated by food crises; for many, these decades had consisted of recurrent bouts of austerity. Most adults in 1945 had personally lived through, or grown up hearing about, the terrible "turnip winter" of 1916-17. They remembered how slowly the food supply improved after the First World War,
only to be again thrown into chaos by the Great Inflation of 1923.
While the stabilization of the second half of the 1920s brought relief,
even prosperity, to some, low-income earners continued to struggle to
feed themselves and their families. Even during the "golden years" of
the Weimar Republic, millions remained unemployed--2 million in
1926, that is, 10 percent of the working-age population and 18 percent
of trade unionists. The onset of the Great Depression necessarily broadened and deepened their plight. In 1930 the number of unemployed reached 4.5 million; by January 1933, when Hitler became chancellor, it had grown to over 8 million. Although the Nazi regime managed to put people back
to work in the mid-to-late 1930s, there continued to be persistent complaints about shortages and rising prices for all kinds of basic commodities, as not only the reports of the German Social Democratic Party in Exile (SOPADE) but also those of the Gestapo clearly show.
For consumers the Nazi years were characterized by a combination of seductive promise and material frustration or, as one historian has recently put it, "enticement and deprivation." The regime's propaganda tantalized with images of mass access to new kinds of consumer experience, most notably its "strength through joy" vacations, radios, vacuum cleaners, refrigerators, cars, and early television sets. But with the exception of the cheap, standardized "people's radio," which appeared
to serve the propaganda needs of the regime, these promises were never, or only slightly, fulfilled during the Third Reich. With its economy geared toward preparing for war, its foreign currency reserves in desperately short supply, and its hope, never realized, of achieving a
state of economic self-sufficiency, the regime did what it could to suppress private consumption. To soak up excess purchasing power, it increased taxes and allowed prices to rise faster than wages. In the hopes of "guiding" consumption, it appealed to consumers to "buy
German" and to accept ersatz products in place of foreign or scarce commodities. It launched propaganda campaigns to encourage saving and to fight against all forms of waste. Consumers were less responsive to these propaganda efforts than Nazi authorities had hoped they
would be. Still, they faced shortages in textiles and foodstuffs. As early
as 1937, butter, margarine, and other fats had to be rationed. With the introduction of extensive rationing in August 1939, on the eve of the German invasion of Poland, there was much grumbling from the population. But the rationing system had been so painstakingly
well prepared by Nazi authorities that people more or less grew accustomed to it. The Nazi leadership had been determined to avoid what it regarded as one of the great mistakes of the previous war-that is, allowing the food supply to deteriorate to the point that it weakened
morale on the home front. Although there were complaints about the uniformity of rationed supplies, the regime managed in the first years of the war to feed its population sufficiently well, assuring "normal consumers" about twenty-three hundred calories daily. But as the tide of
the war turned in 1943, and it was no longer possible to supply Germans with the goods plundered from the territories conquered by the Wehrmacht, the orderly system of provisioning gave way increasingly to improvisation and shortages. By spring 1945 authorities had to extend
the validity of ration cards already distributed in February and March,
since it was impossible to allocate any new rations for the first week of
April. The ration cards themselves, meanwhile, had long since become worthless, as black markets flourished. In the end, as the military effort inexerably disintegrated, collapse on the home front could not be avoided. Still, the Nazi system of rationing had functioned well for much of
the war and, with its reputation largely intact, was continued in the Western occupation zones." In the Soviet zone, however, the allocation of rations followed a combination of Soviet and Nazi wartime practices. Here the population was divided into three main groups: normal consumers (Normnalverbraucher), partial self-providers (Teilselbstversorger), and self-providers (Selbstversorger). The normal consumers, who comprised the overwhelming majority of the zone's population, were then broken down into six smaller groups, each receiving a different ration
card based on occupation and age. In order of decreasing rations, cards were distributed to workers performing the heaviest manual labor (Card I), those performing heavy manual labor (Card II), workers (Card III), employees (Card IV), children (Card V), and the rest of the
population (Card VI). In the Western zones, too, there was a connection between heavy
manual labor and better rations. Workers performing heavy manual labor in Munich, for example, were "honored" in 1947 with 1,090 extra calories per day, which represented 83 percent of normal consumer rations. Similarly, miners in the Ruhr were rewarded according to a points system. But in the Soviet zone, Cards I and II were also given out to engineers and technicians, political leaders and administration officials, intellectuals and artists, and even some professionals. The inclusion of these groups in the highest ration categories, justified by "the great economic and social significance of their work," reflected distinctly Soviet practices in the allocation of scarce commodities, one aim of which was to win over and build up a reliable leadership cadre.
In direct contrast, the members of these groups in the Western zones were among those at the bottom of the rationing hierarchy. Moreover, in the Soviet zone heavy manual labor did not in itself guarantee receiving Card I or II. One had to work in either mining or heavy industry. This requirement, too, reflected a particularly Soviet emphasis that, as we shall see, was soon extended on a far greater scale than was ever done in the West.
In addition to the categories of occupation and age, the size (and thus political importance) of one's place of residence also played a role in the early stratification of provisioning. The population was divided into a four-tiered residential hierarchy in which the Soviet sector of
Berlin came first, followed by the two largest cities in Saxony, Dresden and Leipzig. These, in turn, were followed by the other sixteen large cities of the zone, which were finally followed by the smaller towns, rural communities, and villages. The differences between these categories, it should be added, were significant. For example, in January 1947 official daily rations ranged from nearly twenty-five hundred calories for a worker performing heavy manual labor in East Berlin to just over one thousand calories for a holder of Card V in one of the smaller locations of the zone. Very often, however, even these desperately inadequate rations could not be fulfilled, and the actual amounts given out fell well below the official levels.
It was with the help of trusted house and block representatives that zonal administrators distributed ration cards to the population. Upon presenting their work certificates to these representatives, individuals would receive their corresponding cards. The cards for most consumer goods retained their validity for a period of ten days, partly because officials wanted to limit attempts at speculation and partly because most food items would not keep for longer periods. Not only were consumers required to shop within the circumscribed time period, but they also had to shop at designated stores in their immediate neighborhoods, where they were registered. Individual stores received their deliveries only after preregistering their customers' cards. (In
East Berlin this system of binding consumers to particular stores lasted until 1951.)

</text>
