<text id="J41" category="" words="2036" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Enacting catastrophe: preparedness, insurance, budgetary rationalization" Author="Stephen J. Collier" PublicationDate="May 2008" SampledFrom="Economy and Society " WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=3&hid=105&sid=acba6468-f5a8-4864-889e-80035d05127c%40sessionmgr113">

In recent years events such as terror attacks, natural disasters and technological accidents have received growing attention from critical social scientists. A central question in this literature is whether such events exceed the mechanism of risk spreading through insurance that was so essential to a certain kind of security over the twentieth century. This problem of insurability has served as a lens for broader issues: do such risks exceed mechanisms of calculated mitigation altogether? How do they transform the apparatuses of collective
security that characterized industrial modernity?
The present article addresses these questions by shifting attention away from insurability and calculability per se and towards an analysis of alternative mechanisms for knowing and assessing risks. The knowledge form classically associated with insurance - which uses statistics to analyse an 'archive' of past events - is only one way through which uncertain threats can be known. In what follows, I contrast this archival - statistical knowledge with enactment-based knowledge produced by 'acting out' uncertain future threats in order to understand their impact. I will trace the genealogy of enactment through a series of historical moments in the United States: from civil defence preparedness to disaster insurance to budgetary rationalization in contemporary domestic security. In tracing this genealogy, I do not mean to suggest that enactment-based knowledge has superseded archival- statistical knowledge or that enactment is the paradigmatic knowledge form of contemporary collective security. It is, however, a significant new approach to producing knowledge about collective life, one that is increasingly important in the diverse emerging assemblages of risk, rationality, and security.
The article begins by examining the critical social science discussion concerning catastrophe risk and insurance. I focus in particular on a central point of reference in these discussions, Ulrich Beck's 'insurability thesis'.
Beck's thesis involves two interlinked claims. First, he argues that contemporary societies increasingly face 'catastrophe' risks such as industrial accidents or large-scale terrorism that cannot be covered by private insurance. Second, Beck argues that this insurance 'limit' marks the threshold of risk society, whose dominant techno-political dynamics are shaped by uncertain risks that are beyond rational assessment and calculated mitigation. Beck's claims have been criticized, both because they are empirically suspect (insurers do cover some catastrophe risk) and because they paint an overly epochal picture of the shift from the manageable risks of industrial modernity to the uncertain and thus unmanageable risks of risk society (Bougen, 2003; Ericson &amp; Doyle, 2004a; O'Malley, 2004; Rose et al., 2006). These critiques are persuasive. Nonetheless, I want to insist that Beck offers crucial insights into contemporary mutations of risk and collective security. Following Beck's own suggestion in recent work (Beck &amp; Lau, 2005), his epochal story can, with some modification, be turned into a set of useful propositions for inquiry. Beck argues that uncertain risks exceed the limits of calculative and instrumental rationality in general. It would be more precise and analytically productive to say that such risks push the limits of a specific form of calculative rationality based on archival - statistical knowledge. This distinction is important, since what we observe today is not the paralysis of frameworks for rational response to uncertain threats. Rather, we see the proliferation of such frameworks in multifarious emerging initiatives whose aim is to generate knowledge about uncertain future events and to link this knowledge to diverse mechanisms of mitigation. Thus, as O'Malley (2000) suggests, the central question concerns not the theoretical status of calculative rationality (or 'insurability') per se, but, rather, how risks judged 'uncertain' from one perspective are already being known and assessed using other approaches.
The remainder of the article examines one approach to assessing 'uncertain' risk that has emerged and become institutionally significant in the last fifty years: enactment. Enactment, it will be shown, is of a fundamentally different character from archival - statistical knowledge (see Table 1). Rather than drawing on an archive of past events, enactment uses as its basic data an inventory of elements at risk, information about the vulnerability of these elements and a model of the threat itself - an event model. And, rather than using statistical analysis, enactment 'acts out' uncertain future threats by juxtaposing these various forms of data. These elements of enactment have been noted in some critical scholarship on insurance (Bougen, 2003; Ericson &amp; Doyle, 2004a). But they have generally been treated as 'idiosyncratic' or nonstandard techniques of risk assessment. What is more, since such discussions have been confined to insurance, they have not examined the diversity of domains in which enactment has been deployed.
The analysis that follows traces a genealogical progression through which enactment was articulated and linked to diverse mechanisms of mitigation: first, civil defence preparedness planning in response to the Soviet nuclear threat in the early 1950s; second, new approaches to natural hazard modelling, which linked enactment to insurance from the 1960s to the 1980s; third, and finally, the contemporary emergence of terrorism risk assessment based on enactment, and its proposed application to the rationalization of federal budgetary distributions. These moments in the genealogy of enactment affirm many propositions in Beck's risk society theses. In each, archival  -  statistical forms of knowledge and assessment encounter a 'limit'. In each, the problem of estimating the likelihood and consequence of uncertain future events is made an explicit object of expert reflection and technocratic response. The genealogy of enactment does not, however, confirm propositions concerning a generalized crisis of rationality in the face of uncertain threats or a 'structural break' (Beck &amp; Lau, 2005, p. 532) in the status of expert knowledge. Rather, we find alternative forms of knowledge and assessment - enactment among them - with coherent genealogies, with bodies of sanctioned expertise that become authoritative in certain contexts (though they remain disputed in others), and with their own norms and modes of veridiction.  In specific sectors and in response to events we see moments of re-problematization in which existing forms are critiqued, redeployed and recombined. My analytic strategy is to trace these recombinations and the emerging forms of collective security to which they are giving rise.
Beck's 'insurability' thesis and styles of reasoning about risk In his now thoroughly debated work, Beck has characterized contemporary society as 'risk society'. The distinction that Beck marks with this term is between a society faced with threats whose 'risk' can be confidently expressed as a likelihood of future harm and a society faced with threats whose risk is uncertain. He argues that this distinction is made visible by the limit of a distinctive technology of collective security, namely, insurance and, in particular, private insurance. Given the centrality of these claims to contemporary discussions about risk, it bears rehearsing the outlines of Beck's 'insurability' thesis.
The voluminous critical scholarship on insurance has shown that insurance was applied to problems of collective security in response to a certain class of events - 'pathologies of the social' such as disease, workplace accidents and
poverty - in the nineteenth century (Ewald, 1991, 2002; Foucault, 2007;
Hacking, 1990, 2003; Rabinow, 1989; Rose, 1999).  Through an emerging practice of applied social science, these pathologies were mapped onto the regularities of collective life through new knowledge forms that were, in turn, linked to the insurential mechanism of risk spreading. The data associated with this 'social insurance', that is, insurance deployed as a mechanism of collective security, might be called archival (Collier &amp; Lakoff, 2008a; Fearnley, 2005). It is a 'historical' record of past events - illnesses, crimes, incidents of poverty - in a
population. The analytic technique or technique of assessment in social insurance is statistics, used to understand the distribution of these events - and, thus, the distribution of risks  - over a population. This archival - statistical knowledge about the population, finally, was linked to the insurance form of risk spreading.
Actuaries could estimate the risks associated with an individual policy and with a total portfolio, and make decisions about what to insure, whom to insure and what premiums to charge.
For Beck - and, it should be noted, for many other critical social scientists - social insurance is paradigmatic of the modern 'security pact'. The 'systematic creation of consequences' by industrial modernity, Beck argues,
found a 'counter principle' in a 'social compact against industrially produced hazards and damages, stitched together out of public and private insurance agreements' (Beck, 1992b, p. 100). Through the mechanism of insurance 'the incalculable threats of pre-industrial society (plague, famine, natural catastrophes,
wars, but also magic, gods, demons) [were] transformed into calculable risks in the course of the development of instrumental rational control' (Beck, 1999, p. 76).
In his work on risk society, of course, Beck's primary concern is with the limits of this security pact. He associates this limit with the emergence of threats such as nuclear war or environmental catastrophes that do not meet the basic criteria of insurability based on archival - statistical knowledge. Such threats are also systematically produced by industrial modernity; indeed, as
Beck points out, they are the products of industrial modernity's very success, a point to which we return. But unlike 'pathologies of the social', these threats of risk society exceed industrial modernity's characteristic mechanism of security.
There is no archive of past events whose analysis might provide a guide to future events.11 As a consequence, Beck argues, 'standards of normality, measuring procedures and therefore the basis for calculating the hazards are abolished. . . . [I]ncomparable entities are compared and calculation turns into obfuscation' (Beck, 1992b, p. 102). Such risks, in short, exceed mechanisms of calculated, rational assessment.
Beck draws various implications from these observations, among them a core thesis concerning a new politics around the distribution of social 'bads'.
Here I want to focus on a narrower technical dimension of his argument. Beck posits that the 'limit' of private insurance marks the threshold of risk society.
The market economy's internal dynamic, he argues, 'reveals the boundary line
of what is tolerable with economic precision, through the refusal of private
insurance. Where the logic of private insurance disengages, where the
economic risks of insurance appear too large or too unpredictable to insurance
concerns, the boundary that separates ''predictable'' risks from uncontrollable
threats has obviously been breached' (Beck, 1992b, p. 130). The uninsurable
risk, for Beck, is the autonomic signalling mechanism of risk society.
Beck's 'insurability thesis' has been subject to deserved critique, first of all on
empirical grounds: private insurers do, in some cases, offer coverage for
catastrophe risk. This empirical qualification has conceptual implications. It
does not seem plausible to maintain that private insurance serves as the
boundary marker of risk society (Ericson &amp; Doyle, 2004, p. 137); and we may
wonder more broadly whether epoch-marking terms like 'risk society' do the
analytical work required to trace contemporary shifts in contemporary risk and
security. These problems, I hold, can be traced to two conceptual slippages in
Beck's work. First, in his arguments about insurance Beck seems to conflate the
limits of a specific knowledge form - what I have called the archival - statistical

form of knowledge and assessment - with the limits of the insurential
mechanism of risk spreading. Second, Beck associates the limit of a specific style
of reasoning about risk with the limit of rational assessment in general.12 If these
slippages can be sorted out, we may be able to proceed with Beck's categories,
understanding that they offer provocative orientations for inquiry rather than
an epochal diagnosis of the present.
First, the empirical question concerning the insurability of catastrophe risk:
discussions of this problem can be traced back to at least the 1960s and 1970s
when a combination of new economic formalizations and practical problems -
specifically, mounting losses from natural disasters - drew the attention of
insurance professionals and policy-makers. Beginning in the 1970s, a specialist
literature of economists and insurance experts began to argue that catastrophe
risk could be managed by private insurance companies (Anderson, 1976; Jaffee
&amp; Russell, 1997). Over time, tools for assessing such risks became increasingly
widespread, and have recently been extended to new kinds of catastrophe risks,
such as terrorism. This development has been examined in critical studies of
insurance that have asked how actuaries and underwriters respond to
catastrophe risks (Bougen, 2003; Ericson &amp; Doyle, 2004a; O'Malley, 2003).

</text>
