<text id="J44" category="" words="2016" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Punishment and Revenge" Author="Leo Zaibert" PublicationDate="January, 2006" SampledFrom="Law and Philosophy, Vol. 25, No. 1, pp. 81-118" WebAddress="http://www.jstor.org/stable/pdfplus/27639423.pdf?acceptTC=true">

Philosophers tend to believe that to punish and to take revenge
are vastly different activities. Consider the ancient view put
forth by Protagoras, in Plato's Protagoras:
No one punishes wrongdoers putting his mind on what they did and for the
sake of this - that they did wrong not unless he is taking mindless vengeance,
like a savage brute. One who undertakes to punish rationally does not do so
for the sake of the wrongdoing, which is now in the past
- but for the sake of the future, that the wrongdoing shall not be repeated, either by him or by
others who see him or by others who see him punished.
Nowadays, this continues to be the predominant view amongst
philosophers of law regarding the relationship between punish
ment and revenge. It is probably impossible to present an
exhaustive list of authors who hold that punishment and revenge
are different, and any partial, non-exhaustive list is prone to be
helplessly idiosyncratic. Just to get a taste, I will mention a
handful of influential authors who embrace this view. Joel
Feinberg puts vengeance in close company with "lust for blood"
and "Schadenfreude" and claims that whereas retributive
punishment is "righteous," vengeance is "angry". Likewise, philosophers such as John Elster, Antony Flew, Ted Honderich,
John Kleinig, Nicola Lacey, and C. L. Ten, amongst many oth
ers, have held that punishment and revenge are different.
Arguments which allegedly show that punishment and
revenge are two different phenomena abound in the literature
on punishment. Among the most popular of these arguments
are the views that unlike punishment, revenge can be carried
out for mere slights, or by unauthorized agents, or by agents
who display an inappropriate emotional response to what
they perceive was an instance of wrongdoing, or by agents
who are unconcerned with the generality of universality of
the moral principles behind their action, i.e., agents who
would not treat like cases alike, or by agents unconcerned
with the proportionality of their response and the perceived
wrongdoing to which they react. In spite of this argumen
tative manifoldness, I shall argue that all these arguments
tend to revolve around one basic idea: revenge is "mindless,"
or barbaric, irrational, etc., and thus unjustifiable, whereas
punishment is "rational" or civilized, enlightened, etc., and
thus justifiable.
In opposition to this orthodoxy of sorts, I shall argue that
punishment and revenge are not at all easy to distinguish. I thus
hope to cast doubt on the plausibility of the above arguments. I
hope to show as well that the main role this distinction has
played throughout history is not really analytic but merely
rhetorical. It is rhetorically powerful to claim that such and
such action is not punishment but mere revenge, in spite of the
fact that there may be no good analytic grounds for making
such a distinction. In most cases 'punishment' and 'revenge' are
terms used to conveniently describe one single phenomenon.
A sketch of an account of punishment should suffice here to
shed light on the sort of phenomenon that I have in mind: A
punishes B when A inflicts (what she believes to be) suffering upon B as a reaction to (what she believes was) B's
wrongdoing. This is, in principle, also true of the avenger: the
avenger also re-acts to what she believes was someone's
wrongdoing and seeks to inflict suffering upon her. I shall
discuss below a narrowly circumscribed sort of case in which,
perhaps, a principled difference between punishment and re
venge might be recognized. Yet, even if there are cases in which
some acts of revenge contain elements not found in paradig
matic acts of punishment, this way of distinguishing between
punishment and revenge is not only dim, and not only does it
operate (if it operates at all) in a miniscule number of cases, but
it is different from any of the standard distinctions found in the
literature. In any event, rather than seeing acts of revenge as
wholly different from acts of punishment, I see the conceptual
connection which might obtain between punishment and re
venge as follows. Either there is no analytical difference at all
(true in the vast majority of cases), or, at most, it could be
conceded that revenge is a form of punishment. Either way,
there is no vast difference between the "two" phenomena.
The term 'action' (or activity, or act -
I do not here distin
guish between these terms) which I used in the preceding par
agraph to refer to punishment and to revenge is itself
important. Punishment can be seen in different ways: as an
institution, or as a reason supporting the setting up of these or
those institutions, or as a motive for which actions are done, or
as an action. Something similar happens with revenge. In what
follows I shall concern myself with the act of punishing and the
act of revenging. My interest lies with the alleged differences
between a case in which a person is said to punish and a case in
which a person is said to take revenge. Perhaps some of the
conclusions that I draw regarding the relationship between
punishment and revenge, understood as activities, might hold
too if one sees punishment and revenge as motives, or as
institutions, and even in cases in which one sees punishment
and revenge as different sorts of phenomena, say, punishment
as an institution, and revenge as a motive for which an action is 
done. But I am not interested in extending the scope of the
present article. Sometimes we punish and sometimes we avenge,
so goes the official story; philosophers overwhelmingly assert
that these are two essentially different activities, and I shall
argue that they are not.
One obvious way to attempt to refute the thesis that
punishing and taking revenge are different activities would be
to point to the numerous fictional examples where the "two
phenomena" seem perennially intertwined. Does Othello
punish Desdemona or does he take revenge upon her for what
he thought was her betrayal? Is the Count of Monte Cristo
punishing or taking revenge on the malefactors who attempted
to ruin his life? Does Lazarillo de Tormes really take revenge
(as he claims) on the blind man who had cruelly abused him for
so long, or is he in fact punishing him? Does Michael Kohlhaas
seek to take revenge or to punish as he roamed Saxony in
pursuit of those who did him wrong? These questions are not
easy to answer. Sometimes it seems to be the very point of these
stories to leave these questions unanswered; that they are not
easy to answer constitutes a reason why these literary works are
so good and compelling. Most emphatically, however, I am
not appealing to literature as the ultimate judge in anything.
Yet, that in literature there are many cases where it is difficult
to distinguish punishment from revenge surely has some
significance.
The view that punishment and revenge are not easily distin
guishable finds support elsewhere as well. Oft-quoted biblical
passages, such as Romans 12:19, "Vengeance is mine; I will repay,
saith the Lord" or Romans 13:1, "[a ruler ordained by God] is the
minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth
evil," seem, too, to be cases in which 'vengeance' and 'punish
ment' are not easily distinguishable. When God says that ven
geance is his, surely it is not absurd to assume that he uses
'vengeance' as a synonym for 'punishment'. For it is otherwise
hard to accept that what (a benevolent) God has in mind is that he
is the only one allowed to engage in barbaric, unjust, irrational
behavior (can God behave in such a way?), and it is precisely
barbarism, brutality and so on, which are customarily adduced as
evidence showing that revenge is different from punishment.
The best dictionary of the English language also seems to assume
that punishment and revenge are very similar. One of the meanings
the Oxford English Dictionary gives for "revenge" is "punishment".
In most of the other meanings of "revenge" listed in the Oxford
English Dictionary, the element of "being a response to a wrong,"
clearly something that is also true of punishment, is present. The
Oxford English Dictionary provides the following as the first defi
nition of "vengeance": "The act of avenging oneself or another;
retributive infliction of injury or punishment; hurt or harm done
from vindictive motives". For the noun form of 'avenge', the Ox
ford English Dictionary gives one single meaning (though it admits
is obsolete): "Execution of vengeance; retributive punishment,
retaliation either upon an offender, or on account of a wrong".
The view that punishment and revenge are not so easily
distinguishable is supported in yet further ways. In an inter
esting article, Gregory Vlastos discusses the complicated rela
tionship between punishment and revenge in ancient Greece.
Vlastos points out that early in Greek history, the distinction
between punishment and vengeance was not clear-cut. The
linguistic connection between punishment and vengeance, for
instance, was then so strong that Vlastos dubs it "positively
tyrannical". As Vlastos points out:
Down to the last third of the fifth century [BCE], Tifi pia, whose original
and always primary sense is "vengeance," is the word for "punishment".
The specialized word for the latter, ko?gc?eiv ("chastening," "disciplining,"
- with no collateral use for "taking vengeance") does not acquire currency
until we reach the prose of Thucydides and Antiphon.
All of this: literature, the Bible, the Oxford English Dictionary,
ancient Greek philology, is grist for my mill, insofar as it
supports the main thesis that I wish to defend in this paper,
namely, that punishment and revenge, qua activities, are not
that different. But, of course, I am not going to simply present
literary references and dictionary entries. I present this evidence
simply to highlight the fact that, unlike the predominant view
amongst contemporary philosophers, the view that punishment
and revenge are clearly different is not met with general
acquiescence in other fields. In what follows I shall dissect the
specific arguments which those who believe that there is a clear
distinction between revenge and punishment endorse, and I
shall argue why I believe that they are unconvincing.
PUNISHMENT SIMPLICITER AND RETRIBUTIVE PUNISHMENT.
Vlastos claims that "the distinction of punishment from revenge
[in Plato's Protagoras] must be regarded as one of the most
momentous discoveries ever made by humanity". Not surpris
ingly, what Vlastos considers momentous about this discovery is
that revenge is a sign of "barbaric tribalism" and that punishment is a sign of a more civilized concern for justice. Vlastos
bemoans the conflation of punishment and revenge in the archaic
period of Greek history, as he comments on the fact that
earlier, as for example in Herodotus, language traps one into using "vengeance", even when "punishment" is exactly what one means.
But how does Vlastos actually figure out what "exactly" pun
ishment is and how "exactly" does it differ from revenge?
When it comes down to articulating the allegedly diaphanous
difference between punishment and revenge, Vlastos, by and
large, follows the lead of one contemporary author whose
distinctions between revenge and retributive punishment have
become a mainstay of the contemporary discussion: Robert
Nozick. Vlastos' own contrasts between punishment and re
venge are admittedly corollaries to Nozick's views.
Vlastos is by no means alone in following Nozick. The
influence that Nozick's contrasts exert in the contemporary
discussion of the relationship between punishment and revenge
is immense. Such an immense influence is not only the result of
Nozick's creativity, but also of the fact that Nozick's contrasts
constitute a sort of compendium, comprising many of the differences which have been intuitively assumed to hold be
tween punishment and revenge. (It is likely that if we ask
people who have never read Nozick, or indeed who have never
studied the philosophy of law, about the differences between
punishment and revenge, we will get answers of the same tenor
as Nozick's contrasts.)
Thus, the general discussion of the al
leged differences between punishment and revenge overlaps to
a great extent with the particular discussion of Nozick's own
arguments.

</text>
