<text id="J45" category="" words="2007" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Slumming sexual and social politics in Victorian London " Author="Koven, Seth" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Princeton, N.J. : Princeton University Press," WebAddress="http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/pageviewer-idx?c=acls;cc=acls;rgn=full%20text;idno=heb04963.0001.001;didno=heb04963.0001.001;view=image;seq=00000021;node=heb04963.0001.001%3A4">

Introduction.
SLUMMING: EROS AND ALTRUISM IN VICTORIAN LONDON.
FOR THE BETTER part of the century preceding World War II,
Britons went slumming to see for themselves how the poor lived.
FThey insisted that firsthand experience among the metropolitan
poor was essential for all who claimed to speak authoritatively about social problems. To a remarkable degree, the men and women who governed church and state in late-nineteenth- and twentieth-century Britain
and dominated social welfare bureaucracies and the emerging profession
of social work felt compelled to visit, live, or work in the London slums
at some point in their careers of public service. Even the fiery Welsh radical Lloyd George, champion of popular rights against aristocratic privileges, sought out a friend to take him on a tour of the East London slums
soon after he arrived in London in 1890 to assume his seat in parliament.' Lloyd George may have been intent to witness the scenes of
human misery and sexual degradation made famous the world over by
the serial murderer Jack the Ripper, but he also embarked on a journey
routed for him by thousands of well-to-do men and women. By the
1890s, London guidebooks such as Baedeker's not only directed visitors
to shops, theatres, monuments, and churches, but also mapped excursions to world renowned philanthropic institutions located in notorious
slum districts such as Whitechapel and Shoreditch.
We will never know precisely how many men and women went slumming, but the fact that slums became tourist sites suggests it was a very
widespread phenomenon. At any given time there were hundreds of private charitable institutions and agencies in the metropolitan slumrs, each
visited regularly by scores of donors, trustees, and volunteer and paid
workers. No doubt slumming was merely an evening's entertainment for
many well-to-do Londoners, but for many others, the slums of London
exercised powerful and tenacious claims over their minds and hearts,
drastically altering the course of their lives.
One such man was James Granville Adderley. Adderley was far too
iconoclastic to be representative of anything, but his life providles one
point of entry into the world of the women and men whose philanthropic labors are the subject of this book. Even those who disliked
Adderley's radical ideas liked the man himself. He bristled with righteous indignation about the world's injustices, but he also radiated an inner
calm and a joyful enthusiasm that drew people of all sorts and conditions
to him. Well-born, charming in conversation, blessed with even-featured
good looks, and bright without being ostentatiously intellectual, Adderley seemed destined for a lucrative career in law and politics. However,
within a short time of leaving Oxford in the mid-1880s, he found himself
the toast of philanthropic London as head of one of the metropolis's
newest institutions for translating vague ideals about cross-class brotherly love into concrete form: the Oxford House in Bethnal Green. A residential colony of idealistic university men planted in a slum district, it
was devoted to constructing bridges of personal friendship between rich
and poor through Christian work and wholesome "rational" recreation.
There was something absurd about Adderley's instant celebrity as an expert on social questions, and he knew it better than anyone else. He cannily recognized that his contemporaries saw him not as he actually was
but rather as an embodiment of a new type of man: the "'ecclesiastical
young man,"' called upon to "address all kinds of meetings, and looked
upon as a sort of freak-the fellow who might live in luxury in Belgravia
but preferred [the poverty of] Bethnal Green."
Impatient with the unending stream of visitors, reporters, and transient do-gooders to Oxford House, Adderley took his clerical vows and
moved farther east into ever less glamorous slum districts. He joined the
Catholic prelate Cardinal Manning and the trade unionist Ben Tillett in
championing the cause of London's grossly exploited dock laborers in
their world-famous strike in 1889; he defended the rights of laboring
men against puritanical attempts to deny them the pleasures of the stage
and music hall; he threw his heart and soul into club work with the
"rough lads" in his adopted neighborhood of Poplar and invited large
numbers of them for holidays on the grounds of his ancestral home,
Hams Hall. He helped form a new religious community within the
Church of England that was founded on the rules of St. Francis: The Society of Divine Compassion. Adderley and his brothers in poverty exalted the beautiful while despising the exuberant materialism of late Victorian London. Jolly fellowship among men went hand in hand with
severe austerity. "There was no carpet on the floors, a fire only in the
common room, and the brothers did their own crude cooking," one visitor recalled. A bare plank served as his only bed. Adderley felt that even
this self-denying regimen kept him too far removed from the gritty struggles of the homeless poor. He spent weeks at a time disguised as a tramp,
often sleeping rough on the streets. The depth of his compassion was
matched by the breadth of his tolerance. He extended his hand not only
to social outcasts but also to sexual outlaws like the celebrated playwright Oscar Wilde convicted in 1895 for committing same-sex acts of gross indecency. Living in East London placed Adderley far from the
starched-collar respectability and top-hatty conventions of bourgeois domesticity and freed him to develop distinctly heterodox ideas about class
relations, male sexual celibacy, and social purity. When Adderley died
in 1942, it was another man, Arthur Shearly Cripps, his "comrade in
tramping, dossing, and in preaching the gospel," who memorialized their
loving friendship in a tender poem of chaste but sensual couplets: "He to
whose lips the taste of old wine clings/ Asks no new wine. Ah me! My
friend's loss brings/ No wish for some new friend to fill his place."
Why did Adderley renounce the privileges of aristocratic birth and the
comforts of family to live for six decades in voluntary poverty and sexual
celibacy among the London poor as a bachelor slum priest? His only biographer discouraged readers from seeking the psychological roots of
Adderley's singular devotion because he was "a man of simple ways and
thoughts and friendships" who never worried about himself and instead
did God's work as a parish priest. We need not posthumously coerce
Adderley onto the psychoanalyst's couch to suggest that the private and
public, sexual and social forces shaping his life choices may not have
been as "simple" as his "ways."
This book tries to make sense of the ideas and movements, institutions
and practices that made the slums of London and "slumming" seem so
necessary to Adderley and thousands of members of the "comfortable
classes." It examines the complex historical and cultural circumstances
in which such women and men found themselves and to which they importantly contributed. I attempt to save them from the misguided goodwill of those who would make them into saints and the smugness of those who would dismiss them as marginal cranks, or worse yet, as hypocrites. They were none of these. Instead, I try to recapture the altogether
messier mingling of good intentions and blinkered prejudices that informed their vision of the poor and of themselves. While exploring deep
structures of thought and feeling in nineteenth- and early-twentiethcentury British culture, I attend to individuals' particularities. I portray
slum reformers and workers not as mere tools of social or discursive
forces outside their control-though such forces did influence their agendas-but as human beings who confronted ethical dilemmas and made
difficult choices. I examine the interplay of sexual and social politics
both at the micro-level of how women and men came to express and understand who they were and at the macro-level of public debates about
poverty and welfare, gender, and sexuality. By so doing, I work within,
but also reorient, a tradition of scholarship linking private conscience
and public duty in Victorian culture and society.
The intimate, turbulent, and often surprising relationship between
benevolence and sex, rich and poor, in Victorian London is my subject. I
came to this topic circuitously through the history of elite men's and
women's philanthropic endeavors to bring "sweetness and light" to the
dark spaces and dirty inhabitants of the metropolis. As I immersed myself deeply in the sources, I found it impossible to keep sex, sexual desire,
and sexuality out of their story. So what began as an inquiry into classbridging institutions and social welfare programs took on a life of its
own, propelled by several insights. First, it became clear that debates
about "social" questions such as homelessness, social hygiene, childhood
poverty, and women's work were often sparked by and tapped into anxieties about sex, sexuality, and gender roles. To understand how elite
men and women thought about the poor required me to reckon with
how they thought about sex, gender, and themselves. Second, I discovered that the widely shared imperative among well-to-do men and women
to traverse class boundaries and befriend their outcast brothers and sisters in the slums was somehow bound up in their insistent eroticization
of poverty and their quest to understand their own sexual subjectivities.
But how and why were these movements, both literal and imaginative,
connected? And what were the consequences of such linkages for the histories of class, gender, sexuality, and welfare? An inquiry into the set of
social practices and relations that Britons called slumming promised a
means to untangle and knit together in a new way the history of sexual
and social politics. Once I started looking for slumming, it was hard not
to find it everywhere.
The Oxford-educated journalist Henry Wood Nevinson, who lived
with his talented wife Margaret and their growing family in an insectinfested slum flat in the 1880s, astutely observed that slumming expressed both "shamed sympathy" with the poor and an irresistible "attraction of repulsion" for them. Nevinson's paradoxical formulation
points to the double optic through which elites viewed the slums of London. Men and women like the Nevinsons knew only too well that slums
were real places of monotonous material deprivation and quiet human
suffering which both rightly elicited their sympathy and called them to
action. At the same time, when elites wrote about slums, they tended to
romanticize and exoticize them as sites of spectacular brutality and sexual degradation to which they were compulsively drawn." Slums were
anarchic, distant outposts of empire peopled by violent and primitive
races; but they were also conveniently close, only a short stroll from the
Bank of England and St. Paul's, inhabited by Christian brothers and sisters. They were prosaically dull and dangerously carnivalesque.
The metropolitan slums provided well-to-do philanthropic men and
women with an actual and imagined location where, with the approval
of society, they could challenge prevailing norms about class and gender
relations and sexuality.' These men and women may well have needed
the freedom the slums offered them more than the poor in their adopted
neighborhoods benefited from their benevolent labors. Such claims capture the complex social dynamics of philanthropic encounters between
rich and poor, as well as my own ambivalence about them. Reformers'
creativity and passion, their sincerely felt and lived ethos of service, inspire admiration. At the same time, many were deeply invested in the titillating squalor of the slums, which they used as stages upon which they
enacted emancipatory experiments in reimagining themselves. Synonymous with squalid tenements and soiled lives, the slums of London ironically functioned as sites of personal liberation and self-realization - social, spiritual, and sexual - for several generations of educated men
and women. Upper-class men and women had long ventured into the low haunts of
London in pursuit of illicit pleasure. In 1670, the Queen and the
Duchesses of Richmond and Buckingham caused a public uproar when
they disguised themselves as "country lasses" at Bartholomew Fair to
mingle undetected with the common people. "They had all so over done
it in their disguise," Sir Henry Ingilby reported in his diary, that they
quickly drew the attention of the mob, which angrily pursued them all
the way to the Court gate.

</text>
