<text id="J47" category="" words="2019" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Commonality and Individual Differences in Vocabulary Growth" Author="Philip S. Dale and Judith C. Goodman" PublicationDate="2005" SampledFrom="ebook -- Beyond nature-nurture  : essays in honor of Elizabeth Bates -- edited by Michael Tomasello and Dan Isaac Slobin -- LAWRENCE ERLBAUM ASSOCIATES, PUBLISHERS. pp. 41 - 46" WebAddress="http://www.netlibrary.com/Reader/">

A CRUCIAL METHODOLOGICAL INNOVATION
We live in an era of high-tech everyday life. Computer chips can be found in automobiles, toys, washing machines and toasters. The study of language use and acquisition is no exception. Among the techniques currently in fashion are computerized analysis of language samples (MacWhinney, 2000), split video monitors with a soundtrack that matches one image for the study of language comprehension (Hirsh-Pasek &amp; Golinkoff, 1996), evoked-potential recording to trace the division of labor between the two hemispheres in language processing (Mills, Coffey-Corina &amp; Neville, 1997), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to identify the brain locus of specific aspects of language processing (Raichle, 1994), and molecular genetic techniques to identify and characterize the influence of specific genes on language (Plomin &amp; Dale, 2000; Meaburn, Dale, Craig &amp; Plomin, 2002). In contrast to these technologically complex methods, this chapter is based largely on the revival and improvement of a very old and low-tech approach to studying language; one that is not only practical and cost effective, but is also, for certain purposes, simply footer than the alternatives. It is parent report: the systematic utilization of the extensive and representative experience of parents (and potentially other caregivers) with their children. Parent report, in the form of diary studies, is in fact the oldest form of child language research. A long series of "baby biographies," often examining language, began with Tiedemann's 1787 diary of infant behavior and
includes such distinguished examples as Darwin's 1877 study (both excerpted in Bar-Adon &amp; Leopold, 1971). The tradition continues fruitfully, as in Dromi (1987) and Tomasello (1992). Despite the scientific significance of these studies, there has been an understandable reluctance to use parent report more generally for purposes of language assessment or substantive investigation. Unlike Dromi and Tomasello, most parents do not have specialized training in language development and may not be sensitive to subtle aspects of structure and use. Furthermore, a natural pride in their own child and a failure to critically test their impressions may cause a parent to overestimate developmental level;
conversely, frustration in the case of delayed language may lead to underestimates. One of the most striking developments in the study of child language, and indeed developmental psychology more generally, over the past 20 years is the revival of parent report as a trustworthy, and trusted, research
technique. The work of Elizabeth Bates and her colleagues in Italy and the United States has been central to this revival.2 Indeed, the single most widely used language assessment instrument for young children included in published research today is a product of Bates's research program: The
MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories (MCDI; Fenson, Dale, Reznick, Bates, Thai, &amp; Pethick, 1994).
The MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories had their genesis in free-form interviews with parents (Bates et al., 1975). They continued to evolve through structured interviews using a standard set of openended probes (Bates, Benigni, Bretherton, Camaioni &amp; Volterra, 1979), to
a highly structured checklist administered orally, to a self-administered checklist format, the Early Language Inventory (never published, but widely used in research). Gradually a range of aspects of early language and communication was incorporated in the research program, including preverbal
communication and symbolic skills, morphology, and syntax. A more complete account of this development, including the emergence of an impressive body of validation evidence for these measures, may be found in Fenson et al. (1994) and Dale (1996). By 1988, there was clear evidence for the research and clinical utility of this type of measure, together with a body of detailed, item-by-item information necessary to develop scales with adequate psychometric properties. With funding from the MacArthur Foundation Network on Early Childhood Transitions, a final, substantial revision

was undertaken, along with a very large (N = 1,803) norming project, and several validation studies.
Following the principle that parents can best evaluate emerging aspects of language, two forms of the Inventory were developed, one for children between 8-16 months (MacArthur Communicative Development Inventory: Words and Gestures, or MCDLWG) and one for children between 16 and 30 months (MacArthur Communicative Development Inventory: Words and Sentences, or MCDLWS). Both instruments are often used with somewhat older children whose communicative development is delayed. The MCDLWG includes two major components. The first is a 396-item vocabulary checklist organized into 19 semantic categories. Parents indicate for each word if the child understands the word, or if the child understands and says the word. The second component is a list of 63 communicative, social, and symbolic gestures. The MCDLWS also has two major components. The first is a vocabulary
checklist of 680 words organized in 22 semantic categories. Parents are asked only to indicate if they have heard their child say the word. The second major component utilizes an innovative sentence pair format to assess grammar, e.g., to judge whether "kitty sleep" or "kitty sleeping" sounds
most like the way their child is talking. (See Marchman &amp; Thai, this volume, for more discussion of the grammar component.) The central place of vocabulary in the MCDI is itself notable. Vocabulary
development was relatively neglected in research on early language development during the 1960s and 1970s. One source of this neglect was the difficulty of studying vocabulary in young children, for whom structured testing is often unfeasible. Probably more important, however, was the intense focus on syntax that stemmed from Chomsky's (1957) emphasis on the complexity, creativity, and abstractness of syntactic structure, and the exciting discovery of some of this complexity and creativity in the language of
quite young children (Brown, 1973). The linguistics and psycholinguistics of the era emphasized the distinction between lexicon and grammar. On first consideration, lexical development appeared to be less creative, less combinatorial, and less pattern-governed than syntax. Nevertheless, by the late 1970s interest in vocabulary development also revived. Several sources contributed to this revival. One was interest in the cognitive foundations of lexical development (Bloom, 1973; Gopnik &amp; Meltzoff, 1986). Another was interest in individual differences (Nelson, 1973). But we suggest that the main reason was a renewed appreciation of the fundamental challenge of learning a word. Consider what would appear to be the simplest condition of word learning. A fluent speaker of the language, such as a parent, undertakes
to teach a learner a word by uttering the word, say, "gavagai" and pointing in the direction of a small furry white object, recognizably a rabbit (borrowing from Quine, 1960). What does "gavagai" mean? Does it mean 'rabbit'? Perhaps, but it might also plausibly mean 'white' or 'animal' or 'food' or 'tail' or 'my pet rabbit'. Each type of reference is a plausible use of the word. And even if we were correct in believing that "gavagai" meant 'rabbit', how would we know the range of animals to which this label might be correctly applied? That is, every word other than proper names is a label for a category, not a single object, action or quality. Learning the category boundaries for each word is a specific "problem of induction." Children are
placed in exactly this situation, and must solve the problem for tens of thousands of words; the fact that they do so successfully means that some general principles of acquisition must be involved (Clark, 1995; Markman, 1994). While the MCDI provides measures of gesture and grammatical development, it is largely devoted to measuring vocabulary, and that will be the focus of the present chapter.
Advances in observational and measurement techniques have often directly stimulated theoretical advances, because they do not simply lead to more precise measurement of what is already studied, but to the observation and/or measurement of new entities or quantities. The development
of the microscope and of the telescope are good examples of this, leading to the discovery of new forms of life and new objects in the sky, respectively. The same process occurs in the study of language development. As Bates and Carnevale (1993) wrote, "the field of child language has reached a new
level of precision and sophistication in the way that we code and quantify linguistic data. Single-case studies, qualitative descriptions and compelling anecdotes will continue to play an important role. But they cannot and will not be forced to bear the full weight of theory-building in our field." The development of the MCDI made possible a measure of overall vocabulary size which was both comprehensive and cost-effective. Unlike structured tests of vocabulary, it was not biased toward nouns and other words which are easily pictured; unlike language samples, it was not biased toward highfrequency words. Furthermore, it was cost-effective enough to be used longitudinally with a substantial sample. Thus it provides a perspective on early language development, especially vocabulary development, that was not
previously possible. In particular, it made possible the establishment of a database on vocabulary development which was could be used to characterize both commonality and individual differences in vocabulary development. The ability to draw on both commonality and individual differences
provides a foundation for theorizing at the level of specific acquisition processes which is far better grounded than relying on either alone. The authors of this chapter have been the beneficiaries, both personally and professionally, of the collaborative program of research which led to the MCDI. Liz Bates's collegiality, collaborative enthusiasm, and passionate commitment to addressing the "big questions" of child language development with multiple innovative techniques including parent report are responsible for the major themes of our own research. Her generous friendship and copious humor have made it a delight. In the remainder of this chapter we discuss some of the fruits of our own and related research,
much of it done in collaboration with Bates. Three projects receive special emphasis in this far-from-comprehensive review. The first is the norming study for the MCDI (Fenson et al., 1994). At the time of its publication, it was a uniquely large-sample study of child language development, and both
the design of the study and the consistency of the results did much to gain acceptance for parent report. It was a cross-sectional study, however, and two other studies have added important longitudinal perspectives. The first
is the San Diego Longitudinal Study, conducted by Goodman in collaboration with Bates, which followed a group of 28 children longitudinally from 8 to 30 months with monthly assessment utilizing both the MCDI and laboratory measures of comprehension, production, and word learning. The second is the Twins' Early Development Study (TEDS), directed in the U.K. by Robert Plomin, in which Dale is a collaborator. Measures of language development at ages 2, 3, and 4 years were adapted from the MCDI. In addition to a very large sample size for a longitudinal study - more than 8,000 for most analyses - the twin design made possible the evaluation of genetic and environmental factors in early language development.
WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED ABOUT VOCABULARY
GROWTH FROM THE MCDI
Vocabulary Size as Antecedent and Consequent
Does size matter? Does the number of words learned by a young child reflect important aspects of the present or past environment, or of significant organismic factors? Does it have any continuing, i.e., predictive,
significance? Which "Size?" Before addressing the question of vocabulary size directly,
we must consider an issue which is begged by the use of the singular noun "size." Almost all parents and other observers of young children have an impression that they understand more words than they produce. Every pediatrician has had worried inquiries about children who have barely started to talk, even though they appear to understand much of the speech addressed to them. That impression is confirmed by more systematic research,
which was greatly stimulated by Nelson's (1973) careful comparison of very early receptive and expressive vocabularies (see Bates, Dale &amp; Thai, 1995 for a more complete review). Nevertheless, it is possible that even though receptive vocabulary exceeds expressive, the two might be sufficiently well correlated that a single number would characterize both developments. Here is a first payoff from the increased sample size that is made possible by the use of parent report. 
As Fenson et al. (1994) document, there is enormous variability in the development of both receptive and expressive vocabulary. But more surprising is the developmental asynchrony between the two.

</text>
