<text id="J48" category="" words="2010" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Peer Exclusion and Victimization: Processes That Mediate the Relation Between Peer Group Rejection and Children's Classroom Engagement and Achievement?" Author="Eric S. Buhs, Gary W. Ladd and Sarah L. Herald" PublicationDate="February 1, 2006 " SampledFrom="Journal of Educational Psychology Vol. 98, No. 1, p. 1 - 13" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?hid=112&sid=58f8ab5d-fca9-4f3f-abb1-231ea2567e5f%40sessionmgr114&vid=3">

Longitudinal data from a study of kindergarten through 5th graders were used to estimate a structural model in which chronic peer exclusion and chronic peer abuse were hypothesized to mediate the link between children's early peer rejection, later classroom engagement, and achievement. Peer exclusion and abuse were expected to predict changes in 2 forms of school engagement (classroom participation and school avoidance), and changes in both forms of engagement were expected to predict changes in achievement. The model fit the data well and lent support to the premise that distinct forms of peer maltreatment and classroom engagement mediate the link between early peer rejection and changes in children's achievement. Early peer rejection was associated with declining classroom participation and increasing school avoidance, but different forms of chronic peer maltreatment mediated these relations.
Whereas chronic peer exclusion principally mediated the link between peer rejection and classroom
participation, chronic peer abuse primarily mediated the link between rejection and school avoidance. Children's reduced classroom participation, more than gains in school avoidance, anteceded decrements in children's achievement.
The premise that peer group acceptance and rejection influences
children's development and adjustment has been a compelling
impetus for research on children's peer relationships since the
1930s (see Ladd, 2003). Since that time, a sizable body of empirical
findings has been assembled, much of which is consistent with
the inference that peer group rejection is a cause of children's
adjustment difficulties (see Ladd, 1999; MacDougall, Hymel,
Vaillancourt, &amp; Mercer, 2001; Parker &amp; Asher, 1987). Contributing
to this corpus of evidence were early investigations in which
investigators found that peer group rejection was concurrently
linked with child maladjustment (e.g., Koch, 1933; Northway,
1944) and recent longitudinal studies in which researchers reported
that childhood peer group rejection not only anteceded early- and
later emerging adjustment problems (Boivin, Hymel, &amp; Bukowski,
1995; Ladd, 1999) but also predicted these problems independently
of other potential risk factors (e.g., children's behavioral dispositions, and the like; Coie, Lochman, Terry, &amp; Hyman, 1992;
Ladd &amp; Burgess, 2001).
Among the most convincing evidence gathered to date are
findings that implicate peer group acceptance or rejection as an
antecedent of children's school adjustment problems (see Ladd,
2003; Parker &amp; Asher, 1987). The construct of peer acceptance/
rejection has been defined at the level of the peer group (e.g., in
contrast to friendship, which is defined at the level of the dyad),
and it has been construed as an attitudinal variable that reflects the
collective valence of group members' sentiments (i.e., liking,
disliking) toward individuals in the group (Buhs &amp; Ladd, 2001).
Thus, when administered in classrooms, measures of peer group
acceptance/rejection yield information about how well liked versus
disliked a child is, on average, by classmates. Low classroom peer
acceptance has been consistently linked with indicators of school
disengagement (e.g., negative school attitudes, school avoidance;
Ladd, 1990; Ladd, Kochenderfer, &amp; Coleman, 1997), and, relative
to other types of peer relationships, peer group rejection appears to
be one of the strongest predictors of academic readiness and
achievement (Buhs &amp; Ladd, 2001; Ladd, Birch, &amp; Buhs, 1999;
Ladd et al., 1997; Vandell &amp; Hembree, 1994).
Although these findings support the interpretation that peer
group rejection negatively impacts children's engagement and
achievement in the school environment, insufficient effort has
been devoted to understanding how this linkage is established or
develops over time. In part, this limitation stems from a lack of
theory about the processes through which peer group rejection may
affect children's involvement in learning opportunities and
achievement in classrooms. Only recently have investigators begun
to question how peer sentiments, themselves not directly
observable, can affect children's adjustment (Boivin &amp; Hymel, 1997; Buhs &amp; Ladd, 2001; Bukowski, Hoza, &amp; Boivin, 1993;
Coie, 1990; Wentzel &amp; Caldwell, 1997).
Toward this end, researchers have begun to formulate and
evaluate frameworks that identify specific mediating processes
that account for the association between peer group rejection and
children's school engagement and achievement. On the basis of
propositions advanced by Coie (1990), Buhs and Ladd (2001)
proposed a model in which it was hypothesized that the effects of
peer rejection on children's achievement is mediated through two
processes: (a) the negative behavioral treatment that rejected children
receive from peers and (b) resulting changes that such treatment
causes in children's classroom participation (see Figure 1).
The specific premises upon which this model was constructed can
be summarized as follows (see Buhs &amp; Ladd, 2001): First, peers
express the dislike they feel toward rejected children by treating
them more negatively than other classmates, and, once manifested,
these negative behaviors serve as visible markers of rejection for
both the larger peer group and for rejected children. Second, once
children are marked by maltreatment, or behavioral manifestations
of rejection, they become marginalized from classroom peer activities.
Marginalization occurs because, as peers become aware of
children who are often targeted for maltreatment, they tend not to
associate with these children or include them in classroom activities.
Moreover, rejected children disengage from classroom activities
as a way of avoiding further abuse. Third, disengagement
from classroom activities negatively impacts children's learning,
which ultimately leads to lower levels of achievement.
Preliminary empirical support for this model was obtained by
Buhs and Ladd (2001) with a sample of young children who were
identified at school entrance and followed from fall to spring of
their kindergarten school year. Results showed that children who
were rejected by their classmates in the fall of the school year were
more likely to be maltreated by classmates and that exposure to
these rejecting behaviors partially mediated the negative association
found between peer rejection in the fall of kindergarten and
changes in classroom participation over the course of the school
year. Furthermore, these findings also revealed that early peer
rejection was negatively related to later achievement and that this
association was partially mediated through peer maltreatment and
declining classroom participation, respectively.
Although illuminating, the Buhs and Ladd (2001) results were
limited in three important ways. First, because the construct of
peer maltreatment was evaluated as a latent variable, the findings
did not generate a high degree of specificity about the types of peer
maltreatment that may be most closely associated with children's classroom disengagement. The latent peer maltreatment variable
was constructed from three indicators of rejecting behaviors, including
being ignored or rebuffed by peers when attempting to
interact or enter activities (via a measure of unilateral entry bids),
being actively excluded from peer activities (peer exclusion), and
being verbally or physically harassed (peer abuse or victimization).
Measurement model results revealed that, although the latent negative
treatment variable contained information about all three
forms of maltreatment, exclusion had the highest lambda (loading)
of the three indicators. For this reason, the investigators speculated
that, as children began school, exclusion might be a more powerful
mediator of the link between peer rejection, declining classroom
participation, and underachievement.
Whether exclusion is the principal mediator between rejection
and classroom disengagement, and whether this inference generalizes
beyond the first year of formal schooling - and to other
forms of school disengagement - remains to be evaluated. Note
that Buhs and Ladd (2001) hypothesized that classroom disengagement
was a consequence not only of peers' exclusionary behaviors
but also of children's propensity to avoid contexts in which they
are likely to be abused by peers. This logic implies that there are
two pathways to classroom disengagement that emanate from
peers' rejecting behaviors: First, children become less active participants
in classroom activities because their opportunities to do
so are increasingly restricted as a result of peer exclusion. Second,
children who are harassed by peers seek to avoid classrooms (or
the school context in general) as a means of escaping further abuse.
Whereas exclusion by peers is construed as a cause of reduced
participation in classroom activities, abuse is seen as increasing
children's motivation to avoid the classroom or school context.
Notice that these two pathways imply that different forms of
classroom disengagement evolve from each form of peer maltreatment.
This observation illustrates a second limitation of the Buhs
and Ladd (2001) study: Only one form of classroom engagement
(i.e., classroom participation) was examined as a mediator between
peer maltreatment and children's achievement. A better test of the
Buhs and Ladd model would entail an empirical evaluation of the
following predictions: (a) decrements in children's classroom participation
are better predicted by peer exclusion than by peer
abuse, and increments in children's school avoidance are better
predicted by peer abuse than by peer exclusion; and (b) the link
between peer exclusion and achievement is mediated through
classroom participation, and the link between peer abuse and
achievement is mediated through school avoidance.
Third, the Buhs and Ladd (2001) results were limited by features
of their longitudinal design and assessment plan. Although it was
proposed that peer rejection incites peer maltreatment, the measures
of these constructs were obtained concurrently. A more
rigorous test of this premise requires a design and assessment plan
in which the former variable is assessed prior to the latter, thereby
establishing temporal precedence for peer rejection. Furthermore,
because Buhs and Ladd (2001) conducted their study within a
single school year (kindergarten), it remains to be determined
whether the forms of peer maltreatment that originate from early
peer rejection endure over time (e.g., across grade levels) and, if
so, whether children who are exposed to sustained (chronic) rather
than transient maltreatment are at greater risk for classroom disengagement
and delayed scholastic progress. On the basis of logic
that originates within theories of psychological risk, stress, and
support (Dohrenwend &amp; Dohrenwend, 1981; Johnson, 1988; Ladd
&amp; Troop-Gordon, 2003), it was hypothesized that prolonged peer
maltreatment increases the probability that children will disengage
from classrooms (or the school context) and that increasing disengagement
impairs children's achievement. Thus, it was predicted
that longer rather than shorter histories of peer maltreatment,
after controlling for contemporary exclusion or abuse, would
mediate the link between early peer rejection and later classroom
disengagement.
Thus, the principal purpose of this investigation was to address
prior limitations by implementing the proposed innovations and
gathering data that would reflect on the aforementioned hypotheses
(see Figure 1). In contrast to the Buhs and Ladd (2001)
short-term longitudinal design, we conducted a 6-year prospective
longitudinal study that spanned the school years of kindergarten
through fifth grade. The assessment plan was expanded to include
measures of peer group acceptance/rejection, peer exclusion, peer
abuse, classroom participation, school avoidance, and achievement.
Peer group acceptance/rejection was defined as the extent to
which individuals were liked/disliked by classroom peers and
indexed with averaged sociometric ratings that were obtained from
classmates during children's first year in grade school (kindergarten). 
One form of peer maltreatment - peer exclusion - was defined
as the extent to which children were the target of peers'
nonaggressive rejecting behaviors, including behaviors such as
ignoring, avoiding, or refusing to associate with them in the
classroom context. The other form of peer maltreatment - peer
abuse - was defined as the extent to which children were recipients
of classmate's aggressive and harassing behaviors (i.e., the
target of confrontive aggressive acts such as verbal and physical
aggression). Measures of the two peer maltreatment constructs
were obtained in kindergarten and every year thereafter until grade
5, and separate indicators of chronic versus current peer maltreatment
were created so that the predictive efficacy of chronic peer
maltreatment could be estimated while controlling for current peer
maltreatment. The constructs used to represent aspects of classroom
disengagement were termed classroom participation and
school avoidance. Classroom participation encompassed two aspects
of children's classroom behavior that have been termed
autonomous and cooperative participation (see Buhs &amp; Ladd,
2001; Ladd et al., 1999; Ladd, Buhs, &amp; Seid, 2000). Both forms of
participation have been shown to be indicators of classroom engagement
and predictors of achievement. Autonomous participation
refers to classroom behaviors that are characterized by initiative
or self-directedness (e.g., starting activities, working
independently, seeking challenges), and cooperative participation
refers to classroom behaviors that are conducted in a socially
responsible manner (i.e., adhering to classroom rules and role
expectations; see Ford, 1985; Wentzel, 1991). School avoidance
was defined as the degree to which children expressed a desire to
avoid school and engaged in school-avoidant behaviors.

</text>
