<text id="J50" category="" words="2003" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Updated" Author="Updated" PublicationDate="Updated" SampledFrom="Updated" WebAddress="Updated">

Character education 
The field of character education is much more difficult to chart. The term has been mostly used in the USA, but for a longer time than the term moral education. There was a large interest in educating for character development starting at the end of the nineteenth century and continuing through the first four decades of the twentieth century, essentially interrupted by World War II (McClellan, 1999). It was mostly a traditional approach, focusing on the inculcation of desirable habits. Even John Dewey (1922) defined character as the 'interpenetration of habits' (p. 38) and the effect of consequences of actions upon such habits. This behavioural orientation has an important legacy for the development of the field.
After World War II, there was a vacuum in US education concerning educating for positive youth development. But with the social and political upheaval of the 1960s, a resurgent interest in this age-old challenge arose. In response to societal questioning of moral values and policies, numerous approaches to socializing youth were proposed. One was moral education, as described above. Another was values clarification, a relatively short-lived but nonetheless highly influential approach that focused on promoting self-discovery but with an implicit philosophy of moral relativism. Yet another was the rediscovery of character education, often with a strong Aristotelian justification. In fact, most of the character education work blurred the line between Aristotelian virtues ethics and psychological behaviourism, in part because of the somewhat overlapping reliance on the acquisition of habits and in part because of the under-emphasis on theory in the more practice-oriented field of character education. An exception was the study group The Foundations for Moral Education and Character Development which operated in the first half of the 1980s and resulted in a three-volume set of essays - Knowles &amp; McClean, 1992; McClean, Ellrod, Schindler &amp; Mann, 1986; Ryan &amp; McClean, 1986. Despite this extensive body of work, these volumes unfortunately remain obscure and are rarely cited. Recently, Lapsley and Narvaez (2006) have published a broad theoretical review of the conceptual roots of character education.
In the early 1990s, however, the field of character education changed. A pair of attempts to create a national agenda for character education brought together some strange bedfellows under the 'big tent' philosophy of banding together to serve the USA through promoting the positive development of youth, predominantly in schools. The watershed was reached in 1992 when, within a few months of each other, the Josephson Institute launched what later become Character Counts and the first planning meetings of the eventual Character Education Partnership were held. At both meetings were experts with quite diverse perspectives (including representatives of the moral education approach). Through these and other events and initiatives, character education was broadened to include a wider range of pedagogical and philosophical perspectives. However, it remained largely a-theoretical and non-scientific, at least as compared with the moral education movement. More recently, however, a sizeable body of school-based outcome studies has generated an empirical data-base for demonstrating the potential effectiveness of character education (Berkowitz &amp; Bier, 2005).
Character education remains a phenomenon difficult to define, as it includes a very wide range of outcome goals, pedagogical strategies and philosophical orientations. There is substantial overlap between the character education and moral education 'camps', evidenced by a large number of North American members of the Association for Moral Education who also belong to the Character Education Partnership. In fact, numerous character educators have incorporated moral development into their character education models. Lickona (1991) emphasizes the promotion of moral reasoning through peer discussion. Berkowitz and Bier (2005) report that effective character education programs frequently target moral development and implement moral discussion in classrooms. Lickona and Davidson (2005) include critical thinking as one of their targeted '8 strengths of character'. Most notably, the Character Education Partnership's flagship document Eleven principles sourcebook (Beland, 2003), offers a lengthy discussion of moral development and education as part of its focus on the cognitive side of character. Nonetheless there is an uneasy tension between those who hold to a theory-based approach to promoting moral cognitive capacities and those who largely a-theoretically want to promote self-motivated competent moral agents.
Moral vs. character education 
There are a few key differences between moral education (defined here as cognitive-developmental approaches to moral education) and character education, most notably that:
* Moral education tends to be theory-based and character education tends to be a-theoretical. Moral education is heavily influenced by and derived from cognitive-structural models of stages of moral reasoning development (Piaget, 1965; Damon, 1976; Kohlberg, 1976). 
* Moral education, in its current guise dates to the 1960s, remaining relatively stable over time. Character education has been evolving repeatedly for well over a century (McClellan, 1999). 
* Moral education typically has a narrow focus (the development of moral reasoning structures). The exception to this is the infrequently implemented Just Community School model which attempts to expand the narrow moral reasoning development focus to incorporate the development of moral behaviour, values and emotions (Kohlberg &amp; Hersh, 1977), although moral reasoning development remains the primary outcome variable even in Just Community studies. Character education, on the other hand, has a very comprehensive and diverse set of targeted outcomes. Similarly, moral education relies on a very narrow range of pedagogical strategies and character education has a very broad and variable range of strategies (Berkowitz &amp; Bier, 2005). 
* Moral education, as the term suggests, is more focally a moral domain than is character education. Moral education focuses on the development of justice reasoning, and, insofar as it incorporates more recent work on relational morality, reasoning about interpersonal care. Character education, because it takes a very broad approach, often blurs the line between moral concepts and other non-moral but related concepts. Berkowitz (1997) attempted to delineate the latter as 'foundational characteristics', suggesting they are not specifically moral (e.g. perseverance, loyalty, courage) but serve to support moral agency. They derive their moral status, if they acquire any, from the moral or immoral ends to which they are applied (i.e. do you persevere to serve good or evil? Are you loyal to a moral or immoral cause?). More recently, Lickona and Davidson (2005) have offered a new model that identifies two sides of character (moral character and performance character), that approximate the distinction made by Berkowitz. However, Lickona and Davidson argue that they are equal in status, rather than one being derivative of the other, and need to be equivalent goals of character education. For many moral educators, the incorporation of some of these non-moral concepts is a salient reason for distancing themselves from the character education field, while for many character educators this inclusive duality connects them more centrally to the academic side of schools and the central mission of schooling (i.e. educating and developing the whole child). 
* Moral education comes from a liberal, social science tradition and character education comes predominantly from a classic, traditional and at times philosophical tradition. This is an overly simplistic dichotomy, however, for (1), as noted above, theory has a stronger place in moral education than in character education; (2) character education has become a very eclectic field and actually incorporates some of moral education; and (3) character education at times is a-theoretical and at times relies on varying combinations of virtue ethics and psychological behaviourism. Nonetheless, as a trend, this still remains accurate. Kohlberg (1981) wrote extensively about the liberal tradition upon which his work was based. The progressive education movement, and Dewey in particular, strongly influenced his applications to education. Moral education methods tend toward liberal, democratic forms (e.g. the Just Community Schools were radical experiments in democratizing schools, and moral dilemma discussions are decidedly empowering and democratic in nature). Traditional character education, on the other hand, has relied more on conservative and hierarchical methods (e.g. adult advocacy, direct teaching, presentations of inspirational cultural artefacts). Perhaps this is a reason why some important educational models based more on progressive roots (e.g. the Child Development Project and the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional Learning) have avoided defining themselves as 'character education' programs (Watson et al., 1989; http://www.casel.org). 
* Moral education, in part because it has strong roots in social science, tends to have a much stronger empirical base and orientation. More recently, in part because of funding by and legislation from the USA federal government, the empirical base of character education has grown. It is worth noting, however, that when attempts are made to review this research (Beland, 2003; Berkowitz &amp; Bier, 2005) they frequently incorporate moral education research. In fact, in their comprehensive review of the character education outcome research, Berkowitz and Bier report that the most commonly supported outcome of character education is socio-moral reasoning development. This is a direct product of the extensive research on Kohlbergian moral dilemma discussions. Furthermore, two of the 33 supported character education programs they identify are moral dilemma discussions and the Just Community Schools program, both moral development models. 
Citizenship and civic education 
Citizenship 
In one sense, citizenship is a legal category, identifying one's legal status, entitled rights and responsibilities, as a member of a society. In a deeper sense, however, it is much more than that. In democratic societies, fair procedures (the rule of law) and constitutional rights are designed to maintain equality among citizens but also to ensure the active role of citizens in contributing to society, partly through participation in democratic decision-making. Thus, a key aspect of democratic citizenship is the capacity to 'move beyond one's individual self-interest and to be committed to the well-being of some larger group of which one is a member' (Sherrod, Flanagan, &amp; Youniss, 2002, p. 265), which includes the ability (and the motivation) to follow debates on current public policy issues and to participate in local and national politics. 'For the purpose of clarity, we use the term civic competence to refer to an understanding of how government functions, and the acquisition of behaviours that allow citizens to participate in government and permit individuals to meet, discuss, and collaborate to promote their interests within a framework of democratic principles' (Youniss et al., 2002, p.124). This conception is consistent with Dewey's view that democracy is not only a form of government (which would require educated voters) but also a mode of living together (which requires citizens prepared to solve differences in mutual deliberation in a respectful way and to engage responsibly in the common interest). Informed and effective citizenship in a democracy must be nurtured. There is a tension between a narrow definition of citizenship as a legal status, a middle definition of citizenship as knowledge of and skills for participation in the political sphere, and a broader definition of citizenship as a combination of knowledge about society, skills for participation in society and dispositions to engage constructively in public efforts to promote the common good.
Citizenship education 
For any society, the question must arise as to how to instil citizenship in each subsequent generation, however citizenship is defined. Here we enter the field of citizenship education. Not surprisingly, there is variation in what this endeavour is called (e.g. citizenship education, civic education, political socialization, democratic education). For the purposes of this discussion we will call it citizenship education, although we will make a distinction below between citizenship education and civic education. We will not attempt to give a full account of approaches to citizenship education in this article (see Parker, 2003, for one such attempt), but rather will highlight some controversial standpoints and suggest a possible consensus.
It is important to note that there is a common and often unreflective complex interplay between the outcomes of citizenship education (i.e. citizenship, differentially defined as knowledge, skills and dispositions) and the methods of citizenship education (e.g. direct instruction, direct experience with politics, indirect experience with public service, etc.).
On the conceptual level, there has been a longstanding tension in educational theory and research between approaches directed towards knowledge delivery and approaches directed toward practice, active participation and experiential learning as the means to competent citizenship.

</text>
