<text id="J51" category="" words="2012" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Critical thinking and informal logic" Author="Timothy A. Crews-Anderson" PublicationDate="2007" SampledFrom="ebook -- Humanities-Ebooks.ac.uk  pp. 10-22" WebAddress="http://lib.myilibrary.com/Open.aspx?id=204061&loc=&srch=undefined&src=0">

Before delving into definitions of the basic elements of critical thinking, a brief overview of the structure of these elements will perhaps be helpful. The discus- sion offered in this book will focus primarily on the argument , which itself con- sists of at least two propositions . All arguments are either deductive or inductive , and an understanding of this distinction is required for criticism. The success of deductive arguments is evaluated in terms of what philosophers call validity and soundness , while inductive arguments are rated along a spectrum from weak to strong. Many of these words are familiar to most, but it is likely that they are associated with a number of different possible meanings. To remove these potential ambiguities, precise definitions will be introduced. The importance of a thorough familiarity with these concepts cannot be overstated.
Propositions 
The precise nature of propositions is a matter of some philosophical debate, but for present purposes, it will suffice to define a proposition as a claim or asser- tion that affirms or denies that something is the case . All propositions are either true or false, and no proposition can be both true and false. Furthermore, they are the only sort of thing that can properly be called true or false. Put simply, propositions are the sole bearers of truth and falsehood, and as will become clear shortly, this feature is of crucial importance for identifying them in ordinary language. Here are some examples of propositions.
All triangles have three sides. 
Either George W. Bush won the U.S. election, or John Kerry won it. 
People ought not to lie.
If today is Wednesday, then tomorrow is Thursday. 
All circles are squares.
The majority of propositions that one encounters come in the form of a declarative sentence, but it is important to note that a proposition is not identi- cal to the sentence that expresses it. A proposition is that to which a declarative sentence refers. For this reason, multiple sentences may express or refer to the same proposition.
George W. Bush won the U.S. election. 
The U.S. election was won by George W. Bush. 
George W. Bush was the winner of the U.S. election.
It is perhaps helpful to think of a declarative sentence as pointing to a kind of abstract object. It is this sort of object that philosophers have termed a proposition. 
Non-propositional language: exclamations, commands, and questions 
There are many uses of language that do not express propositions. As noted above, all propositions are either true or false, so whether a particular phrase or sentence can be considered to be true or false will determine if it indeed expresses a proposition. Consider the following.
What are we doing here?
To decide whether this question expresses a proposition, simply ask whether it makes sense to say that, what are we doing here? is either true or false. Clearly it does not, and just as clearly this sentence does not express a proposition. Another tactic is to add, It is the case that in front of the phrase in question and consider whether this new construction makes sense. If it does, then it is very likely that the phrase expresses a proposition. If it does not, then it is likely a non-propositional use of language. Consider.
It is the case that, 'what are we doing here'.
This is, of course, nonsensical. By contrast, consider the following propositions.
It is the case that all triangles have three sides.
It is the case that, either George W. Bush won the U.S. election, or John Kerry won it.
It is the case that, people ought not to lie.
It is the case that, if today is Wednesday, then tomorrow is Thursday.
The concern here is not whether the constructed sentence is true or false but whether it makes sense. Consider a false proposition.
It is the case that, all circles are squares.
Obviously this claim is false, but it does make sense, and thus the phrase all circles are squares expresses a proposition. Other non-propositional uses of language include commands and exclamations. Go to bed. Oh, no! A quick consideration of each of these constructions reveals that they are neither true nor false and thus do not express propositions. Note that the following do not make sense. It is the case that, go to bed. It is the case that, oh, no! This provides the basis for a general rule. Questions, commands, and exclama- tions do not express propositions . They are non-propositional uses of language. Questions of interpretation: rhetorical questions as assertions and commands as normative claims It should not come as a surprise that there are exceptions to this rule. In some cases certain questions or commands can be interpreted as actually expressing propositional language. A rhetorical question is a question that is meant to have an obvious answer and can be interpreted and reformulated as a declarative sentence that expresses a proposition . Consider the meaning of the question who won the 2007 election?  in the following.
Indeed, there are many propositions for which this is the case. The third is also a difficult claim to prove. What kinds of evidence and information would be required to support it? Clearly, it would be extremely difficult to remove all doubt, but it might very well be possible to offer strong supporting evidence for or against it. Such evidence would likely include historical documents, eyewitness accounts of Trumans decision-making process, etc. Coming to at least a cursory understanding of the burden of proof that a pro- ponent of a claim must meet is absolutely fundamental to a good critical analysis. As the discussion moves from propositions to arguments, it will be very helpful to keep this in mind. For the sake of concision, propositions will often be represented as capital letters throughout this text. P is the default designation for a proposition, Q is a proposition that is not P, R is a proposition that is neither P nor Q, and so on. To express the negation of a proposition, a not will simply be placed in front of the letter. If P is the cat is on the mat; then Not P is simply the cat is not on the mat or it is not the case that the cat is on the mat. Keep in mind that the negation of a denial is a possibility. If P is people ought not to lie; then Not P would be it is not the case that people ought not to lie or simply people ought to lie. Finally, the negation of a particular proposition always bears the opposite truth value of that proposition, so if P is true, then Not Pis false and vice versa. 
Arguments and Inferences 
The English word argument has many meanings, and when most people hear
it, they think of a (perhaps heated) disagreement. It is very likely that they do not immediately think of philosophy or critical thinking. Perhaps they should however, because the argument, or rather a particular kind of argument, is the philosophers bread and butter. In philosophy, an argument is a group of two or more propositions that express an inference. An inference , in turn, is a mental
process of linking propositions by offering support to one proposition on the basis of one more other propositions . The conclusion of an argument is that single proposition which is supported by other propositions , and a premise is a proposition that provides a basis of support for the conclusion . Consider the following argument. 
P1   : If you look into the abyss, then the abyss will change you. 
P 2 : The abyss did not change you. 
C: Therefore, you did not look in to the abyss. 
In this example, P 1 and P 2 are premises, and C is the conclusion. All three propo- sitions taken together are the argument. The inference, however, does not lie here on the screen. It is a mental activity, and as such, it occurs in the mind. Indeed, the inference is an instance of the reasoning activity for which human beings are so famous. Recognizing the differences between good inferences, those in which the premises provide adequate support for the conclusion, and bad ones, those in which the premises are inadequate to this task, is the essence of critical thinking and the primary focus of logic.
Deductive and Inductive Reasoning 
A deductive argument is one in which it is claimed that the premises provide a guarantee of the truth of the conclusion. In a deductive argument, the premises are intended to provide support for the conclusion that is so certain that, if the premises are true, it would be impossible for the conclusion to be false. Because successful deductive arguments are those in which the conclusion is com- pletely guaranteed by the premises, the conclusion must be contained within the premises. The conclusion cannot go beyond what the premises implicitly assert. For this reason, deductive arguments are usually found in inferences that follow from definitions, mathematics and rules of formal logic. The following are examples of deductive arguments.
An inductive argument is an argument in which it is claimed that the premises provide reasons supporting the probable truth of the conclusion . In an inductive argument, the premises are intended only to be so strong that, if they are true, then it is unlikely that the conclusion is false. They can appeal to any consideration that might be thought relevant to the probability of the truth of the conclusion. Inductive arguments, therefore, can take very wide ranging forms, including arguments dealing with statistical data, generalisations from past experience, appeals to signs, evidence or authority, and causal relationships. Please note that while causal reasoning is a complex and important part of any robust discussion of induction, there is simply no way to do it justice within the scope of this book. 
The real difference between the deductive and inductive arguments comes from the sort of relation the author or expositor of the argument takes there to be between the premises and the conclusion. If the author of the argument believes that the truth of the premises definitely establishes the truth of the conclusion due to definition, logical entailment or mathematical necessity, then the argument is deductive . If the author of the argument does not think that the truth of the premises definitely establishes the truth of the conclusion, but nonetheless believes that their truth provides good reason to believe that the conclusion is true, then the argument is inductive . It is usually fairly easy to decide whether an argument is deductive or inductive, but because it requires insight into what the arguer is thinking, it can occasionally be difficult or controversial.
Form versus Content
Put simply, the form of an argument is its logical structure or the manner in which the premises offer support for the conclusion. Since the form describes the relationship between the premises and the conclusion, it cannot be true or false (remember that only propositions can be true or false). The content of an argument is the group of actual propositions that comprise the argument. It is with respect to content alone that one may consider truth and falsehood. Consider the following arguments. 
Notice what is similar and what is different about these four arguments. What is similar about these arguments is their form . What is different about these argu- ments is their content . In the last example, the actual propositions have been replaced with capital letters. This makes the point that it is possible to consider the form of argument without any reference to actual propositions or content. This is important because the form of an argument is the most direct expression of the inference. Generally speaking, the study of logic primarily concerns itself with evaluations of the form of arguments and the reasoning process that they involve.
Recall that a deductive argument is one in which it is claimed that the premises guarantee the conclusion with absolute certainty.

</text>
