<text id="J52" category="" words="2019" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Contemporary philosophy of religion" Author="Steven Duncan " PublicationDate="2007" SampledFrom="ebook-- Humanities-Ebooks.co.uk" WebAddress="http://lib.myilibrary.com/Open.aspx?id=204044&loc=&srch=undefined&src=0">

Philosophy as traditionally understood may be defined as the branch of intellec - tual inquiry that deals with the most general and fundamental questions about the nature of reality and human life insofar as those problems lie beyond the compe- tence of the special sciences to raise or resolve. Defined in this way, many people do not want there be such a thing as philosophy, or at any rate want as little of it as possible.   However, despite the concerted efforts of many movements in twentieth century philosophy, from logical positivism to post-modernism, this traditional conception of philosophy has proven remarkably resilient and philosophers continue to discuss the big questionswith ever less embarrassment as the mid-twentieth century slips farther below the horizon of living memory. Among the questions that have exercised philosophers of the last sixty years, that of the existence of God has been one of the most hotly contested. It is the debate over that question that will be subject of this book.
Philosophy of Religion is the branch of philosophy that deals with that ques- tion, as well as related questions concerning the nature of God, the meaning of religious language and the immortality of the soul, among others, insofar as these questions are amenable to discussion from the point of view of neutral, impartial rational inquiry. Unlike other &amp;#8220;second-order&amp;#8221; philosophical pursuits, however, the philosophy of religion does not take religion as such, i.e. actual religious belief and practice, as its subject-matter. Instead, philosophy of religion is con- centrated primarily on the metaphysical truth-claims implied or presupposed by religious belief and practice properly so-called and attempts to bring these to the surface, analyze their central concepts, clarify their implications and attempt to evaluate their truth or falsity from the rational point of view. Since most reli- gions make some attempt to do this from within the perspective of belief in the form of dogmatic theology, it is religion as theologically articulated, rather than as lived belief and practice, that is primarily of interest to philosophers of reli- gion, regardless of whether or not they are sympathetic to religion.
The religious tradition of the West, which for our purposes here includes the Middle East and Persia, is known as monotheism , which is centrally character- ized by the thesis, shared by Christians, Jews and Muslims, that there exists one supreme being, the personal and providential creator of the universe who reveals Himself through the prophets and whose mighty deeds are recorded in canoni- cal scriptures such as the Bible or the Holy Qu&amp;#8217;ran. Although these religions diverge with regard to which prophets and scriptures they accept and differ with regard to their distinctive religious teachings, all of them trace themselves to the fundamental revelation of God to Abraham and claim to worship the same God. Furthermore, as theologically articulated, they largely agree in their overall metaphysical conception of God. It is this conception of God, known as theism , which is the primary object of analysis in the philosophy of religion and which is thought to express the fundamental metaphysical truth-claims common to all the Western monotheistic faiths. The theological consensus among monotheists goes deeper than this, however; the mainstream conception of the theistic God, shared by the major figures of all three traditions, is nowadays referred to as Classical Theism or Perfect Being theology.   According to this view, God is characterized as the &amp;#8220;being a greater than which cannot be conceived&amp;#8221;, i.e. as the most perfect being in prin- ciple, unsurpassable even by Himself. Reflecting to some extent an element of Platonic inheritance, God is thought of as a being so fully and completely real- ized in every respect as to be immutable, impassable and utterly self-sufficient in such a way as to require nothing outside of Himself in order to exist. At the same time, God is a personal being, possessing intellect and will and thus capable of rational agency. One way in which God has exercised this rational agency is in the creation of the observable universe from nothing pre-existent, whether this is conceived of as eternally existing matter or the very substance of God Himself. Rather, God created the world ex nihilo simply through willing that it should exist; further, given that the observable universe is created from nothing, it requires not only to be created but to be conserved by God at every moment at which it exists. Thus, despite being wholly independent of and transcendent to the observable universe He has created, God is immanent in presence and power to every point in space and time. In the context of the divine perfection, we must therefore attribute omnipotence, omniscience and perfect goodness to God, which attributes are reflecting in and testified to by what He has made. In addition, most Classical Theists include necessary existence as among the divine attributes, maintaining that God, being independent and self-sufficient, contains within Himself the cause, reason or explanation for His existence. In the context of the divine perfection, Classical Theists deny that God is subject either to coming-to-be or passing-away. Being incapable of ever having come into existence or of ever going out of existence, God thus possesses infinity and eternity. However, Classical Theists are divided over whether this eternity should be understood as existence for an infinite period of time in both directions or as constituted by a unique, non-temporal mode of existence outside of time. In addition, some modern exponents of necessary existence as one of the central divine attributes maintain that it ought to be understood as logically necessary existence and thus as entailing that Gods non-existence, properly understood, is logically impossible or self-contradictory. The classical ontological argument for Gods existence, to found in Anselm, Descartes and moderns such as Norman Malcolm and Alvin Plantinga, is an expression of this tendency, though not all theistic philosophers, not even all Classical Theists, endorse this idea.   Much work has been done to clarify and defend the Classical Theist concep- tion of God, as well as to evaluate it, especially in comparison to other, alterna- tive conceptions of God on offer in contemporary philosophy of religion.
We cannot go into all this here; however, we will focus on the central question of the philosophy of religion, namely, the question of Gods existence, from the philo- sophical point of view. For our purposes here, we may further divide this topic into two more specific issues. First, there is the question of whether or not there are any rationally compelling (or at least intellectually respectable) arguments, evidence or grounds for believing that God exists. Theistic philosophers of religion generally defend an affirmative answer to this question, whereas atheistic philosophers of religion critique those defences and conclude that there is no good reason for believing that God exists. Secondly, there is the problem of evil, which examines the main piece of evidence for positive atheism, i.e. the affirmative judgment that there is no God. Since the mid-twentieth century, the problem of evil has been one of the most written on philosophical topics in the English-speaking world. No account of contemporary philosophy of religion can fail to deal with this issue at least in broad outline.
Three Competing Paradigms in Contemporary Philosophy of Religion I will survey contemporary philosophy of religion in accordance with the histor ical thesis I advanced in my earlier, more comprehensive treatment of this mate- rial called Analytic Philosophy of Religion: Its History since 1955 .   According to that treatment, contemporary philosophy of religion is best characterized as reflecting the interaction between three overlapping but successive paradigms in the philosophy of religion called Deductivism, Inductivism and post-Deductivism respectively. While each of these approaches to the questions of Gods existence and problem of evil has adherents today, each also enjoyed a period in which it was the prime focus of attention within the discipline. Deductivism, which was initiated by the neo-Thomists and which drew the fire of the analytic atheists, was dominant in the crucial decade of the 1950s in which contemporary philosophy of religion emerged, emphasized the construction and evaluation of deductive proofs of Gods existence, and gave rise to the deductive Argument from Evil intended to prove Gods non-existence. In response to theistic critiques of the Argument from Evil, the discussion of Gods existence slowly shifted from the evaluation of deductive proofs for Gods existence to the question of whether or not Gods existence was reasonable to believe on the basis of our total evidence; this initiated the Inductivist paradigm that culminated in Richard Swinburnes Bayesian argument for the existence of God. Although what I call the post- Deductivist paradigm emerged about the same time as Inductivism, it did not enjoy its heyday until the 1990s, when Alvin Plantinga proposed his Reformed Epistemology; as the core of a new kind of;Christian philosophy.
Given the constraints of the Insights series, I will only be able to barely sum- marize the stages and movements that characterize contemporary philosophy of religion, though I hope to do enough to pique the readers interest in consult- ing the aforementioned text as well as the many fine books referenced here and listed in the bibliography. We will begin by looking at the historical background of contemporary philosophy of religion and the emergence of the Deductivist paradigm. 
Prior to the emergence of modern analytic philosophy, British and American philosophy was dominated by the tradition of German Idealist thought inspired by Hegel. This school conceived of the ultimate reality as an impersonal, self- developing absolute mind or spirit identical with but not exhausted by the observ- able universe. Given this conception of things, it is not surprising that thinkers in this school were largely opposed to traditional monotheism and rejected tra- ditional Christianity as anything more than a kind of mythical expression of the truth that finds its full and literal expression only in the categories of Hegelian metaphysics.   Although Christianity did manage to find defenders even within the Idealist school, what was then known as philosophy of religion was largely just the project of reinterpreting traditional religious ideas within the framework of Hegelian philosophy, where those ideas ceased to have anything like their traditional significance.
By the turn of the twentieth century, the inevitable reaction against Idealism and Hegelianism in particular had begun to set in. Under the broad-based banner of neo-Realism, philosophers in Europe, the United Kingdom and the United States began to urge a return to a less arcane philosophical perspective, one more amenable to common sense. One of the contending new realist posi- tions was the philosophical and theological system known as neo-Thomism; another, which grew out of British neo-Realism, gave rise to what became known as Analytic philosophy. It is in the confrontation of these two schools that contemporary philosophy of religion and its characteristic problems and issues emerged. 
Neo-Thomism was a movement that began in the Catholic Church and remained largely within its confines. Although a Thomistic revival was already well under - way by the early decades of the nineteenth century, the movement took its primary inspiration from two events that occurred later in the century. The First Vatican Council (1870-71) is remembered now primarily for its definition of the dogma of papal infallibility; in fact, however, that decree was only part of the realization of its more central aim, which was to re-affirm counter-Reformation Catholic theology in the context of the challenges of the modern world. Decrees were also issued against modernism, rationalism, semi-rationalism and evolutionary naturalism.   At the same time, fideism and traditionalism were also con - demned and among the positive decrees of the Council was the thesis that Gods existence was capable of rational proof independently of the claims of faith. In 1879, Pope Leo XIII issued his first encyclical, Aeterni Patris , in which he directed that all Catholic seminaries and universities should base their philosophy and theology curriculum on the teachings of St. Thomas Aquinas.   This encyclical had the effect of making Aquinas the official theologian of the Catholic Church and spawned the neo-Thomist movement that would dominate the Catholic philosophy and theology for the next eighty years.

</text>
