<text id="J53" category="" words="2010" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Dynamics of Sociality" Author="MICHAEL E. BRATMAN" PublicationDate="January 1, 2006 " SampledFrom="Midwest Studies In Philosophy Vol. 30 Issue 1, p1-15" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?hid=112&sid=b13d81c9-d6f0-4d31-947e-86a39a69572f%40sessionmgr112&vid=3">

I am going to try to make some progress toward a model of our sociality that
focuses on both interpersonal structures at a time and characteristic forms of
construction of our sociality over time. I begin with some ideas about shared
agency that I have defended elsewhere; I then turn to the dynamics of our
sociality.This leads me to a complex view of the relation between shared intention
and obligations of each to each not to opt out. While such obligations are not
essential to shared intention, they are a common and important aspect of standard
ways in which we construct our sociality over time in response to systematic
problems of stability and depth, problems that arise as we seek shared agency
and shared deliberation in the face of our different reasons and our different
judgments.
SHARED INTENTION AND SHARED VALUING.
Suppose that we are building a house together. Our interrelated activities are
structured and organized by relevant intentional structures.This is why it is true, in
the relevant sense, that we are building the house together. These intentional
structures normally involve something like a shared intention to build the house, as
well as related forms of shared valuing - in favor, for example, of earthquake
preparedness. Our shared intention and our related shared valuings help coordinate
and organize not only our interconnected activities, but also our associated
planning, bargaining, and shared deliberation.
What is shared intention? As I see it, in a basic case you and I share an
intention to J when, in a public context, we each intend that we J by way of each of
our intentions that we J and their meshing subplans, and the continued persistence
of our intentions involves a recognized interdependence.
The idea is to understand shared intention to act in two stages.We first appeal
to a background theory of the intentions of individuals - as I see it, this will be what
I have called the planning theory. The planning theory sees intentions as playing
basic roles in forms of planning central to our abilities to achieve complex goals
across time and interpersonally. It aims at understanding intention primarily in
terms of regularities and norms that are associated with these coordinating, organizing
roles. In the second stage we then apply to intentions so understood a theory
of intention sharing, a theory that appeals to certain characteristic contents and
interrelations among such intentions in a public context. Central ideas for this
theory of sharing will include ideas of intentions of an individual in favor of a joint
activity, intentions that subplans come to mesh, semantically interlocking intentions
(i.e., intentions that are about each other's roles in thought and action),
recognized interdependence of intentions, and public accessibility.The theory tries
to see characteristic forms of functioning of shared intentions in cross-temporal
and social organization of action and planning as following from the basic theory
of intention, together with appeal to the special contents, interrelations, and contexts
that characterize intention sharing.
It is important that this theory goes beyond a simple appeal to public accessibility,
or some version of common knowledge or the like, and appeals to semantic,
causal, epistemic, and explanatory interconnections across the relevant intentions
of the participants. This helps it explain forms of rational mutual responsiveness, over time, on the part of each to developments in the intentions of other participants.
So, for example, my intention that we J by way of your analogous intention
and meshing subplans imposes rational pressure on me, as time goes by, to fill in
my subplans in ways that fit with and support yours as you fill in your subplans;
and vice versa. This pressure derives from the basic rational pressure on me for
means-end coherent and consistent plans, given the ways in which your intentions
enter into the content of my intention.
Turn now to shared valuing - for example, our shared valuing, in the context
of our shared house building, of earthquake preparedness. My proposal here
has been that this is, in a basic case, a shared policy about relevant practical
reasoning - where policies are intentions that are appropriately general in their
contents. For us to value X is, in a basic case, for us to have a shared policy to treat
X as justifying in shared deliberation in which we intend to engage and by which
we intend to be guided.We say in what such a shared policy consists by extending
the account of shared intention to the case in which the content of the relevant
policy-like intentions of the participants is our treating X in this way. So, in a basic
case, you and I have a shared policy of treating X as justifying in relevant shared
deliberation when, in a public context, we each have a policy (i.e., a general
intention) that favors that treatment by us by way of meshing subplans, these
policies are interlocking, and their persistence is appropriately interdependent and
recognized as such.
Such shared valuing is different from, and has a complex relation to commonality
in value judgment.There are two general considerations that support this
point.The first concerns individual agency. Here the basic point is that even in the
case of an individual agent there is a distinction between judging something good
or valuable, and valuing it. As Gilbert Harman notes, I might judge listening to
Mozart to be valuable but not value it. Further, if I do value X the significance or
weight that my valuing accords to X may be quite different from what I judge to be
its value. Finally, I may reasonably hold my value judgments to certain constraints
of intersubjective rational convergence. Given my recognition of thoughtful and
rational divergence across different evaluators, this may block certain value judgments
on my part. Nevertheless, in the course of living my own life, I may value
certain things in certain ways while recognizing the absence of interpersonal rational
convergence on this. So my valuings go beyond my value judgments.
What conception of the valuings of an individual best coheres with these
observations? This is a large issue. Here let me just say that, as I see it, for an
individual to value X is, at least in a basic case, for that individual to have a policy
(i.e., an intention that is appropriately general) of giving X relevant weight, or
other kinds of justifying significance, in her motivationally effective practical reasoning.
And the present point is that such a policy is not the same as, and is related
in complex ways to, a judgment that X is good or valuable.
The second promised consideration concerns the wedge between shared
valuing and shared value judgments that is introduced by the structure of sharing.
Of course, given potential divergences between the valuings and the value judgments
of the individual participants, we already have reason to expect that shared
valuings may not involve commonality of value judgment. But there are also
further pressures for such divergences once we turn to phenomena of sharing.You
and I may each judge that earthquake preparedness is a good thing, and we may
each personally value earthquake preparedness, and yet we may not participate in
a shared valuing of earthquake preparedness with respect to the shared deliberation
associated with our house-building activities. It is one thing for each of us to
think earthquake preparedness a good, another for us to be committed to giving it
weight in these shared deliberations. Further, even if we both judge that earthquake
preparedness is a good thing and we both participate in a shared valuing of
earthquake preparedness, the weight given to it in our shared valuing may diverge
significantly, in either direction, from the extent to which each of us judges it good.
Finally, we might have a shared policy of giving significant weight to earthquake
preparedness in our shared deliberations even if I believe there is no significant
earthquake danger and so no significant value to earthquake preparedness in
house building, and even if I do not myself value earthquake preparedness in my
own personal deliberations. I may still participate in our shared valuing because
earthquake preparedness matters so much to you, and because it is part of a
package of shared commitments that makes overall sense to me, as well as to you.
Our sociality is, in this way, a package deal.
There is a general point that lies behind this distinction between shared
valuing and commonality of value judgment. Shared valuing involves a relativity to
certain shared contexts, especially contexts of shared deliberation. Commitments
to participate in giving weight to X in such contexts are context-relative. But
judgments about the value of X are not context-relative in this way. So we have interrelated models of shared intention and shared valuing,
models that exploit the two-stage strategy noted earlier. I now want to emphasize
a basic feature of the underlying account of sharing: Such sharing does not require
commonality in each agent's reasons for participating in the sharing.You and I can
have a shared intention to garden together even though I participate because I
need the exercise and you participate because you need the food.Though we have
different background reasons for which we participate, our shared intention nevertheless
establishes a common framework. Again, suppose we are on a college
admissions committee and we have a shared policy of giving weight to legacy
considerations in relevant shared deliberation. In this sense we value such considerations.
Nevertheless, I might participate in this because I think giving such
weight in admissions decisions is an effective fund-raising tool; whereas you participate
in it because you think our institution has made an implicit promise to its
alumni to provide this benefit to their children.We participate for different reasons,
but our shared valuing nevertheless establishes a common framework.
I think it is a significant virtue of this theory of sharing that it helps us model
such partial social unity and commonality of framework in the face of different
background reasons for participation. After all, much of our sociality is partial in
this way. Nevertheless, it is also true that when our shared intention or shared
valuing is grounded in different reasons the absence of certain forms of social unity
can pose important practical problems. In particular, there can be problems of
stability and problems of depth.The potential for these problems might be seen as
an objection to the model of sharing. But I believe, in contrast, that it is a virtue of
the model that it helps us articulate both these problems and also standard ways in
which a group can, over time, reasonably respond. Or so I will argue.
PROBLEMS OF STABILITY AND OF DEPTH.
Begin with instability.
There is a potential for instability of the shared intention or
shared valuing if the different reasons for which participants engage in the sharing
were to come to point in different directions: Just consider what is likely to happen
to our joint gardening if you were no longer to need this source of food even
though I continue to need the exercise. Of course, there will many times be, in the
context of the shared activity, various kinds of salient consequences associated with
sticking with one's part in the shared activity. Issues about reputation effects and
the like belong here. But these are contingent matters.
That there are these possibilities of instability, given the model, might be seen
as a ground for rejecting the model as insufficiently rich. After all, it may seem that
sharing brings with it a further bond between the parties, a bond that goes beyond
the interlocking and interdependence I have highlighted, and a bond that supports
stability in a way that we have not yet captured.
Our model of sharing does have further resources here, resources grounded
in the planning theory that is in the background. Central to the planning theory is
the idea that there are norms for stability of intention. To some extent, these are
norms of nonreconsideration of prior intentions; to some extent these are norms
that give prior intentions a (defeasible) default status even in the face of reconsideration.

</text>
