<text id="J54" category="" words="2003" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The British Empire: sunrise to sunset " Author="Levine, Philippa" PublicationDate="New York : Pearson Longman, 2007" SampledFrom="e-book" WebAddress="http://lib.myilibrary.com/Open.aspx?id=183044&loc=&srch=undefined&src=0">

CHAPTER 1.
Uniting the kingdom.
Three Acts of Union - from the sixteenth to the very start of the nineteenth century - cemented the legal, political and economic relationships between dominant England and the 
so-called Celtic fringe of Wales, Scotland and Ireland. These relationships, which by the nineteenth century saw all these regions directly ruled from the Westminster parliament, are often dubbed 'internal colonialism'. Bringing Wales, Scotland and Ireland within a broader British realm represents some of England's earliest forays into colonial rule, for though the formal statutes linking these countries take us through to the nineteenth century, English interest in and often coercion of these neighbouring regions has a very much longer history. The first of these lands to come directly under English control was Wales, brought formally into the English fold by the 1536 Act of Union that created 27 Welsh parliamentary constituencies. For at least a hundred years prior to this, conflicts between the Welsh and the English were common and, in the borderlands between the two especially, the English imposed discriminatory regulations and practices on the Welsh as they gradually gained the upper hand. The Welsh lacked many of the rights that the English enjoyed, a pattern of inequality and prejudice that would only grow after formal annexation. Scotland's associations with England were more complicated, and its annexation more drawn out. It was under Stuart rule in 1603 that the union of the Scottish and English crowns was formalized, with the seat of government firmly located in England. Little more than a hundred years later, in 1707, another Act of Union robbed Scotland of its own parliament: 45 seats in the Westminster House of Commons and 16 in the House of Lords were established to represent the new Scottish constituencies.
Unlike Wales, however, and largely because it had been an identifiable sovereign state before unification, Scotland maintained even after union with England its own judicial system, its own national church (Presbyterian, unlike England's Episcopal Church of England) and a separate education system. And unlike the 1536 Act that had yoked Wales to England, the 1707 Act was a product of negotiation and not brute force. Scotland was in a position to sever its ties with England and the purpose of the 1707 legislation was to prevent that. The Act thus gave the Scots considerably more latitude than the 1536 Act had allowed the Welsh. Indeed, outside the wealthier segments of society, it probably made little difference to most Scottish men and women. As we shall see, the Jacobite uprisings in the eighteenth century would change that, but before then the Union was reasonably harmonious and not wholly disruptive for Scotland. The same could not be said for the Act of Union with Ireland, which took effect on the first day of the new century, January 1801. A number of critical political factors prompted this union, largely related to Britain's vulnerability, perceived or real, to foreign invasion. Ireland's incorporation came at a time when Britain was almost constantly at war with the Catholic power of France, and sometimes with Catholic Spain, and shortly after a popular uprising in Ireland had been subdued. Ireland was, of course, a predominantly Catholic land. Wolfe Tone's 1798 Irish rebellion was a violent one, with almost 30,000 fatalities. The fact that the rebellion had been aided by the French (despite the fact that Tone was himself a Protestant) fuelled English fears, especially during the threatening years of Napoleon's rule when Britain's political and military strengths were severely tested. With a far larger population than either Scotland or Wales, the 1800 Act granted Ireland 100 seats in the House of Commons and 32 in the House of Lords to represent its 5 million inhabitants. As with Scotland, this representation was premised on the dissolution of a separate Irish parliament, and though that all-Protestant body had long been under the English thumb, the symbolism of its abandonment was nonetheless potent in shaping the future of Irish politics. English intrusions into Ireland date back to the twelfth century, and the Irish had experienced considerable erosion of their liberties over the years; by the sixteenth century England was actively engaged in a political, economic and religious subjugation of this neighbouring island. The dates are anything but coincidental, for the bloodshed over religion so characteristic of the Tudor years in England had deep and dangerous consequences for Catholic Ireland. By the late sixteenth century, there was some urgency to the policy of de-Catholicizing Ireland through migration and plantation, as England became definitively Anglican. A greater and greater Protestant presence was imposed from the 1560s and for the next hundred years, with a corresponding dispossession and pauperization of the Catholic Irish. When the Act of Union was passed in 1800 one promise upon which the old Irish parliament insisted before they would dissolve was that Catholics be allowed to vote and to hold public office. It was a promise that would remain unfulfilled for a further three decades. Early in 1801, it was his inability to keep that controversial promise that prompted the prime minister, William Pitt, to resign his office. After 1801, the kingdom 'now consisting of Scotland, Wales, Ireland and England' was governed solely and as one from London. The state was more deeply centralized than ever before; the term Great Britain, already in use, was now the official designation of the nation. Some historians have argued that such centralization was effective by 1640. This might be so in an informal sense, but we can certainly point to 1801, the dawn of the nineteenth century, as a time when such centralizing tendencies were fully and formally in place and when internal colonialism was complete. Although Scotland retained a number of important local institutions, Britain had one parliament and a state religion secured by a Protestant succession to the monarchy. It was fear of destabilizing this Protestant sovereignty that prompted much of Britain's internal colonialism. Ireland as a predominantly Catholic region was the principal flashpoint for these religious debates within imperial policy, but religion was politically significant in Wales and Scotland too. In Scotland, Catholicism had largely given way by 1690 to a Calvinist-inspired Presbyterianism, under the influence of John Knox. It was distinctively different in character from English Episcopalian Christianity. The influence of Presbyterians among Protestant Irish groups, mostly centred in northern Ireland, was of considerable concern to the English authorities in the eighteenth century. Presbyterianism in Scotland was acceptable, but its presence in Ireland added a complicating addi- tional layer of religious discontent and dissent that could only add to England's problems there; the Protestant Irish strand was the origin of the Orange Movement, which quickly became deeply involved in political protests in Ireland. Meanwhile, in Wales the insistence by the Anglican Church that services be conducted solely in English secured sturdy support for non-Anglican forms of Protestantism. The successful spread especially of Methodism and of Baptism owed much to the fact that they conducted services in the local language. Likewise the translation of the Bible into Welsh, effected during the reign of Elizabeth I, ensured that virtually every household in Wales would continue to be exposed to the Welsh language even at a time when that language was under attack. Welsh remained alive in large part because of the actions of a monarch determined to impose Anglican conformity. Non-Anglican Protestants and Catholics throughout the kingdom were barred from public office, local or national, by the Corporation Act of 1661 and the Test Acts of 1673 and 1678. These laws were part of the legal and political mechanism designed to protect a Protestant succession to the throne and to resist reinstatement of the Catholic Stuart dynasty. They also reflected a popular and growing sentiment that parliament 'although hardly a representative institution at this time' was a specifically Protestant expression of liberty, what historian Linda Colley has called the 'Protestant inheritance'.  This celebration of Protestantism gave voice to a profound and long-standing anti-Catholicism in England, bolstered throughout the eighteenth century by the animosity between England and its most significant imperial and commercial rival, France. Ironically, after the defeat of France in the Seven Years War in 1763, Britain's new colonial acquisitions made the Empire a far less identifiably Protestant one than it had formerly been. Catholics and non-Christians figured largely among those now subject to British imperial rule. National stability and success depended on more, of course, than merely a continued adherence to Protestant Christianity. The needs of merchants and of bankers were vital, and the mercantilist economic principles of England in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries meant that the state took a close interest in trade and commerce, actively regulating economic life as a way to pay the expenses of government. In the early eighteenth century, for example, rarely a year passed in which a new law designed to regulate colonial trade in some fashion, or to control customs revenue (and its enemy, piracy), did not come before parliament. England kept a tight rein on colonial trade. Colonial goods were governed by strict regulations that gave a strong advantage to the English economy. Scots merchants and traders gained access to these lucrative colonial markets as a condition of the 1707 Act of Union. This meant that they were no longer required to route goods through England and pay duties on them, but could trade directly with other colonies within the British Empire. For Ireland, the wait was longer. An Act of 1696 had ruled that goods from the American plantations could not be landed in Ireland, a law that hindered the logical trade that might otherwise have flourished between America and Ireland, given their geographical proximity. Though this restriction was eliminated in 1731, Irish trade continued throughout the eighteenth century to be primarily with England, a situation that gave England as the dominant trading partner a considerable advantage. Wales, like the often neglected Celtic region of Cornwall on England's south-west tip, was the site of active smuggling, both across the English-Welsh border and at the ports. The loss of government revenue that efficient smuggling represented made the control of contraband and of piracy a major component in England's desire to fold these 'peripheral' areas into the polity. The prospect of economic order in border areas - meaning a crackdown on smuggling and an organized customs agency pulling in significant revenue - was a key motive for internal colonialism. This interest in potential revenues from the Celtic periphery was seldom balanced by a corresponding commitment to investment in those regions. The Irish plantation schemes of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were more concerned with peopling the country with loyal Protestants than in giving economic aid to, or partnering with, the Irish. Centralization, as it would do at a later stage of empire and in more distant lands, often worked to the advantage of the dominant and not the peripheral power. In the arena of banking, for example, London became more and more powerful at the expense of provincial centres, and the establishment of the Bank of England in London in 1694 was some indication of the power lines in the fiscal world. Whereas Scottish banks remained robust until the banking reorganization of the 1840s, those in Wales and Ireland simply could not compete with their English rivals. Economic competitiveness was crucial to political survival in this era, and here again it was English practices and activities that came to dominate, particularly from the eighteenth century onwards. The landholding practices common in Celtic cultures were often incompatible with English ideas about inheritance, wealth creation and economic efficiency. The dominance of gavelkind , in which land was shared by all male heirs, contrasted with the typical practice of primogeniture in England, which concentrated wealth in eldest sons. In an era when the English economy was focusing increasingly on consolidating large tracts of land for more profitable and efficient cash-crop farming, the tendency in gavelkind for land plots to shrink to accommodate every son was regarded as a backward-looking and inefficient system.

</text>
