<text id="J55" category="" words="2023" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Globalizing women: transnational feminist networks" Author="Valentine M. Moghadam" PublicationDate="2005" SampledFrom="ebook -- Johns Hopkins University Press" WebAddress="http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/pageviewer-idx?c=acls&cc=acls&idno=heb04730.0001.001&seq=3&size=100&view=text">

Women are taking the lead and making a huge contribution to defining the international agenda in terms of human rights, macroeconomics, conflict/peace, and sustainable development. We have a valuable and unique perspective on these issues as women and as human beings. We recognize that feminism in one country is not sustainable-we need feminism on a global scale. [Women in Development Europe, 1995]
Central to women's experiences-and to analyses informed by socialist-feminism or feminist political economy-has been the sexual division of labor, the separation of societies into public and private spheres, the organization of economies into the spheres of production and reproduction, and the ways that these have articulated with gender and class, as well as with ethnicity and race.
Feminist analyses, and women's activism, have been concerned with the broad implications of the identification of women with the private sphere of the family, including their exclusion from the public sphere, their varied experiences of marginalization, exploitation, and integration in the sphere of production, and their undervalued location within the sphere of reproduction, whether as
paid or unpaid labor.1 Although these experiences and analyses have preoccupied women and feminists throughout the world, it may be said that prior to the mid-1980s the world's women had not yet developed a collective identity, a collective sense of injustice, or common forms of organizing. The year 1985 was, in many ways, a watershed. The third United Nations world conference
on women, which took place in Nairobi, Kenya, and consisted of both an intergovernmental conference and a forum of nongovernmental organizations, brought together women from across the globe who shared their experiences with and criticisms of new economic policies, conservative governments, and cultural-political movements that they deemed inimical to women's interests.
Although the term globalization would not be used until years later, the emerging global state of affairs proved to be an impetus for novel forms of women's organizing and mobilizing.
This book examines transnational feminist networks (TFNs), their relationship to the globalization process, the ways that they engage with public policy at the national and international levels, and their organizational dynamics.
The study is situated at the nexus of three bodies of literature and is intended as
a contribution to all three. The first is the now extensive literature on globalization, which analyzes the complex and multidimensional processes that are said to have begun in the late twentieth century. This literature addresses globalization from different disciplinary, conceptual, and political vantage points, but it rarely investigates the gender dimension of globalization. Much of the literature emphasizes globalization as an economic process; some studies examine globalization in terms of the changing nature of the post-Cold War world order; other studies emphasize the cultural aspects and effects of globalization.2 The literature does not, however, consider globalization as a gendered process.
A related body of studies has appeared on the growth of nongovernmental organizations, civil society and citizenship, global civil society, transnational advocacy networks, and global social movements. This, too, is a rich literature, but attention to the women's movement or to women's organizations is limited to only a few studies. For example, the well-known volume by Keck and Sikkink examined transnational advocacy networks (TANs) organized around human rights, the environment, and violence against women. O'Brien, Goetz, Scholte, and Williams studied the ways in which global social movements-women's movements, unions, and environmental organizations-have engaged with multilateral economic institutions such as the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, and the World Trade Organization. And the collection by Cohen and Rai on global social movements includes essays on feminist networking for conflict resolution and the advancement of women's human rights.4
A third literature focuses precisely on women's movements and women's organizations.5 Much feminist theorizing of women's movements has focused on national-level factors such as the growth of the population of educated women with grievances about their second-class citizenship. More recent studies have begun to connect women's movements and organizations to international or global processes such as the role of international organizations
or the United Nations Decade on Women, and they examine the ways that women's organizations have engaged with the world of public policy. For the most part, however, this literature has not explained the worldwide social movement of women in terms of globalization processes such as the feminization of labor, growing social inequalities, and increased access to the new information and computer technologies (ICTs) by educated and politically active women-which is the argument I make in this book. At the same time, we have seen increasing numbers of feminist studies on globalization and gender, some of which draw on postmodernist and postcolonialist thought and some
of which may be described as Marxist-feminist or as constituting a materialist, structuralist, or feminist political economy approach.
This book offers an analysis of globalization as a multidimensional and gendered process (the subject of chapter 2) and of the transnational women's movement as a product of sociodemographic, economic, political, and cultural changes (discussed in chapters 3 and 4). I also describe the research, advocacy, and lobbying efforts of TFNs, their methods of organizing global networks of women, and the ways that they engage with states, international organizations, and global civil society to influence public policy and raise international awareness about women and gender issues (chapters 5, 6, and 7). In discussing Islamic fundamentalism and neoliberal capitalism as two
key features of globalization that have resulted in transnational feminist responses, I bring together topics that are usually discussed separately. Conceptually, I draw on world-systems, Marxist, and feminist frameworks to analyze contemporary globalization processes and explain the emergence of a transnational women's movement in the late twentieth century. My explanation
incorporates the concepts of gender, class, capital, and the state, all of which
operate within a hierarchical world-system divided into core, periphery, and semiperiphery.6 This book illuminates the links between globalization, inequalities, and women's movements and brings neglected feminist research and activism into clearer view.
The capitalist world-system has often produced antisystemic movements that cross borders and boundaries, while national-level class conflicts and political contradictions have similarly generated forms of collective action and social protest, including social movements and revolutions. But a key characteristic of the era of late capitalism, or globalization, is the proliferation of transnational social movements, including the transnational women's movement and its organizational expression, the transnational feminist network.
What exactly are transnational feminist networks? They are structures organized above the national level that unite women from three or more countries around a common agenda, such as women's human rights, reproductive health and rights, violence against women, peace and antimilitarism, or feminist economics. They are part of the family of political change organizations
operating above and across national borders that have been variously described as global civil society organizations, transnational advocacy networks, and transnational social movement organizations-and which, along with international nongovernmental organizations, constitute the making of a transnational public sphere. As three scholars of social movements have noted:
"Globalization has in fact brought social movements together across borders in a 'transnational public sphere,' a real as well as conceptual space in which
movement organizations interact, contest each other, and learn from each other. Transnational feminist networks work with each other and with transnational human rights, labor, social justice, and environmental organizations to draw attention to the negative aspects of globalization, to try to influence policy-making, and to insert a feminist perspective in transnational advocacy and
activism. Since 1985, when a number of now well-known TFNs emerged, feminist networks have proliferated around broad agendas or specific issues and
campaigns. The focus in this book is on those TFNs that address themselves primarily to women's human rights and to economic policy. In particular, I examine three feminist networks that formed in opposition to structural adjustment and neoliberal economic policy, developing a feminist critique and an alternative feminist economics framework (chapter 5); and I examine three
feminist networks that promote women's human rights, especially in Muslim countries where fundamentalism emerged and the legal status of women became compromised (chapters 6 and 7).
Why the focus on feminist economics and the human rights of women in
the Muslim world? I can offer three reasons. First, some of the best-known and well-organized transnational feminist networks are precisely those orientedprincipally toward economic policy (notably Development Alternatives with
Women for a New Era, or DAWN) and the human rights of women in the Muslim world (in particular, the network Women Living under Muslim Laws, or
WLUML). Second, I argue that neoliberal capitalism and Islamic fundamentalism are among the defining features and consequences of global restructuring and globalization in the late twentieth century; hence it is logical to examine those feminist networks that focus on these issues. It is noteworthy that the Gloria Declaration-issued by the Eighth International Women and Health
Meeting in Rio de Janeiro in March 1997-identified two major systemic obstacles to achieving women's health and rights: globalization of the market economy and religious fundamentalism. That declaration emphasized Christian and especially Catholic restrictions on women's sexual autonomy, as well as Islamic fundamentalism, and criticized the role of the Vatican at venues such as
the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development and the
1995 Fourth World Conference on Women. Third, I decided to give prominence to the feminist critique of neoliberal economic policy because I felt it important to correct a certain misunderstanding concerning the women's movement, which is that feminists are either concerned exclusively with personal and reproductive rights or oriented primarily around violence-against women issues. My decision to include three TFNs that engage with economics is meant to show that global feminism is taking on some of the major policies and institutions of our time-including neoliberal capitalism, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the World Trade Organization (WTO)-and inserting a distinctly feminist perspective in global discussions about economic justice.
Female Labor and Women's Mobilizations in an Era of Globalization Why did the transnational feminist networks emerge in the mid-1980s and not earlier? What was the context?
The women's movement of the second wave, which began in North America and Europe in the 1960s, consisted of feminist groups that emerged within national borders and addressed themselves to their own nation-states, governments, employers, and male colleagues and kin. As women's groups expanded internationally, they remained primarily nationally based and nationally oriented. Feminist groups encompassed liberal, radical, Marxist, and socialist ideologies, and these political differences constituted one form of division within feminism. Another division took the form of North-South, or First WorldThird World differences in terms of priority feminist issues; many First World feminists saw legal equality and reproductive rights as key feminist demands
and goals, while many Third World feminists emphasized underdevelopment, colonialism, and imperialism as obstacles to women's advancement. The Cold War also cast a shadow on feminist solidarity, in the form of the East-West divide. Disagreements over what constituted priority feminist issues came to the fore at the beginning of the United Nations' Decade for Women, and especially at its first and second world conferences on women, which took place in
Mexico City in 1975 and in Copenhagen in 1980, respectively. The disagreements at the Mexico City and Copenhagen conferences pitted women activists from the North and from the South, and revolved around prioritizing equality and sexuality issues versus economic and political issues. A shift in the nature and orientation of international feminism began to take place in the mid-1980s, during preparations for the third UN world conference on women, which was held in Nairobi, Kenya, in 1985. The shift took the form of bridge building and consensus making across regional and ideological divides, and the emergence of a women's organization of a new type.
What enabled this important change in the women's movement to take place
were three critical economic and political developments within states and regions, and at the level of the world-system: the transition from Keynesian to neoliberal economics, along with a new international division of labor that relied heavily on (cheap) female labor; the decline of the welfarist, developmentalist state; and the emergence of various forms of fundamentalist movements. These developments led to new thinking and new forms of organizing on the part of activist women in both developing and developed countries.

</text>
