<text id="J56" category="" words="2004" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Assuming the burden: Europe and the American commitment to war in Vietnam " Author="Lawrence, Mark Atwood" PublicationDate="2005" SampledFrom="Berkeley: University of California Press." WebAddress="http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/pageviewer-idx?c=acls&cc=acls&idno=heb06225.0001.001&seq=3&size=100&view=text">

PART ONE.
Contesting Vietnam.
CHAPTER I.
Visions of Indochina and the World.
The Second World War ended one epoch of Vietnamese history and
launched another. For half a century France had dominated the territory
collectively known as Indochina-the Vietnamese provinces of
Cochinchina, Annam, and Tonkin, plus neighboring Cambodia and
Laos. Vietnamese nationalists had periodically challenged colonial rule,
but French authorities had squelched demands for change in every case,
reaffirming their nation's supremacy through a mix of armed repression, economic subjugation, and cultural domination that had characterized colonial rule in Indochina since its beginnings in the nineteenth century. Nationalist agitation aggravated the colonial administration
but did not threaten its control. Nor was French rule much challenged
from beyond Indochina's borders. The Western powers, respectful of
French claims and excluded by formidable trade barriers, took little
account of the area. China, for centuries the main Asian aspirant to
power in the region, remained too weak and divided during the decades
of French rule to interfere. For its part, Japan steadily emerged as a
regional power during the early twentieth century but posed no direct
threat to European dominance in Southeast Asia until 1940.
The events of that year changed everything. In May Nazi armies
launched a crushing attack against France and, a month later, forced the
French government into a humiliating armistice that shattered the country's pretensions as a global power. The defeat had immediate consequences in the Far East, where the Japanese government eagerly exploited French weakness. Seeking to bolster its war effort against
China, Tokyo demanded that the colonial administration close the
Chinese-Tonkin border, thus sealing off an important channel of Western supplies for the beleaguered Chinese army. Severed from Paris,hopeless of challenging Japanese military power, and doubtful of receiving support from Western nations, French governor-general Georges
Catroux capitulated. Over the next eighteen months, the trickle of
French concessions grew to a flood as Catroux's Vichy-appointed successor, Admiral Jean Decoux, struggled to appease Tokyo and avert an
outright Japanese takeover. First Japan demanded airfields in northern
Indochina and the right to transport troops across Tonkin to fight in
China. Then in summer 1941, as the Japanese military prepared to
attack southward toward the Dutch East Indies and Singapore, Tokyo
insisted on establishing bases in southern Indochina. By the time of
Japan's assault on Pearl Harbor, the French administration had become
a virtual accessory to the Japanese war effort.
In a sense, Catroux's strategy was successful. In return for French
cooperation Tokyo permitted the colonial administration to remain in
place at a time when Japanese forces were uprooting Western regimes in
Malaya, Singapore, Burma, the Philippines, and the East Indies. Even in
its hour of humiliation France nominally remained master of its Southeast Asian empire, a privilege that the colonial administration struggled
to protect over the following years. But this arrangement-really an
expedient that served Tokyo's interests by relieving it of administrative
and military burdens-could not mask the underlying reality of French
impotence.
To Vietnamese nationalists the crumbling of French power signaled
an unprecedented opportunity to overturn the colonial order. They
understood that their goal would not be realized quickly. There
remained not only the matter of ending what was left of French control
but also that of evicting the Japanese. Still, the rapidly changing international situation generated hope. Amid surging optimism Ho Chi
Minh and other Vietnamese nationalist leaders gathered in a damp
mountainside cave near the Chinese border in northern Tonkin to begin
laying the groundwork for revolution. The delegates agreed to submerge
clashing agendas within a broad patriotic coalition-the Viet Nam Doc
Lap Dong Minh Hoi, or Viet Minh-and chose guerrilla warfare as the
principal method of struggle against foreign occupiers. With those
matters settled, Ho Chi Minh appealed to Vietnamese patriots to join
the fight. "The hour has struck!" he proclaimed. "Raise aloft the
insurrectionary banner and guide the people throughout the country to
overthrow the Japanese and the French!"
The Viet Minh's unalloyed enthusiasm contrasted sharply with the
deep anxiety that prevailed among Western policymakers concerned
with Indochina's future. Events that inspired optimism and boldness in
the Tonkin mountains generated fear and discord among Free French,
British, and American officials charged with settling Indochina's destiny
following Japan's defeat. Above all, the evisceration of French control
raised the vexing question of how-and, at least in Washington,
whether-colonial rule should be reestablished. In the early months of
the Pacific war, Allied deliberations amounted to little more than academic exercises since Japan totally dominated the region. As the tide of
war turned toward the allies in 1943 and 1944, however, Indochina's
postwar status became a steadily more pressing issue. Small clusters of
French, British, and U.S. policymakers focused on a full slate of questions: Who should govern Indochina after the war? How should the
aspirations of local nationalists be taken into account? What would be
Indochina's place in the postwar international order? In attempting to
answer these questions, the three Western governments laid down patterns of thinking and debate that would underlie policymaking for the
next half decade.
FREE FRANCE AND THE RECOVERY OF INDOCHINA.
As Allied victory grew more certain in 1944, the Free French organization under General Charles de Gaulle became increasingly anxious
about Indochina. To be sure, the matter ranked below the most pressing
national concerns-the reestablishment of the French state, economic
rehabilitation, and the war against Germany. Consumed by these challenges, ordinary citizens, the Free French media, and the renascent political parties showed little interest in the fate of a territory on the other
side of the world. For the small leadership group concerned with recovering France's traditional role as a global power, however, the issue did
not lag far behind the nation's top priorities. These men-bureaucrats,
diplomats, politicians, and military officers-shared a conviction that
their country's long-term prospects rested on its ability to preserve the
empire, not least Indochina. Francois de Langlade, a one-time rubber
planter who became one of de Gaulle's chief delegates for Indochinese
affairs, succinctly stated the group's thinking in early 1945. "Without
Indochina," he wrote, "France is no longer a world power."
The equation of French grandeur with imperial prowess ran deep in
French history. Since the early nineteenth century, French colonial ambition had swelled during times of national crisis as leaders strove to compensate for setbacks in Europe with victories overseas. It was no
accident that the most active phase of French conquest followed the
humiliations of the Franco-Prussian War in I870-1871 or that French
determination to maintain the empire soared during the Second World
War. Indeed, the necessity of preserving the empire was as plain to Vichy
officials as to Gaullists. Both regimes struggled desperately to preserve a
glimmer of French independence following the debacle of 1940. "The
colonial peoples represented the best reason for France to believe and to
hope," the Vichy colonial minister, Admiral Charles Platon, asserted in
fall 1940. De Gaulle, employing remarkably similar language, proclaimed the empire "a strong ray of hope," offering France "trump
cards in the game where its destiny will be decided."s For both regimes,
Indochina held special significance. Although less directly tied to French
national identity than Algeria and perhaps other African possessions, it
surpassed any other imperial holding in conferring great power status
on France. The farthest-flung of major French territories, it rivaled
India, the jewel in Britain's imperial crown, and entitled France to a
major role in Far Eastern affairs.
French determination to hold Indochina also stemmed from a pervasive, if less explicitly stated, belief in the territories' economic value. To
be sure, Indochina had not yielded the returns that French colonial
enthusiasts had hoped for over the years. As one U.S. study remarked,
French fiscal, tariff, and wage policies since the late nineteenth century
had been "unfortunate" at best, failing to generate a healthy colonial
economy or to bring many benefits to the metropole. A small group of
white planters and the Banque de l'Indochine reaped most of the rewards,
while French consumers paid high prices for colonial goods. So questionable was Indochina's economic value that one U.S. study suggested
in 1944 that France might simply be better off without it. Still, the
French economy had become dependent on Indochinese exports, especially rice, tin, and rubber, before the war, making the territory the
second most important source of French imports (after Algeria) within
the empire. In addition, Indochina represented a source of food and
labor for other French possessions and served as a hub of the French
colonial economy in the Far East and Pacific. All in all, Free French
leaders had reason to believe that Indochina, however weak its prewar
performance, could play a valuable role in metropolitan recovery.
While officials agreed on the need to recover Indochina, they differed
over precisely how French rule should be reconstituted after the war. A
conference of colonial administrators in Brazzaville, the capital of
French Equatorial Africa, in January 1944 revealed a wide range of
views about the possibility of postwar colonial reforms. Formally, the
Brazzaville meeting dealt only with Africa. But discussions reflected
thinking about the empire in general-its structure and the degree of selfrule that should be permitted within it. On one side, the embryonic Gaullist
colonial ministry based in Algiers offered relatively ambitious proposals. Henri Laurentie, head of the political section of the Commissariat
aux Colonies, laid out plans not only to liberalize administrative practices but also to reconfigure the empire as a federation allowing greater
autonomy for the various component territories. Laurentie stopped well
short of proposing self-government. "If there is to be self-government,"
he insisted, "it can come only at the end of a fairly long and strictly controlled evolution." But there was no mistaking that Laurentie's proposals envisioned significant change.
This view encountered stiff opposition from the assembled colonial
governors, most of whom had risen to positions of influence under a
prewar system that eschewed federalism and emphasized the assimilation of colonial peoples into a unified French empire. Under their sway
the meeting accepted only minute steps to improve indegene opportunities and coldly rejected Laurentie's guarded language about self-determination. To the conservatives, talk of "le self-government"-a phrase
so alien that it was always rendered in English, as historian Martin
Shipway has pointed out-flew in the face of the hallowed Jacobin principle of "France One and Indivisible." The conference's final declaration, though only an advisory document, left no doubt where the conservatives stood. The French "civilizing mission" in the colonies
excluded "any idea of autonomy [and] all possibility of evolution outside the French bloc," the statement asserted. "Also excluded," it added,
"is the eventual establishment of self-government in the colonies, even
in a distant future."
These opposing viewpoints laid out the parameters of a debate over
Indochina's future that would percolate within the Gaullist bureaucracy
for the remainder of the war and would, in later years, break into the
open. For the time being, however, deliberation over postwar reforms
remained muted. Far more pressing was the challenge of assuring that
France, rather than some other power, would make the decisions when
the moment came. On this score French officials of all political stripes 
were united in anxiety. While every other part of the prewar French
empire had rallied to de Gaulle by 1944, Indochina floated in precarious limbo, nominally under the control of a French administration loyal
to the Vichy regime but vulnerable to Japanese takeover.
From 1940 Gaullist leaders had done what they could to show their
determination to recover Indochina and to reclaim for France a prominent role in the Far East. Free France declared war on Japan immediately after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 and
a month later began planning for the eventual dispatch of forces to fight
alongside the allies in the Pacific. De Gaulle's Comit6 Francais de la
Liberation Nationale stepped up its efforts in 1943, approving creation
of an expeditionary force in North Africa for use in Indochina and
requesting British and U.S. permission to post an officer to the Allied
headquarters supervising the war in Southeast Asia.

</text>
