<text id="J57" category="" words="2011" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Titans/Planners, Bohemians/Revolutionaries : Male Empowerment in the 1930s" Author="PHILIP ABBOTT" PublicationDate="22 November 2006" SampledFrom="Journal of American Studies (2006), 40: p. 463-485 " WebAddress="http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayFulltext?type=1&fid=550372&jid=AMS&volumeId=40&issueId=03&aid=550368">

While William Leuchtenburg is certainly correct in concluding that the shadow
of both FDR and the New Deal is receding, the decade of the 1930s is
still regarded as the acme of progressive reform in America. Although
the memories of the 1930s are fading and the reforms of the decade have been
contested, in this narrative the achievements of the New Deal are still heroic.
In many respects I do not challenge this assessment. However, an
important aspect of this heroic narrative deserves reevaluation. Robert
McElvaine, in his analysis of the decade in 1984, argues that the loss
of economic status by men in the Great Depression resulted in a ''feminization
'' of cultural norms: ''The self-centered, aggressive, competitive
male ' ethic ' of the 1920s was discredited. Men who lost their jobs became
dependent in ways that women had been thought to be. '' As men
found themselves much more in the traditional role of women  -  on the bottom, in a
state of dependence  -  they moved toward ''feminine '' values _ When, with the
New Deal, they got beyond passivity and became active in their quest to improve
their situation, Depression victims tended to do so through ''female '' values.
They sought to escape dependence not through 'male ' self-centered, ''rugged ''
individualism, but through cooperation and compassion.
According to McElvaine, the reformers of the 1930s were sandwiched
between Progressives and post-World War II liberals who remained
'' essentially 'masculine' '' in their ''urge for 'male' exploits, '' concern for
projecting ''toughness'' and '' fear of appearing to be a ' sissy. ' '' In his revised
edition (1993), McElvaine noted that he had inadequately emphasized his
gender analysis. The ''most significant fact about the Depression era '' was that
it was the only time in the twentieth century during which there was a major break
in the modern trends toward social disintegration and egoism _ Among the few
restraints that have existed in postwar America on the modern forces of social
atomization are carryovers from the values that were resurgent during the thirties.
Other analysts share McElvaine's assessment in whole or in part. Some
focus on ''FDR's body'' as a signifier of female values. Others find feminist
foundations in New Deal policies or in radical alternatives to the New
Deal. There are others too who do not explicitly employ gender motifs but
describe New Deal achievements in terms of the values identified by
McElvaine. Finally, even those who note the relative absence of female
voices in the 1930s speak of inadvertence and historical inopportunity.
One can argue, however, for precisely the opposite reading. The nearly
universal collapse of the economic base of masculine identity produced a
patriarchal reassertion that suffused all discourse in the 1930s. Deprived of
the authority that emanated from control of the household, men retrieved a
sense of autonomy by creating a new masculine public space. Catalogues 
of Depression life contain heartbreaking confessions of emasculation.
Relief agencies only compounded the loss of power for the person who
entered the '' intake'' room to apply for aid. The behavior of unemployed
men was described in negative female stereotypes. A father '' cried in relating
his situation to the case worker'' ; other men were reported as ''high strung''
and lacking in ''emotional stability. '' The anthropologist Margaret Mead
wondered what would be the consequences for male children born to a
generation of fathers who lacked an '' inheritance of aggression. ''
In response, New Dealers created a new world based on masculine values
other than appetitiveness, risk, and self-interest (though these too often
reappeared in veiled ways). These values were derived from a redefintion and
refocus of the concept of male responsibility and they took place in a
new sphere, a public one. To be a man no longer depended on material
acquisition but on public stewardship, no longer on speculation but on
public adventure. Strength too was invoked but it was strength derived
from discipline rather than self-assertion. I examine the development of
these tropes in both New Deal and radical discourses in the 1930s in order to
illustrate the pervasiveness of patterns of male assertion through new
homosocial structures. Though entry into World War II altered this reformulation
in unanticipated ways, the model of the citizen soldier too
expressed this notion of male responsibility as a collective effort. Comrades
became comrades in arms. Thus efforts to ''reopen'' the 1930s as a narrative
for a new point of reformist or radical departure may be a mistaken project
or at least a more complex one than is currently proposed.
TITANS/PLANNERS
Writers in the 1930s were preoccupied with examining differences from
the previous decade. For its participants, no sharper division had occurred
in the history of the republic. This division, marked by the brute fact
of the Crash, was theorized in binary terms, like gender itself. The binary
conception of political and economic crisis was expressed in general terms
of male/female through various dichotomies such as true/false masculinity,
responsibility/irresponsibility, power/powerlessness, will/indecision, individualism/
collectivism.
In Farewell to Reform, one of the most popular political commentaries of
the early 1930s, John Chamberlain concluded that reforms in previous crises
in America were preoccupied with a ''return connotation.'' If only the
''methods and possibilities of a more primitive capitalism '' could be restored,
the crisis could be resolved. Chamberlain was especially critical of the
Progressive tradition in this regard. Progressives failed so miserably in their
mission that they were helpless to stop the concentration of capital in the
1920s that had brought about the current crisis. Had the Progressives, as well
as previous reformers, been more manly in their confrontation with capital,
the current generation would not have been faced with the present emergency.
Thus Veblen, Croly, Dewy, and Beard could offer no help in ousting the
''high priests of profit'' and Americans must reject the whole reform
tradition.
Progressives themselves accepted this critique. Dewey, for example, in a
series of articles in the New Republic, complained that America had become a
''United States, Incorporated'' in the 1920s, in which the '' business mind''
crowded out individualism to make a ''pecuniary culture'' based on speculation
and consumption. ''The publicity agent is perhaps the most significant
symbol of our present social life,'' he concluded. Dewy had reservations
about the Soviet experiment but he acknowledged that it exhibited a sense of
''imagination'' and ''resourcefulness '' that deserved study. In March 1932
Adoph Berle, Jr., too, stated that the '' future is becoming visible in Russia. ''
He assured readers that soviets in America would look more like rotary clubs
than their counterparts in Leningrad. Berle's comparison is instructive since
the notion of soviets, rotary-style, suggested a more '' responsible'' imitation
of Soviet experimentation and also invoked the image of American male
reliability as well as masculine empowerment. In the same year George Soule
wrote whimsically, ''Perhaps Russia was not talking the same language that
we were, but at any rate she was using a lot of the same words.'' This
abandonment of Progressive ideas, often in the context of an interest in the
USSR, also partially erased the binary preoccupation between capitalism and
communism as it simultaneously accentuated the divide between the decades.
The proposals appearing in the new journal Common Sense repeatedly
focussed upon advertising as a development of 1920s capitalism that
was especially corrosive of a stable economic system. Co-editor Alfred
Bingham's ''Looking Forward,'' a view of America in 2000, spoke of a
''democratic republic of industry '' in which a ''new moral health, and a new
moral beauty'' would prevail. Harold Loeb's book-length utopia, Life in a
Technocracy, disposed of advertising as well as government and elections
altogether in favor of a national engineering CEO supervised by unions.
Richard Chase (A New Deal ) and George Soule (A Planned Society) offered
similar sentiments. To them as well, the 1920s represented an era in which
irresponsible economic elites promoted systemic chaos in their pursuit of
immediate gain. The future would replace acquisitiveness with an '' active
bond with our fellow citizens. ''
Each of these critiques thus put forward the values of collective
commitment as the responsible mode of behavior. Advertising in particular
was singled out as a feminized form of activity that focussed upon
consumption rather than production. Not only did this focus of capitalism
overburden the household with gadgets, but also the fixation on demand
created a world of caprice and illusion. True (responsible) action rested in the
excitement of common effort, since the household itself had been corrupted.
Americans had been seduced by a false American Dream unrelated to real
work. As the price, they had been cast permanently from Eden.
While these first ideological exits were dramatic and unprecedented in the
scope of their critique, it was FDR, more than any single figure in the early
1930s, who systematically discredited the 1920s on these terms. Hoover
actually remained the last public figure to defend the 1920s. He continued to
insist that the decade was a period of phenomenal economic growth, increase
in the standard of living, and democratization of consumption.
''Over-optimism as to profits'' and events in Europe fed an ''undue
pessimism'' on the part of business leaders. FDR rejected Hoover's contention
that '' the major sources of the depression now lie outside of the
United States '' with blistering images of the irresponsibility of economic
elites in the 1920s, with politicians as their accomplices. In fact, Hoover's
defense of '' irresponsible '' household consumption and his alleged inability
to confront the Depression crisis doubly feminized him as an exemplar of
female hysteria.
Seduction, promiscuity, immediate pleasure, gullibility, and undeserved
leisure are historical male constructions of the irresponsibility of Eve and
they floated through FDR's critiques of the 1920s. The Oglethorpe
University speech is often quoted for FDR's announcement that '' bold,
persistent experimentation'' was now required of government. But the bulk
of the address was devoted to portraying the 1920s as a period in which
economic elites created a ''mirage'' of real wealth. In these '' rose colored
days'' every American was told that he ''could just sit back and read in
comfort the hieroglyphics called stock quotations which proclaimed
that wealth was mounting miraculously without any work on their part. ''
With the government's complicity, corporate leaders in the 1920s were
responsible for '' gigantic waste, '' ''superfluous duplication, '' '' questionable
methods of raising capital, '' ''continual scrapping of useful equipment'' and
''depression of wages.'' In his nomination acceptance speech, the 1920s
were condemned as a ''period of loose thinking, descending morals, and an
era of selfishness. '' FDR even asked all Americans to accept some degree of
responsibility : ''Let us be frank to admit that many of us too have made
obeisance to Mammon.''
Late in the 1932 campaign Roosevelt gave a speech to a group of
business leaders in San Francisco and pulled all these elements into a general
philosophical approach to government. The original title of the address was
'' Individualism: Romantic and Realistic. '' The speech is structured around
sets of pairs. In this binary analysis, however, the negative is not a feminized
disruption but one form of masculine endeavor. Roosevelt compares the
growth of central governments to that of centralized industry. He compares
the rise of European monarchies to the new '' princes of property. '' He
compares Jefferson to Hamilton. He compares the needs of a country with a
frontier to those of one whose '' plant is built. '' And, of course, he compares
the responsible and irresponsible exercise of power.
Roosevelt presents his analysis of great leaders in ambivalent terms. Each
creates arenas of freedom for others, though inadvertently, as they pursue
their own projects. Lincoln had spoken of the need for men of great ambition
at the time of the founding and of the threat they posed in an established
republic. Roosevelt recounts the contributions of the '' creators of national
government'' in Europe. ''The people preferred the master far away to the
exploitation and cruelty of the smaller master near at hand.''

</text>
