<text id="J58" category="" words="2004" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="MAKING SOMETHING OF IT: QUESTIONS OF VALUE IN THE EARLY ENGLISH TRAVEL COLLECTION" Author="MARY C. FULLER" PublicationDate="February 1, 2006 " SampledFrom="Journal of Early Modern History Vol. 10 Issue 1/2, p11-38 " WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?hid=112&sid=7e52d6e7-c27e-493a-85fa-e778928239cd%40sessionmgr114&vid=3">

In the second half of the sixteenth century, experiences and narratives of English travel
to distant places first began to matter enough to be collected and published. Tracing
early accounts of West Africa and Muscovy through the several collections of Richard
Eden (1553, 1555) and Richard Hakluyt (1589, 1600) allows for comparison of how
different editors handled the same materials at different moments. The evidence suggests
that both editors differentiated between the African and Russian materials according
to perceptions of these materials' value, or meaning, for their own collecting and
publishing projects. Looking at how this was so, and considering why it was so, provides
a closer and more detailed look at how travel writing acquired value in the context of
print; it also offers an an approach to the larger question of how Englishmen "read"
the places and cultures they encountered, actually or virtually, outside of Europe.
I begin with a massive material object: the second edition of Richard
Hakluyt's great collection of travel documents, commonly known as The
Principal Navigations of the English Nation. Roughly 2000 closely-printed folio
pages, it was issued as two or three large volumes in the successive
years 1598-1600. In imagination, set next to this book its earliest English
predecessor. Richard Eden's collection, A Treatyse of the newe India (1553),
was a poorly printed octavo of 204 pages. These are books which take
up quite different amounts of space, and have enjoyed quite different
reputations. Eden's has remained relatively obscure; Hakluyt's has become
known as the "great prose epic of the English nation". Apart from their
contents, the sheer difference in size has surely played some role in the
physical survival of both books, and consequently in their present value - 
as distinct from their reputation. Hakluyt's three volumes are a common
possession of rare book libraries: a recent census has located some two
hundred and forty sets. As this article was being written, a copy priced
at $20,000 was for sale online: hardly a casual purchase, but still not
outside the reach of a generous research budget, not to mention a reasonably
well endowed library. Eden's Treatyse of the newe India survives
in only six copies; were one to come on the market, it would be almost
beyond price.
What changed between 1553 and 1598? While the pace of English
travel and exploration certainly increased during these 50-odd years,
Eden and others were simply not interested in many of the existing
materials which Hakluyt sought out for his larger collection. Many of
Hakluyt's documents had never been printed before, and some of the
voyages they recorded were forgotten by the time Hakluyt began his
work; in some cases, the records themselves had already vanished, and
testimony was solicited from elderly survivors. The idea of getting voyage
narratives into print and disseminating them was evidently not as
obvious in the middle of the sixteenth century as it may now seem in
the wake of Hakluyt, Purchas, and the last century or so of publications
by the Hakluyt Society and others. During the 45 years which separated
Eden's first book and the second edition of Principal Navigations, the materials
which Hakluyt collected had acquired a value which they did not
seem to have earlier.
In this essay, I will examine how value is assigned both to, and in,
two particular sets of materials present in both Eden's and Hakluyt's
collections: English accounts of West Africa and Muscovy from the
1550's. As compared to other parts of the Hakluyt anthology, these
materials have received relatively little attention from modern scholars;
yet they have a particular importance for a history of the travel book.
Documents on both regions appeared in Eden's second collection (1555),
were reprinted by Richard Willes in his 1577 revision of Eden, and again reprinted with changes and additions by Hakluyt in 1589 and
1599. They represent an early stage in the collection of first-person narratives,
while also allowing us to compare the treatment given them by
editors and editions over several decades; Eden's and Hakluyt's framing
comments and organizational schemes give some sense of the ways these
two editors understood both the documents and the places the documents
described.
What kinds of enterprises led the English to the coast of West Africa
and to Muscovy? In the early years of the decade, overlapping groups
of English investors set in motion a series of voyages in two directions.
The first trading voyage to West Africa took place in 1553, the same
year that a newly constituted company sent three ships to the northeast
in search of a passage to Cathay. Both voyages combined a kind of
disaster with a kind of success.
From the West African coast, two of three ships returned, but with
only forty out of the initial complement of one hundred and forty men;
the rest died of disease or were abandoned in Benin, and more died
soon after the return to England (PN VI, 151). Nonetheless, the voyage
turned a considerable profit, and in 1554 a second voyage was captained
by John Lok - whose brother Michael would become London
Agent for the Muscovy Company. Two of the three ships which sailed
northeast likewise came to grief, delayed and finally wintering in Lapland,
where the crews froze to death. The remaining ship, the Edward Bonaventure,
managed to round the Kola Peninsula and anchor in the White Sea,
at the mouth of the Dvina River (roughly, present day Arkhangel'sk).
From there, its captain - Richard Chancellor - proceeded south to Moscow
at the Tsar's invitation and delivered a letter from Edward IV intended
for "the Kynges, Princes, &amp; other potentates inhabytynge the Northeast
partes of the worlde towarde the myghtye Empire of Cathay" (Eden
1555, 308). Chancellor returned with information about the country
and its goods which encouraged the promoters to seek a charter from
the crown, which they received from Philip and Mary in 1555. Later
that year, Chancellor returned to Muscovy with two ships, bringing 
agents of the newly incorporated Muscovy company who were duly
granted privileges by the Tsar. Goods traded included cordage and
hemp, flax, train-oil (oil made from the rendered fat of whales or seals),
furs, hides, tallows (candles made from animal fat), and wax. The
Muscovy Company retained a monopoly of the White Sea trade into
the 1570s, as well as an exclusive right to trade in the interior without
duties or tolls.
This northern route to Muscovy was not unknown, and had been
described in print by the Hapsburg emissary Sigismund von Herberstein,
whose account both Eden and Hakluyt made use of in their collections.
The White Sea route was "not commonly frequented" before 1555,
much less was it a corridor for regular trade, and Muscovy itself remained
poorly known to western Europeans. More broadly, the English shared
with some other Europeans both intense interest in the northern parts
of Asia and a general ignorance about them. When members of what
would become the Muscovy company met to consider setting forth a
voyage in this direction, they could do no better than to interview two
Tartar grooms:
. . . two Tartarians, which were then of the king's Stable, were sent for, &amp; an interpreter
was gotten to be present, by whom they were demaunded touching their
Countrey and the maners of their nation. But they were able to answere nothing
to the purpose: being in deede more acquainted (as one there merily and openly
said) to tosse pottes, then to learne the states and dispositions of people.
The scene suggests both the cosmopolitan nature of London's population,
and the paucity of its geographical knowledge.
So if the "discovery" of a trade to Muscovy was new more in regard
to English trading patterns than in respect of actual knowledge, it was
nonetheless undertaken within the context of very long-distance exploration,
and the company would continue (albeit sporadically) to pursue
the grail of a Northern passage to Cathay and the Indies even as it
undertook regular and settled trade along the route Chancellor pioneered.
The voyages to West Africa, by contrast, were not a discovery
at all, since Portugal had an established trade along the coast dating 
from the 1440's; by the mid-sixteenth century, there were permanent
trading bases and a significant Afro-Portuguese population, some settled
on the previously uninhabited Cape Verde Islands off present-day
Senegal. The French had preceded the English as interlopers in this
trade, which at the time primarily exchanged cloth and metal goods
for ivory, gold, and malaguetta pepper ("grains of paradise"). As the
results of the first voyage and others made clear, the coast was not without
its dangers, but these came primarily from the disease environment
rather than from a population which, generally speaking, had been
involved in long-distance, cross-cultural commerce well before the advent
of Europeans and saw certain advantages in adding new trading partners
to compete with the old.
For Hakluyt, both sets of materials - like many other documents in
the collection - were valuable in general terms because they described
the extension of English presence, and commerce, into areas that were
at least new to them. Hakluyt wrote in the preface to the first edition
of Principal Navigations (1589) that
during my five years abroad [in Paris, 1583-88] . . ., I both heard in speech, and
read in books other nations miraculously extolled for their discoveries and notable
enterprises by sea, but the English of all others for their sluggish security, and continual
neglect of the like attempts . . . either ignominiously reported, or exceedingly
condemned.
His collection sought to remedy the sense that, outside Europe, most
areas were still new to the English. For Eden in the 1550's, the situation
was quite different, both rhetorically and historically: there, the secondary,
imitative, or dependent quality of English endeavor was simply
a fact, with consequences visible both in the work of the editor, and in
the experiences which his collection records.
A well-connected translator and sometime employee of the treasury,
Eden assembled his Treatise of the New India in the last year of Edward
VI's reign. It was followed in 1555 by a second collection, Decades of
the new world. Eden's collections both ostensibly translated other books.
The first both translated parts of Sebastian Münster's cosmography, and
followed it in dividing its material between Spanish voyages to the West,
and Portuguese ones to the East. Eden's prefatory matter mentions two
English initiatives - both the Cabot discoveries of the late 1400's and
the voyage then under way to find a Northeast passage to China - but
neither was documented in the collection. The second Eden anthology
translated part of Pietro Martire de Anghiera's De orbe novo (1516-30).
Eden added to this translation not only additional Spanish material but
two accounts of English voyages to West Africa, and a rather larger
assortment of items related (somewhat loosely) to English voyages in the
North.
Decades opens with an encomium to the almost divine achievements
of the Spanish in discovering and conquering America and an effusive
description of marriage celebrations between Philip of Spain and Mary
Tudor, proceeding to an insistent demand that England acknowledge
the authority of Spain. The contrast between this moment and the patriotic
prefaces of Hakluyt's Elizabethan collections is nothing short of
breathtaking: "stoop, England, stoop and learne to know thy lord and
master, as horses and other brute beasts are taught to do" (Eden 1555,
bi verso). Nonetheless, the deference of Decades was complicated. John
Parker suggests that England's northern voyages (begun in the reign of
Edward VI, continued after the accession of Mary) lay behind the
appearance of Eden's collections, devoted even as they were largely to
the accomplishments of other nations.
The first of Eden's two original narratives of travel to West Africa
was thematically concerned precisely with the issue of how to place oneself
in relation to a foreign expertise which had to be acknowledged,
because it could not be duplicated at home. It is a story with a moral,
and a surprisingly pointed one: the disastrous consequences of an English
captain's bad behavior towards his Portuguese second-in-command.

</text>
