<text id="J60" category="" words="2001" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Camera works:  photography and the twentieth-century word" Author="North, Michael. " PublicationDate="New York ; Oxford : Oxford University Press, 2005" SampledFrom="e-book" WebAddress="http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/oso/private/content/literature/9780195173567/p014.html#acprof-9780195173567-chapter-1">

Introduction.
Mechanical Recording and the Modern Arts.
In historical terms, at least, photography is the first of the modern arts. The very existence of a modern period, broken away from the time before, is to some extent the creation of photography, which has made all time since the 1840s simultaneously available in a way that makes the years before seem that much more remote. As Carlo Rim maintains, "the advent of modern times dates from the moment the first daguerreotype appeared on the scene. ... Thanks to the photograph, yesterday is no more than an endless today." In this most basic sense, art and literature have had to emulate the modernity of the photograph, attempting in their various ways to achieve the instantaneous newness that photography first brought to the cultural scene.
Photography and the modern arts are linked in a number of other ways as well, as several recent studies have shown. Whenever the issue of faithful mimesis is raised, the example of photography is apt to be influential, in a positive or a negative way. It is also clear that the habit of seeing photographically has affected modern experience to such an extent that certain oddities of the camera, especially its tendency to frame particular points of view and to isolate one moment from another, have become second nature for human observers as well. Recent studies of photography and literature have therefore shown in some detail how camera vision affects the motives and perhaps even the perceptions of influential modern writers. 
In showing how the camera has affected modern writing, however, scholars may have missed the more fundamental fact that photography is itself a kind of modern writing. One of the most revolutionary effects of the new medium was in offering hope of new methods of representation, neither linguistic nor pictorial but hovering in a kind of Utopian space between, where the informational utility of writing meets the immediacy of sight. If, as Yve-Alain Bois and Rosalind Krauss have long maintained, it is the mutual interference of the linguistic and the optical that makes modern art distinctive, then perhaps the common beginning of modernism in literature and the arts is to be found in the recording technologies that brought the whole relationship of word, sound, and image into doubt. 
Photography began to trouble this relationship from the very beginning, from the 1839 diary entry in which Fox Talbot jotted down the phrase "Words of Light." Talbot was working out the technical problems of a new procedure he was still calling "photogenic drawing," but the neologism caused much dissatisfaction, and the happy metaphor "words of light" inevitably provided what became the accepted name for the new medium.  Talbot's metaphor has been dead for so long that no one looking at a photograph today thinks of it as "light drawing," much less "light writing," but in fact the oldest of Talbot's photographs to survive is a picture of his own handwriting, tracing out the alphabet.  And though this particular subject was most probably necessitated by the practical limitations of Talbot's early method, it is the case that photography was originally promoted as a replacement for writing as well as a rival to painting. The famous bill placed before the French Chamber of Deputies in 1839 to secure Daguerre's invention for the state actually listed the reproduction of graphic notes as one of the new mediums primary uses.  Talbot offered his invention as a superior means of copying written documents, but even when it bypassed writing it could be used, he suggested, for keeping inventories, as a system of notation superior to writing but playing much the same role of information storage and retrieval.  In these early days, the sense that the "graph" in "photograph" pertained to writing rather than drawing was so strong that Elizabeth Eastlake could say the medium offered a "new form of communication ... neither letter, message, nor picture." 
The sense remained strong throughout the nineteenth century and well into the twentieth that photography provided a sort of notation suspended somehow between letters and pictures, a new alphabet, as it were. Impressed by Nadar's photographs of nineteenth-century Paris, Mallarmé exclaimed that light had become "photography's own form of 'writing.'"  In the next century, even as the new, more purely optical style of "straight" photography took hold, an underlying belief remained, as Sadakichi Hartmann put it, that "photographic illustration has become a new kind of writing."  Thus photography was strongly associated from its very beginnings with hieroglyphs, another form of writing that, in the popular view, bypassed sound and spoken language to reach the mind directly through the eye.  One of the first projects suggested for photography in France was a new expedition to Egypt, where it might record and bring back more Rosetta Stones,  but in a sense every photograph was felt to be a Rosetta Stone, decoding every written language by reference to a visual language common to all. Photography, Oliver Wendell Holmes predicted, was to become "the card of introduction to make all mankind acquaintances."  The new medium created a hopeful fascination with new forms of notation, revolutions that would also return to an ancient purity and directness, a pre-Babelic unity of word and thing.
In so doing, though, photography was just the first in a series of technologies that promised new and better forms of writing, some of which, like the phonograph, staked out that territory with their very names. Historians of the phonograph often note Edison's surprise that it might be used for music, since his original purpose for it was primarily stenographic.  All the early applications for this invention imagined it as a repository of language, reading aloud books and newspapers, recording speeches, taking letters. Even the music critic of the New York Post, as Lisa Gitelman notes, imagined phonographic newspapers and not recorded music.  This expectation recalled and reinforced the original association of photography with language: the common suggestion that Edison's new invention photographed sound depended on the idea that legible recording had in some way to be visible recording, like writing. Edison himself was mildly obsessed with the idea that phonograph records should be readable, not just by his own machines but by human beings, and he spent many hours with a microscope trying to find the letter  impacted in the indentations of a record.  Despite his failure, artists began to speculate about the possibility of phonographic writing through direct incision of what Laszlo Moholy-Nagy called "the language of the groove."  Among the general public there was widespread speculation about a phonographic alphabet, a set of patterns in the grooves that might be direct and specific yet also regular enough for iteration and recognition, and there was much consternation, popular and legal, when this hope was disappointed, and the idea had to be confronted of a notation, a writing, that could not in fact be read.  Thus phonographic inscription also came to be associated with hieroglyphs, which had themselves resisted being read for centuries, though they were finally found to be legible. The direct transcription of sound into any visible form, no matter how variable, seemed to promise a new universal language, or at least a universal alphabet, on which a fully motivated and wholly transparent language might be based. 
The rhetoric surrounding these two technologies is so similar because they represent popularly successful versions of an older and far more various project to induce nature to transcribe itself directly and automatically and therefore perfectly. To some extent, this project violates the currently accepted boundary between science and superstition, and to some extent it represents a profound shift in the way science defines and uses signs. The scientific method itself, according to Thomas L. Hankins and Robert J. Silverman, involved a repudiation of language in favor of firsthand sensory observation.  The old magical notion that words and things were necessarily linked was replaced by a desire to remove the subjectivity introduced into observation by language. As early as the sixteenth century, however, scientists needed to "observe" phenomena not particularly amenable to the physical senses, objects too small or too far away to be seen with the naked eye. Soon the telescope and the microscope were followed by other instruments, which did not just alter sense data but rather represented it, often in graphical form. Thus the problem of language was reintroduced into the research situation, for these instruments occupied a curiously ambiguous position as indices of physical phenomena that did not always iconically resemble what they were supposed to represent. What were they, then, languages or things? What were products like graphs to be considered to be, pictures or words? New systems of notation, such as the graphs of Edouard-Léon Scott de Martinville, seemed simultaneously to make pictures that were conventional and writing that was somehow motivated. Though the whole purpose of such scientific instrumentation was to codify and thus objectify investigation, it had the curious unintended effect of making observation seem dependent on mediation, while simultaneously presenting the possibility of languages that would, like the old magical languages, be linked necessarily to reality. The whole notion that there are two quite different ways in which human beings relate to reality, immediately through the senses and indirectly by means of symbols, began subtly to alter, with consequences so far-reaching they might be considered fundamental to the modern condition.
Hankins and Silverman place photography and phonography as episodes in a long history, in which science attempts to replace words with graphs, particularly graphs drawn by automatic recording devices. Perhaps the earliest attempts to perfect direct graphical notation are to be found in eighteenth-century projects for a kind of "traceology," a method of analyzing the gait of horses and human beings by preserving and schematizing the prints they make.  The first truly successful technology of this kind - the prototype, therefore, of all subsequent recording media - were the sound figures of Ernst Chladni, produced by vibrating thin plates of glass or metal dusted with sand. Early in the nineteenth century, these figures were celebrated as "the script-like-Ur images of sound," allowing scientists to "re-discover, or else to find the primeval or natural script by means of electricity."  At about the same time James Watt perfected an automatic indicator diagram to record variations in the pressure maintained by his steam engine, but this, the first automatic recording instrument, was kept a secret and therefore had little influence.  Throughout the nineteenth century and into the early twentieth, experimentalists tinkered with dozens of such machines meant to induce transcriptions directly from nature, many of which occupied the ambiguous territory between entertainment and science.
Perhaps the most commonly remembered of these researchers is Etienne-Jules Marey, now primarily thought of as a major figure in the prehistory of moving pictures. Early in his career, Marey invented a whole series of complex mechanisms designed to transform the muscle contractions of a frog, the flight of a bird, or the walk of a human being directly into graphic notation, "to coax a graphic language directly from living things." To capture more detail, he turned to photography and then film, developing in each case sophisticated techniques to schematize and graph the movements he wanted to study.  Marey's followers and assistants expanded his experiments in several directions, attempting to photograph speech or transcribe human locomotion, establishing a new scientific discipline of physiological registration that Francois Dagognet has called "biogrammatology."  The unifying aim of all such experiments, no matter what sense they addressed or what medium they exploited, was to induce nature to record itself, to extract from visible objects what Talbot called "self-representations" that would necessarily be encoded, insofar as they were encoded at all, in "nature's own script." 
The idea that these experiments in "biogrammatology" had yielded what Marey himself called "a kind of universal language"  depended on the apparently automatic connection between the subject and its self-transcription. "The 'trace,'" as Dagognet puts it, "was to be considered nature's own expression, without screen, echo or interference: it was faithful, clear and, above all, universal."

</text>
