<text id="J66" category="" words="2039" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="A humanistic philosophy of music " Author="Lippman, Edward A. " PublicationDate="Hillsdale, NY : Pendragon Press" SampledFrom="e-book" WebAddress="http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/pageviewer-idx?c=acls;cc=acls;rgn=full%20text;idno=heb07721.0001.001;didno=heb07721.0001.001;view=image;seq=00000007;node=heb07721.0001.001%3A2">

CHAPTER 1.
Our Field of Inquiry.
The history and the philosophy of music are obviously
dependent upon music for their existence, but they are not for
that reason of a lesser value or importance. They are in fact
intrinsic to musical experience in some measure, for it is difficult
to imagine any musical activity that is totally unaccompanied
by conceptual thought, or not in some way guided by theoretical,
aesthetic, and historical notions, or not provocative of some kind
of evaluation and criticism. But if we cannot perceive or think
or act while remaining completely unaware that we are doing
so, reflective thought would appear to be grounded in a central
characteristic of consciousness, and as the exercise of a natural
mental function, philosophy will be pleasurable as well as
inevitable. The pleasure it brings, however, is also due to an
attendant satisfaction of our desire for knowledge and to the
enhancement of our understanding.
Yet how can we justify each successive age and author in
writing philosophy down instead of just engaging in it?
Certainly it is only novel ideas and new values that can logically
claim to be worth recording and preserving. The basis of novelty
is found at once, however, in the distinctive perspective of each
cultural setting and each succeeding vantage point in time, and,
grounded in these, of each individual personality. It can
therefore be expected that musical philosophy will produce a
series of conceptions, which may be considered a counterpart
of the diverse cultural manifestations of music itself, or of the
historical unfolding of its potentialities. As a particular outlook
comes into being, along with corresponding kinds of music, the
conceptions of other times and places will be modified or
discarded in accordance with their relative compatibility to the
ideas that prevail or their contradition of them
But thought and culture build upon the past, and in so
doing they should tend to produce-as they clearly have done
in scientific fields-some kind of progressive insight; new
perspectives should not simply succeed but also somehow
amplify or incorporate older ones, becoming by that token more
complete. In the case of a cultural product such as music-as
opposed to an essentially constant object such as the physical
world-we are dealing not only with an increase in our
knowledge and understanding, but also with a change in and
an enlargement of the very object of study, a change which itself
often contains progressive and cumulative elements. Thus we
can reasonably hope to formulate something more than a
contemporary perspective coordinate with others; our view
should provide a conception of music in many respects more
complete than those of the past. But we cannot expect to secure
an understanding of music that will remain definitive or that
will be complete in an absolute sense. The future obviously
transcends both systematic analysis and past history and the
unpredictable novelty of human creativity is at least as evident
in speculative thought as it is in patterns of behavior or in art.
Thoughout most of its history, philosophic thought
concerning music proceeded from metaphysical, ethical, and
religious principles. The properties of music were conceived in
accordance with these more general concerns. But starting in
the European Rennaisance, increasing attention was given to
the perceptual properties and details of artistic experience. The
discoveries of the history and anthropology of music have
enabled us increasingly to examine a wide range of artistic
experience, so that the foundation of inductive aesthetics has
taken on a new breadth and importance. The aesthetician and
the philosopher of music can no longer content themselves with
an awareness that is limited either in range or in sensitivity.
A corresponding change has taken place in the area of
psychology, where the search for inherent features in human
perception has similarly drawn closer to musical experience.
For it is now not so much the analytic laboratory experiment
that arouses our interest-the investigation of elemental acoustic
events by physics and physiology, or the measurement of
isolated tonal attributes and intervallic responses by
psychophysics-but the study of configurational and cultural
properties. Influenced by phenomenology and Gestalt
psychology, our experimental procedures have turned away to
a great extent.from the examination of abstractly defined
elements and the artificiality of the laboratory task in an effort
to discover the intrinsic organizing capacity of perception.
This capacity, however, is dependent in part upon society
and culture. Indeed not only the configurational properties of
melodic phrases but even the nature and meaning of individual
sounds and tones are partly shaped by cultural forces. It is only
in modern Western civilization, for example-which a century
earlier had invented the analytic procedures of psychophysicsthat electronically generated sound with precisely constructed wave forms could become musical material. The synthesizing
power of perception, then, whether it results in the hearing of a
single tone or of a melodic and harmonic configuration, gives
rise to a compound process in which the inherent and cultural
components cannot be separated. For the effects of cultural
conditioning are essentially the same as those of native
endowment. Both have a corporeal manifestation as part of the
structure and function of the nervous system, and the exercise
of the ability they shape jointly is in both cases accompanied by
a feeling of selfevidence and naturalness. In this respect our
perceptual faculty is no different from our creative capacity,
which selects or devises materials for art and then combines or
forms them into meaningful patterns. Thus the basic data of
psychology-tones, intervals, melodic phrases-will ultimately
be of the same nature as the data of history or anthropology.
Both cultural and psychological studies were strongly influenced by the philosophy of natural science, which reduced history to the isolated specimen of music and psychology to
behaviorism. The musical composition was examined objectively by dissection, while perception, with equal objectivity, was studied by tabulating previouslydefined responses to
simple but essentially meaningless tasks. To be sure, historical
tendencies were responsible for this situation: the decline of
function and genre left the processes of musical evaluation and
understanding without a foundation; the single composition
was exposed to the advances of practitioners of "analysis" and
"aesthetics."
A humanistic history and psychology, on the other hand,
will not take the musical score, the phonograph record, or the
behavior of laboratory subjects as final facts, but will examine
the nature of the auditory objects of music phenomenologically,
as they are given in consciousness. For it is clearly always the
operation of the mind, now on the inchoate matter presented
by history and culture, now on that presented by nature and
human nature, that produces the objects of knowledge. In
psychology, of course, the auditory perceptual objects we study
are generally not examples of music in the full sense of the term;
they tell us more about perception than about music. They point
directly to transhistorical and transcultural features of music
but only indirectly, therefore, to music itself. A further
consideration is called for to determine the extent to which the
elements and configurational properties we have examined are
in fact part of musical experience or relevant to it. Although
psychology and history are fundamentally akin, it can be said
with some justice that the one deals more with the activity of
consciousness and the other more with its objects. We must add
the qualification for psychology, however, that the activity of
consciousness is not only grounded in corporeal experience but
also shaped by social forces; and every abstraction from the
organic totality or from the whole of culture involves the danger
of misunderstanding.
As far as aesthetic objects are concerned, we may consider
them to be modifications of the objects of commonsense
experience. Thus the processes of biological and social
adjustment, are not entirely irrelevent to the understanding of
works of art. It is in our everydayworld that we satisfy our need
for play and for exploration, and the individual objects and
people we learn to deal with often possess aesthetic
attractiveness as a prominent feature. But true aesthetic objects
are those in which aesthetic properties are dominant,although
only by exception does this dominance entirely suppresses
either biological or social functions. An aesthetic object
represents a degree of abstraction from the normal practical
involvement of perception; yet it plays a role in our orientation;
it has its place, and helps us to know our place, both in our
immediate environment of space and time and in our world of
imagination and history. And if we participate in a musical
performance, or attend a recital as a member of the audience,
or even listen alone to a phonograph record, the experience is
in every case structured by social institutions and relationships.
It is clear that objects of every type exist only as
counterparts of human existence. Their properties in general,
their weight, size, color, sound, and feel, like their reactions to
our actions, all have meaning only in relation to human
experience. This is true also as well of the conceptual forms that
accompany our sensorimotor experience, for these also arise
from the intrinsic properties of consciousness and of our sensory
apparatus. Our ability to deal with the physical and biological
world in which we are placed is due to the fact that in the last
analysis we have a similar nature; and even cognition would
seem to rest not only on bodily mobility and sense perception
but also on neurological patterns which are grounded in a
substratum of physical and chemical processes just as are the
events and objects ofthe external world. Similarly, in the very
different realm of historical and cultural understanding, our
knowledge depends upon a basic kinship in experience with
other human beings.
Thus the things we experience and know are colored and
even constructed in great measure by ourselves, both by the
constancies of human nature and by the idiosyncrasies of particular cultures or individuals. This is obviously the case with our
knowledge of people and their creations, but it is true also of
our knowledge of the physical world, In the case of our
knowledge of logic and mathematics, in which the truth of
propositions seems absolutely independent of human existence,
what we learn is no more than the tautologies of thought itself.
It is only art, aside from practical life and engineering, that
is directed at least in a general way, toward objects perceived
by the senses. Yet every field of human endeavor must have
some reference to such objects. History and science, for example,
in spite of the obvious differences between them, are alike in
being centered on objects of a conceptual or theoretical nature.
Science dissolves the world into fields of forces, harmonic
patterns, and equations: imaginative structures which change
in step with man's creativity or with the pressures of the
scientific community. In order to underpin and verify such
objects we must extend our native sensory capabilities by means
of a highly intricate instrumentation which nevertheless
ultimately registers what it detects on charts or in numbers that
are accessible to ordinary vision. History too creates theoretical
patterns of consecution and relationships that differ with each
historian; and it is perhaps even further from any validating
objects of commonsense observation, for the people whose
experiences we seek to narrate are no longer having these
experiences. Yet we depend again, ultimately, upon the
observable clues they have left behind in the form of writing
and artifacts.
Anthropology is more concrete than both science and
history; it provides the presentness of scientific facts without
their abstraction from experience, but the theoretical objective
is present as well, in the project of description and interpretation.
Indeed theoretical formulations will soon occupy the same
dominant position in anthropology that they do in science and
history, for the simple societies that constitute its object of
investigation are rapidly vanishing. Every field of study is
subject to history as well as to the varying interests and concerns
of culture. Even the sensory ingredient of art may take on the
less immediate form of imagined experience, as it does
characteristically in the case of literature; and even in music,
sensational qualities at least occupy a position of lesser
prominence in The Art of the Fugue than they do in the music of
Debussy or Stravinsky.

</text>
