<text id="J67" category="" words="1999" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Updated" Author="Updated" PublicationDate="Updated" SampledFrom="Updated" WebAddress="Updated">

In his influential essay "Nationalism and Social Division in Black Arts Poetry of the 1960s," Phillip Brian Harper defines late sixties' black epistemology through opposing structures of unity and discord. Using Amiri Baraka's "SOS" and "Black Art" as models, he argues that the latter, divisive poem trumps its predecessor's general call for racial solidarity, and that this act of superseding necessitates a reexamination of the common conceptions of Black Nationalism within the Black Aesthetic. "[S]ocial division within the black community," he contends, "is fundamentally constitutive of Black Arts nationalism"; Baraka's work, serving as a synecdoche for all subsequent Black Arts poetry, performs these divisions with manifold ferocity (248). 
   Harper modifies this claim with an eye towards sexual and epistemological concerns in his revision of the essay within the collection Are We Not Men? Following a long line of previous critics,1 Harper defines Black Nationalism as an essentially male project, and writes that "insofar as black identity [. . .] depends upon identification specifically as man [. . .] blackness will partake of the very uncertainty, tentativeness, and burden of proof that [. . .] characterize conventional masculinity" (40). Within this patriarchal orientation, Harper establishes two female archetypes: older poets such as Gwendolyn Brooks who make "Baraka's [initial unifying] enterprise [their] own," and younger counterparts such as Sonia Sanchez and Nikki Giovanni who "[wrote] beyond the 'call' manifested in [. . .] 'SOS,'" and espoused the later, polemical Barakan ideals (46). Thus, he divides the movement along sexually encoded ideological lines, with those who simply repeat Baraka's "call" and therefore "succumb to the rhetoric" on one side, and those who incorporate a "phallic standard of political engagement" to actively challenge such rhetoric on the other (43, 52). Harper's comments leave little doubt as to where his aesthetic interests lie, and he dismisses Brooks from the remainder of the essay after providing an oft-quoted passage from her 1972 autobiography, Report from Part One: 
My aim, in my next future, is to write poems that will somehow successfully "call" (see Imamu Baraka's "SOS") all black people, black people in taverns, black people in alleys, black people in gutters, schools, offices, factories, prisons, the consulate; I wish to reach black people in pulpits, black people in mines, on farms, on thrones[.]2 
   Curiously, Harper's quotation omits the final sentence of Brooks's statement: "My newish voice will not be an imitation of the contemporary young black voice, which I so admire, but an extending adaptation of today's G.B. voice" (RPO 183). This omission and other comparable lacunae are problems endemic to the scholarship concerning both Brooks's relationship to the Black Arts movement and, more generally, the position of black women within the patriarchal organizations of Black Power. Houston Baker, for example, uses the same elided quotation to argue that Brooks "cast[s] her lot with the new generation" (108), while Arthur Davis insists that "like many young and middle-aged writers, she [came] under the influence of the Black Aesthetics Movement" (100). In each of these cases, Brooks is figured as a passive agent with respect to Black Arts; she "submits" to its rhetoric, where alternative figures such as Baraka and Giovanni construct and reconstruct its epistemology. 
   The purpose of this essay is to interrogate (and finally to challenge) such suppositions and to recover what "newish voice" Brooks brings to her poetry upon exposure to the younger poets. Examining her three "Sermons on the Warpland," I argue that Brooks actively resists both the simplistic unitary rhetoric of Black Nationalism and the ideologically polemical stance that Harper describes. Shifting her poetry away from the performative (and ultimately coercive) aspects of both positions, Brooks instead employs a rhetoric of ambivalence in her representation of the nascent Black Aesthetic. In so doing, she situates the Black Nationalist movement, and, concomitantly, the black community from which it sprung, as highly contested hermeneutical spaces of inquiry, locations where previously irreconcilable social divisions can be negotiated and redefined. By examining this alternative response to the question of Black Nationalism, we can begin to see Brooks not only as a figure influenced by the Black Arts movement, but, more importantly, as a poet whose work challenges and reconsiders the grounds upon which the movement rests. This study therefore offers a critical alternative to the previous ideological understanding of the Black Arts movement by uncovering a feminine (if not feminist) counterpart to Baraka's masculine aesthetic program. 
"Define and / medicate the whirlwind" 
Critics such as Angela Jackson and Norris B. Clark consider the events of 1967 to be the transformative impetus behind Brooks's interest in the new Black Aesthetic. During the spring of 1967, Brooks attended the Second Writers' Conference at Fisk University, where she met the fiery Baraka and witnessed his galvanizing effect upon the primarily black audience. Shortly thereafter, Brooks befriended Walter Bradford, the man who would introduce her to the Blackstone Rangers and to whom the "Second Sermon" would be dedicated. Late in the year, Brooks facilitated the Rangers' poetry workshops in Chicago, while contemplating the transfer of her own publications from the white-owned Harper and Row to Dudley Randall's new Broadside Press. These decisions illustrate the changes that were taking place in her catholic mind, and, as Brooks's autobiography makes clear, the decisions resulted in a radical shift in her poetic program. Writing just three years later, she would categorize 1967 as the fulcrum about which her poetry turned: "Until 1967 I had sturdy ideas about writing and about writers which I enunciated sturdily. [. . .] Until 1967 my own blackness did not confront me with a shrill spelling of itself" (RPO 73, 84). 
   Published the following year, In the Mecca marks Brooks's first poetic engagement with the "shrill spelling" of blackness.3 In a shrewd analysis of the work, Norris Clark describes the ways in which Brooks's political transformations reproduce themselves in her poetic explorations, offering a sense of the changes in Brooks's epistemological landscape: 
Her emphasis has shifted from a private, internal, and exclusive assessment of the identity crises of twentieth-century persons to a communal, external, and inclusive assessment of the black cultural experience. That change not only corresponds to the fluctuating social, political, and ideological positions of the national black American communities during the sixties and seventies, but it also correlates with the evolution of aesthetic humanism's fundamental concerns about the nature of reality, our relationship to it and its vast variety. 
(84) 
Although Clark separates the socio-political / black and aesthetic / humanist components of Brooks project, when examining the two poems that close the collection - "The Sermon on the Warpland" and the "Second Sermon" - I find the two projects to be inextricably linked. In both poems, Brooks casts "the nature of reality" and "our relationship to it" as necessarily political questions that pertain directly to the diverse meanings ascribed to Black Nationalism. As her epigram to "The Sermon on the Warpland" makes clear, "The fact that we are black / is our ultimate reality," and it is from this reality and its manifold implications that Brooks tests her "newish voice." It is upon this reality that Brooks builds her own conception of the Black Aesthetic. 
   Brooks begins "The Sermon on the Warpland" with a series of structural paradoxes: "And several strengths from drowsiness campaigned / but spoke in Single Sermon on the warpland. / And went about the warpland saying No" (451). Beginning in medias res, Brooks jars the reader into the lyric present of her poem while alluding to a preceding, though absent, structure. This hypotactic entry and its repetition in the third line join with the explicit binaries in the stanza - "strengths" / "drowsiness," "saying" (proclaiming) / "no" (negating), and "several" / "Single" - to destabilize causation and offer a hermeneutical key to the poem. To understand the "warpland," the reader must confront the elaborate ways in which accumulation of meaning, with paradox and juxtaposition, is a necessary component of the black "reality." 
   What is the warpland? Leslie Wheeler maps the polyvalency of the term to the Sermon on the Mount, the "warped land" of an America torn by racial strife, the "'war planned' by black nationalists against white America, and even a 'warplane,' a carrier for this militant message" (231). Embedded within these possibilities lie both paradox and consonance. Just as Brooks claims to speak a "Single Sermon" from "several strengths" (note the genderless designation here), her polysemous subject - "warpland" - challenges her readers through a language of what could be called motivated ambiguity or, more polemically, a feminine semiotics of black empowerment. 
   This language contrasts greatly with that of Baraka, whose thematically analogous "Sermon for Our Maturity" illuminates the divide between the masculine and feminine lexicons of Black Power. In the poem, he outlines his Black Nationalist project in terms both singular and direct:  
We want to see you again as ruler of your own space Big Negro 
Big ol Negro 
          growin 
          wind storm flyin thru 
          your huge blue lung 
     Lung filled with hurricanes 
     of transparent fingerpops 
     and need to be changed to moans 
Stretch out negro 
      Grow "Gro 
     Gwan "Gro Grow 
Stretch out Expand . . . 
While his language can stray from the literal ("transparent fingerpops"), the bulk of Baraka's message is a clear appropriation of Manifest Destiny rhetoric: the male Negro must rule his own space. Indeed, as Harper suggests, "Ambivalence can have no place [. . .] in the prosecution of such a revolutionary political program as the Black Aesthetic was supposed to represent" (52). Sandra Hollin Flowers takes this sentiment one step further, claiming, "When the masses become confused about ideology, the entire philosophy loses credibility" (12).4 But whereas Baraka's plain style presents little room for political ambivalence, Brooks's poem embraces and indeed requires a reader who actively interrogates the precepts upon which Black Power rests. As such, when Brooks finally employs imperatives in her "Second Sermon," she couches them in opacity: 
Salve salvage in the spin, 
Endorse the splendor splashes; 
Stylize the flawed utility; 
Prop a malign or failing light. . . 
Through the elaborate, sonic word play of "salve salvage" and "splendor splashes," Brooks casts poetic language as a genderless, abstract, and therefore unstable political mechanism that must be negotiated and transformed by the reader. 
   In so doing, Brooks's poem challenges the implicitly hierarchical relationship between speaker and reader of the Black Aesthetic. As Harper argues, poets such as Baraka engender divisions within the black community through a binary system of "I" (or "we") / "you" wherein the poet achieves a position of cultural authority. Conversely, "any 'you' that these Black Arts poets invoke can function as a negative foil against which the implicit I who speaks the poem can be distinguished as a politically aware, racially conscious, black nationalist subject" (48). In the "Sermon for Our Maturity," this binary arises in Baraka's assumption of "we" and subsequent diminution of the reader to "you" or "Negro." Brooks's poetry makes no such claims - in fact, she announces the opposite by assuming a voice of "several strengths." Her voice thereby enacts a process of the black community speaking to itself and explores the diverse implications of its "ultimate reality" from a position within, rather than external to, its audience. Lesley Wheeler disparages such a move, writing that in so doing, the poem "minimiz[es] Brooks's literary authority" (231). But this seems to be exactly Brooks's point; by minimizing her own authority, she maximizes her black audience's political efficacy: a perfect inversion of the Barakan program. 
   Thus, Brooks's poetry moves away from prescriptive imperatives towards a program comparable to the consciousness-raising efforts of the women's liberation movement of the late sixties. Both manifestations of the broader "Movement" redefine their audience demographics, speaking directly to their oppressed compatriots rather than white patriarchal figures of power. Moreover, the efforts foreground the incomplete applicability of any holistic ideology and champion the complexity of any social or cultural epistemology. As Alice Echols writes, 
[F]or some women's liberationists consciousness-raising was a way to avoid the tendency of some members of the movement to try to fit women within existing [. . .] paradigms.

</text>
