<text id="J68" category="" words="2018" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Ends of Enchantment Colonialism and Sir Gawain and the Green Knight" Author="Lynn Arner" PublicationDate="June 1, 2006  " SampledFrom="Texas Studies in Literature & Language Vol. 48, No. 2, Summer 2006 " WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?hid=122&sid=d9a3dba2-c59e-4b97-a7eb-250f6a5d4188%40sessionmgr113&vid=3">

By the thirteenth century, the English had learned that the Welsh were
treacherous and fickle. In the last quarter of the fourteenth century, the
English trembled when the Welsh both raided English territory and produced
an alarming increase in the number of settlers migrating into English
border counties. After the widespread Welsh uprising in the first decade
of the fifteenth century, the English realized that the Welsh were not the
submissive and deferential natives they had feigned to be, but were a
perfidious people, on par with the wild Irish. These "insights" into the nature
of the Welsh were widely held perceptions among the English in the
late Middle Ages. Lest the English forget that the Welsh possessed these
characteristics. Sir Gawain and the Green Knight (SGGK) was prepared to
remind them.
SGGK was thoroughly tied to England's colonial project in Wales when
the poem was composed. SGGK is typically dated between 1350 and 1400
(a common ascription being the last quarter of the fourteenth century), a
period during which the English were attempting to complete their colonization
of Wales, while the Welsh violently opposed such domination.
Resembling several Arthurian histories from medieval Britain, SGGK is
structured by these colonial conflicts and, appropriately, arises from a border
culture: the poem is conventionally believed to have been composed
in northwest England, alongside the Welsh border, and employs a northwest
midlands dialect, specifically, the dialect of Lancashire and Cheshire.
Appropriately, the bulk of SGGK's narrative action unfolds in the English-
Welsh borderland. This location is specified at the beginning of Gawain's
quest to find the Green Knight. Gawain initially journeys through the
realm of Logres (England, south of the Humber) and eventually reaches
northern Wales. Gawain passes the Anglesey Islands, fords rivers near the
headlands, crosses at Holy Head, and lands "In be wyldrenesse of Wyrale"
("In the wilderness of Wirral," 701), a peninsula just inside England,
by the northeastern border of Wales. Gawain is in Wirral when Bertilak's
castle magically appears, making SGGK a border romance. 
This article investigates SGGK's participation in colonial struggles
between the English and the Welsh in the late fourteenth century. As the
models of ideology employed in British cultural studies attest, a text does
not simply reflect the political climate in which it is composed but intervenes
in the political terrain and participates in the production of the
social formation. Hence, using a methodology in dialogue with Stuart
Hall, Raymond Williams, Louis Althusser, and Antonio Gramsci, this article
examines how the ideologies speaking through SGGK attempted to
reformulate readers' conceptions of themselves and of their neighbors and
thus shape their perceptions of how to negotiate English-Welsh conflicts.
The defining work of SGGK in relation to England's colonization
of Wales is that of Patricia Clare Ingham, and we disagree dramatically
about how to understand the English-Welsh negotiations embedded in
the poem. Ingham argues that, as the poem unfolds, the issues surrounding
colonization raised early in the text disappear and that the ethnic and
geographic disparities between the English and the Welsh in the first half
of the poem collapse to be replaced by gender difference. I maintain that
SGGK insists throughout the entire poem - as did, in general, the English
and the Welsh in the late fourteenth century - that the two peoples differed
greatly. Ethnic and geographic incongruities are not effaced as SGGK
unfolds, but are reinscribed at the locus of gender - more precisely, at
the site of female sexuality - in a conventional move that acts to further
elaborate and consolidate colonial power by buttressing ideologies of colonialism
with ideologies of gender.
This divergence points to a more fundamental disagreement between
Ingham's work and my own. We understand the English colonization
of the Welsh, and hence the poem's colonialist politics, very differently.
Ingham writes,
Welsh and English interaction in march towns, at regional marketplaces,
on the battlefield, or in the narrative tropes of a Middle English
poem become the multiple places where unity is forged from ethnic heterogeneities.
Colonial union becomes an act of cultural synchronicity,
a coordination of capitulation . . . Rhetorics of distance and differentiation - 
the desire to separate "Welsheries" from "Englishries" in late
medieval histories, or in the case before us to determine once and for
all which parts of Gawain are Welsh or English - efface the familiarities,
shared dreamings, common spaces of household and story.
Ingham views the intermixing of the Welsh and English (in the poem
and in Wales) as the creation of a hybridity, a conflation which is, for
the most part, a reasonably pleasant cultural and geographical commingling.
Rhonda Knight's work on SGGK and colonization also centers on
hybridity, insisting that Gawain's identity is a "cultural collage" and that
Bertilak embodies Anglo-Welsh hybridity, reflective of the border region.
Knight acknowledges the harshness of England's seizure of Wales but
claims that by the time SGGK was composed, the intensity of conquest and
occupation had subsided to be replaced by a more settled coexistence.
Hence, both Knight and Ingham seem unaware that the English conquest
of the Welsh in the late fourteenth century was frequently bloody: many
Welshmen and women were dispossessed of their lands and livelihoods;
and many were killed by the invaders. Focusing more strongly on consensual
relations than coercive ones, Ingham roots her discussion in the
dialectical (specifically in Homi Bhabha's formulation of mimicry); but
when discussing a dialectic, it is important to emphasize that two disparate
groups do not approach their convergence on equal terms, as
Ingham's work frequently seems to imply. As Antoruo Gramsci and Stuart
Hall argue, when a dominant group seeks to produce hegemony, there is
a dialectic, where, in order to be effective, the ruling group must take account
of the interests and tendencies of the subaltern groups over whom
hegemony will be exercised. However, such compromise does not imply
equity, and the two groups do not contribute equally to the production of
the new social formation. Ingham and Knight make the power relations
in the poem and in Wales seem more equitable and especially more palatable,
I would argue, than they indeed were. As the historical discussion
in this article will demonstrate, relations between the Welsh and the colonizing
English - including in northeastern Wales and in the Marches in
the southeast - were generally bitter in the second half of the fourteenth
century. Accordingly, rather than arguing for the leveling of dissimilarities
and the liquidation of "ethnic heterogeneities . . . into nothing more than
the differences of an extended family," as Ingham holds or for some collage
of identities as Knight maintains, this article argues that SGGK insists
that the Welsh and the English are two distinct groups and that the poem
promoted England's conquest of Wales.
England's Conquest of Wales.
As R. R. Davies explains, by the close of the twelfth century, the Anglo-
Normans had entrenched themselves firmly in much of Wales, especially
in the southeast, in the far southwest, and, in places along the eastern
border. By the end of the next century, Edward I had paid extraordinary
amounts to effect and to sustain the conquest of the remaining areas of
north and west Wales, areas that had more successfully resisted colonization.
Thereafter, the Welsh provoked constant anxiety in the English.
There were occasional outbreaks of violence by the Welsh against their
colonizers, including anti-English violence in the north in the 1340s.
The English feared Welsh uprisings, a fear that intersected with apprehension
that the French and the Scots would employ Wales as a threshold for
attacking England. This trepidation mounted rapidly after the resumption
of the Hundred Years War in 1367, producing English garrisons at most
Welsh castles in the 1370s. Tensions in Wales grew palpably in the last
three decades of the fourteenth century. Ruthless English lords exploited
Welsh tenants to a particularly pronounced degree, and under these
conditions the indigenous community grew increasingly resentful. Relations
between the rural Welsh and burgesses in English towns in Wales
were fraught in places as distant as Carmarthen and Flintshire. In the
1370s, Owain Lawgoch, another in a long line of Welsh rebels emerged,
proclaiming his intention to recover Wales. Lawgoch's cause attracted the
support of the French, the Castilians, and some leading men in northern
Wales, and in response, the English government assassinated Lawgoch.
The last quarter of the fourteenth century witnessed a resumption and
intensification of campaigns by English counties bordering Wales against
Welsh raids and against what the English perceived to be an alarming
influx of Welsh settlers into English border counties.
Northeast Wales in particular generated considerable anxiety for the
English near the end of the fourteenth century: in the 1390s, it was the site
of both a bitter family feud and a violent demonstration that threatened to
become a sizable uprising. In 1400, an insurrection, led by Owain Glyn Dwr,
did erupt. Northern Wales was the seat of Glyn Dwr's power, with Glyn Dwr
also enjoying the support of his powerful cousins from Anglesey. English boroughs
in northern Wales were the primary targets of Glyn Dwr's followers
in their initial forays, although insurgency quickly spread throughout Wales.
Glyn Dwr's uprising was the longest rebellion in Wales since the Norman
Conquest, and the uprising threatened to secure Welsh independence from
foreign rule. However, by 1408, Welsh rebels had effectively lost the battle.
Whatever their biological or cultural interminglings, the Welsh and
the English understood themselves to differ greatly. This was evident on
the part of the English through their pronounced divisions between themselves
and the Welsh administratively and institutionally. As the thirteenth
century unfolded, the categorization of "the Welsh" versus "the English"
became much sharper, and the existence of two separate peoples was institutionalized
in the governance of Wales. The Welsh not only differed from
the English but were for many purposes considered inferior. This shift in
perceptions was discernable in newly emergent pejorative representations
of the Welsh in official documents - especially claims that the Welsh were
treacherous and fickle. In the fourteenth century, the distinction between
conqueror and conquered, settler and native, was even more clearly defined
in formal and institutional terms than at any other time. For the Welsh,
a pronounced distinction between themselves and the English was intact 
not only as the sporadic anti-English violence throughout the fourteenth
century testified, but as the widespread rebellion, led by Glyn Dwr, of the
colonized against their colonizers proclaimed. Most Welshmen and women
were united against the English under a common feeling of oppression and
under a shared political and historical identity. SGGK articulates - and
helps to produce - the understanding that the English and the Welsh differed
dramatically and that the two peoples were antagonistic.
Colonialism, King Arthur, and SGGK.
English-Welsh colonial struggles included contestations over King Arthur.
According to Welsh traditions, the invading Saxons drove Arthur and his
Britons into Wales. The Welsh not only claimed to be Arthur's descendants,
but they traced their glorious heritage through Arthur to Brutus,
to Aeneas, and ultimately to Troy. Elissa R. Henken explains that, in the
Middle Ages, Arthur confirmed the inherent worth of the Welsh by establishing
their honorable and often glorious past and by offering the promise
of a glorious future. Arthur became one of the most renowned redeemerheroes
of the Welsh in the Middle Ages - a figure who would someday
return to emancipate his people. Medieval Welsh texts, including the
Mabinogion and Geoffrey of Monmouth's writings, typically situate Arthur
and his court in Wales, frequently at Caer Llion ar Wysg (Caerleon-on-
Usk). For the English, however, Arthur and the Britons were forebears of
Englishmen. Hence, medieval English texts more readily identify Camelot
as Arthur's primary dwelling, located in some undisclosed spot in England.
Some English kings, especially Edward I and Edward III, claimed
descent from Arthur, citing his sovereignty over Britain as proof that English
monarchs ought to rule the British Isles.
SGGK emphatically participates in English-Welsh contestations over
Arthur and his lineage. In its opening lines, the poem provides a thumbnail
sketch of Arthur's genealogy: Aeneas flees Troy, leading to the founding of
Rome (and later of Tuscany and Lombardy); Brutus, descendent of Aeneas,
abandons his homeland to settle in Britain; and, of the subsequent kings of
Britain, Arthur is the noblest (1-26).

</text>
