<text id="J72" category="" words="2029" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Pacific Maritime Association 2006 Annual Report" Author="Pacific Maritime Association " PublicationDate="2006 Pacific Maritime Association. " SampledFrom="Annual Report 2006. San Francisco: Pacific Maritime Association. p. 21--26." WebAddress="http://www.pmanet.org/pubs/AnnualReports/2006/PMA%202006%20Annual%20Report.pdf">

Southern California leads record year in volume
For many on the Southern California waterfront, the biggest event in 2006 was the lack of any big event.
Unlike some recent years in which volume increases led to labor shortages or cargo back-ups, 2006 saw record movement without significant delays or deficiencies. The
Southern California ports moved a record-breaking number of containers, with totals of 6.06 million loaded container TEUs in Los Angeles and 4.71 million in Long Beach. Combined, those numbers were up more than 12 percent from 2005, and represent a 43 percent increase
in the past four years.
Steps taken by PMA in recent years to facilitate this cargo growth  -  an agreement with the ILWU to hire additional workers as needed; aggressive forecasting and analysis to determine labor needs; and training programs to enable employers to meet those needs  -  led to a year in which 99.9 percent of all labor orders were filled. Put another way, there were no discernable shortages of
labor on the Southern California waterfront. Coast-wide numbers show strength
At other major container ports along the coast, recent volume gains solidified:
Oakland moved a record 1.63 million loaded TEUs, while Tacoma and Seattle
fell just short of previous records, at 1.36 million and 1.30 million TEUs, respectively.
Given the enormous gains in Southern California, these figures showed the tremendous
strength of the West Coast waterfront.
In the last four years, coast-wide container traffic has risen 41 percent, while the registered
workforce has increased by 38 percent  -  to a total of 14,279 workers. For 2006,
overall coast tonnage rose at a healthy 8 percent, to a record 361 million revenue
tons. Put another way, 1 million tons of cargo  -  ranging from automobiles to fruit to
clothing, shoes and consumer electronics  -  moved through West Coast ports each day
of the year. To learn more about 2006 cargo
movement, please see pages 57-76 of this report.
Technology Advances Continue
Four years after the landmark agreement that enabled employers to bring information and clerk technology to the waterfront, PMA members have made significant gains in modernizing terminals. Looking ahead, employers have their sights set on further innovation
that will allow the West Coast waterfront to continue to grow.
A primary goal of the 2002 PMAILWU agreement was to change the
practice of clerk intervention when readily available electronic information
could speed the flow of information  -  and therefore cargo  -  on the terminal.
Examples include the introduction of video cameras and OCR readers that
are in use at 85 percent of truck gates coast-wide. Other such innovations
have significantly reduced the number of clerk shifts required to move containers
through the terminal, while enabling volume growth that has supported
thousands of new industry jobs and brought major benefits to the regional and U.S. economies.
By 2008, it is anticipated that many terminals will have fully integrated
systems that include video cameras, OCR readers and GPS systems. The
result will be the ability to know where a container is at any given time, in a
manner that is accurate, reliable and rapidly obtainable. Further innovations
will enable the continued efficient
deployment of workers throughout
the facility.
Terminal Security Moves Forward
In 2006, steps were taken to advance the Transportation Worker Identification
Card (TWIC) program, while a pilot program in Oakland is laying the foundation
for increased terminal security. The TWIC program is a federally mandated
secure identification credential that is essential to port security. It has been under development in various forms since September 2001, and the first phase (TWIC enrollment) is
expected to be underway in 2007. In addition, as part of this phase, there will
be TWIC biometric reader prototype testing at Los Angeles/Long Beach. The
employers have participated at all levels of planning, design and testing, in conjunction
with the federal government. The ILWU has participated in these
forums as well. The industry is vitally concerned with
port security, and the TWIC is an essential element to aid in knowing who
is on the waterfront at any given time. PMA stands ready to assist the Coast
Guard and Transportation Security Administration with the successful
implementation of TWIC so that neither the enrollment nor rollout processes
unnecessarily impact terminal operations nor impede commerce.
The Oakland pilot program uses grantfunded turnstile entry gates and readers
installed by the port, along with a special electronic PMA training ID
card, to monitor terminal access. This pilot program has already provided
valuable lessons for the broader roll-out of TWIC coast-wide.
GSST VI Brings Focus to Security
The General Safety Training program, widely heralded as an outstanding tool to orient new
workers and veterans alike to waterfront safety
issues, has undergone its latest evolution  -  and a slight name change.
Reflecting the ongoing importance of waterfront security, and the recognition that workers play a key role in maintaining it, the program is now titled General Safety &amp; Security Training VI (GSST VI). After significant revisions in 2006, it includes a new stand-alone module on security, and an increased focus on waterfront vigilance and alertness.
GSST VI will be rolled out in 2007. Key themes include: "own your safety," "scan and focus," and "create a safety net." The program includes classroom
learning, instructional videos and a hands-on workbook to reinforce key
lessons. All waterfront workers are required to participate in this program upon entering the industry and then every three years thereafter.
PMA Members Fuel Environmental Gains
In 2006, several PMA members announced major environmental initiatives,
while the industry as a whole found ways to reduce air emissions from vessels and terminal equipment. Industry initiatives have also resulted
in fewer trucks on the road and less idling in the yard.
Vessels: One company made the decision to burn low-sulfur fuel in the
main and auxiliary engines on all of its ships calling California. The switch, made 24 miles from the coast, is reducing emissions by an estimated
400 tons each year. Several PMA members announced or implemented
plans to "cold-iron" their ships, making use of shoreside electric
power while in port. Others are burning low-sulfur fuel in auxiliary
engines to reduce vessel emissions at the dock. Nearly all carriers have
reduced vessel speeds entering San Pedro Bay, lowering annual NOx emissions by hundreds of tons. PMA members are testing marine engine
technologies  -  slide valves, a next-generation lubricating system, sea water
scrubber technologies and on-board emulsification of residual fuels  - that hold promise for further pollution reduction.
Terminals: Marine terminal operators in California have voluntarily replaced
or retrofitted more than 1,100 pieces of yard equipment with post-combustion
technologies such as Diesel Oxidation Catalysts, particulate filters
and cleaner diesel. One terminal in Southern California operates a fleet
of more than 50 propane-powered yard tractors, while others are experimenting with LNG-powered tractors.
In some cases, PMA member-operated equipment already meets or exceeds
2010 air quality standards. On-dock rail programs are eliminating thousands
of truck trips each week. And it is estimated that Southern California's
PierPass program has shifted about 40 percent of cargo moves to off-peak
hours, saving thousands of hours of truck idling on area freeways.
Terminal Operators Reduce Emissions
The California Air Resources Board has implemented stringent
regulations for terminal cargohandling equipment. PMA and
the terminal operators worked closely with CARB to hammer out these tailored regulations that
will improve air quality for communities
surrounding the ports.
As of this writing, terminal operators are 30 percent ahead of
expected emissions reductions. In addition, they have tested a
variety of means to further reduce emissions, such as alternative and
low-sulfur fuels, post-combustion catalysts and particulate filters.
McNeill Retires from PMA
John McNeill, Vice President, Contract Implementation, retired in June 2006. McNeill joined PMA in
2003 after having spent more than three decades in the industry with Marine Terminals Corporation. A seasoned executive, he used a combination of strategic perspective and strong management skills to organize and create a well-run contract implementation
department. This unit is known for being tenacious and pragmatic in its approach to the observation and application of manning rules under the labor agreements.
PMA President Jim McKenna said: "John's leadership has made a real difference in our ability to manage the West Coast waterfront. He's tough, strategic and
always has the industry's best interests at heart." A long-serving member of PMA's Coast Steering Committee and its Negotiation Committee, McNeill became
chairman of the Employers' Pacific Coast Safety Committee in 1999. He also served as a PMA member of the Board of Directors of the National Maritime Safety Association. McNeill continues to provide consulting services to PMA. 
Training: Record Numbers Continue
As a result of continued increases in both the size of the workforce and the
need for skilled workers, the PMA Training Department had a busy, successful
year in 2006. Training staff worked with record numbers of longshore
workers in skilled equipment operations such as container gantry
crane, top handler, side pick, fork lift, heavy lift and straddle carrier. Furthermore,
casual processing  -  bringing new workers into the industry  -  continued
in Los Angeles/Long Beach, and began in San Diego, Tacoma and
Seattle. Skilled equipment operators are at a premium in the major Southern
California ports of Los Angeles/Long Beach, where terminals are moving more cargo than ever before without having additional space to expand.
In many cases, containers are being stacked rather than stored on wheeled
chassis. As a result, more labor is needed to move and stack the cargo.
An example of the increase in training needs can be seen in top-handler &amp; side-pick operations. Plans were made for 280 workers to be trained during the period from July 2006 through June 2007. Halfway through that period  -  by the end of 2006  -  270 had
already been trained. Further details on PMA training
programs can be found on page 70. 
Air Quality Tests: Terminals Within Limits
A federal agency charged with overseeing worker safety has found that
on-terminal air quality is well within regulatory limits. The National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) issued its final report after overseeing tests at the ports of Los Angeles, Oakland and Tacoma. Further PMA-ILWU tests
in Portland using a private contractor also showed emissions to be well
within legal limits. These tests were requested by the ILWU  -  and agreed to by PMA  -  during their 2002 contract negotiations. Further tests by local agencies are expected.
Legal Developments
During 2006, PMA and its members reached settlement with a group of
casual longshore workers in California who claimed they were owed wages as
a result of late dispatch from the hiring halls that are jointly operated
by PMA and the ILWU. It is worth noting that conditions have changed
on the West Coast waterfront in such a way that this matter is unlikely to be an issue in the future. With an increase in the size of the registered
workforce and the addition of new casual workers, PMA is confident that
work on the waterfront will continue to run smoothly, even at a time of
record cargo volume.
Throughout 2006, PMA continued to vigorously defend the interests of its
members against a number of lawsuits and charges filed with administrative
agencies. PMA continues to succeed in having most lawsuits dismissed
prior to trial.
PMA was pleased to welcome a new attorney into its Legal Department in
mid-2006. Todd Amidon, an experienced labor and employment attorney,
joined as Senior Counsel, replacing Greg Wellons, who opted to move on
from PMA in 2005. Amidon joined General Counsel Craig Epperson, Senior Counsel Kathy O'Sullivan, and Legal Secretary Edie Apostolos at Headquarters.
Regional Developments
Northern California
The Port of Oakland, while not experiencing the exponential growth of 2005, saw modest increases in both container traffic and overall volume in 2006. At the same time, gains in technology and changes to the layout of several terminals have enabled greater efficiency and throughput.
In the last year, employers have focused on technology at the "in" and "out" truck gates to speed the flow of containers into and out of the yard. Technology has also improved the efficiency of vessel operations, and several terminals have begun construction projects that are expected to further enhance operations.

</text>
