<text id="J73" category="" words="2012" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Determinants of Airport Choice in a Multi-Airport Region" Author="Erwin A. Blackstone, Andrew J. Buck, and Simon Hakim" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Atlantic Economic Journal (2006)34:313Y326" WebAddress="http://proquest.umi.com/pqdlink?Ver=1&Exp=12-21-2015&FMT=7&DID=1135519291&RQT=309&clientId=14829">

Until 1984, the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB) was responsible for regulating airfares
in the United States. As a consequence of that regulation, commercial passenger carriers
competed on many dimensions other than price. Such behavior was recognized as being
economically inefficient. The price system was not being allowed to direct resources to
their greatest value in use. The CAB was dismantled on the premise that price
competition among carriers would benefit consumers and direct productive resources
to their greatest value in use. It was felt that, inter alia, the threat of entry would be
sufficient to prevent airlines from being able to exploit apparent monopoly power. That
premise ignores the fact that consumers are an essential element in the exercise of
market power. If consumers do not search for low fares, then it is unlikely that the threat
of entry will have much impact on the fare structure. The effect of the entry of a low fare
carrier will only be the reallocation of fliers among carriers at an airport, with little
impact on the allocation of passengers among airports. Indeed, one of the current stylized
facts about air travel is that there is more variation in price among carriers at an airport
than among airports. It is possible to evaluate the effect of low fares on consumer
behavior, and by implication the likely success of the threat of entry as a disciplinary
device, by examining multi-airport markets. The unwillingness of flyers to travel to other
airports to obtain lower fares increases the ability of carriers to exploit monopoly power
and discriminate in prices. Since broad geographic markets are often used in merger
cases,1 our analysis may shed some light on such markets.

Ashford and Benchemam [1987] studied airport choice in central England for the
period 1975Y1978. Among business travelers, distance to the airport was the most
important variable, followed by frequency of service. Fare was found to be most
important among those traveling for pleasure. Caves et al. [1991] found access
time, frequency, and fare to be significant variables in a model of choice between mature
and emerging airports in England. Thompson and Caves [1993] used data for 1983 to
study airport choice in northern England. For both business and leisure travelers,
distance to the airport and number of available seats were important. Frequency of
service was also important for business travelers. In the San Francisco market, Harvey
[1987] found access time and frequency of service to be determinative. None of these
earlier efforts would lead one to believe that the difference in fares from different
airports would lead to more competition among carriers, or that fare differences could
lead to the reallocation of market share among airports. More recent studies, using
various modifications of the multinomial logit model, also confirm the importance of
access time and frequency of flights in airport choice [Basar and Bhat, 2004; Pels et al.,
2003; Windle and Dresner, 1995]. The lack of searching for the best fare among airports
is perhaps understandable given the time cost of travel to a lower fare airport may
swamp any differences in fares.
In Spring of 2000, a phone survey was conducted of residents of the market area of
Philadelphia International Airport (PHL). The eventual goal of PHL was to learn about
its customer base with an eye to increasing its market. PHL management considers its
facility in competition with not only the small regional airports but also with its large
neighbors to the north and the south: JFK International, Newark International, and
BaltimoreYWashington International. The relevant market was defined by PHL_s
management. Newark is the largest of the four, and BaltimoreYWashington is the
smallest. The analysis of that survey is reported here.
The 1,100 respondents in the final sample were asked a wide variety of questions
about their travel and airport usage. From the survey data, both univariate and
multivariate probit models of airport choice were estimated. A preference for using a low
fare airport was expressed by survey participants. However, in the sample used here,
actually searching for a low fare was not a significant variable in airport selection.
Apparently, respondents liked the idea of using a low fare airport but did not do much
fare research and did not base their eventual choice on fare differences. As a new entrant
in a multi-airport region, a discount airline should enter at that airport where there is
the greatest opportunity for winning market share from incumbents without relying on
attracting new passengers from other airports.
Income was a significant variable in the use of two of the three distant airports:
Newark and BWI. Higher income increased the likelihood of flying from either Newark
or BWI in the previous year. If distance from the respondent_s residence to the airport
was an important consideration, then it increased their likelihood of using JFK, Newark,
and Philadelphia. Those who used airports other than the target airport were also more
likely to use the target airport. For example, those who had used BWI, JFK, and EWR
were also more likely to have used PHL.
The Model
Passengers must decide on both an airline and an airport for their travel. The phone
survey used to assemble the data asked respondents to think about all of their travel in
the prior year. This precluded directly asking about choice of airline as could be done in
an intercept interview in an airport. Consequently the model used here addresses only
the choice of airport.
The decision about which airport to use can be cast as either an index function model
or a random utility model. In the index function approach, the agent makes a marginal
benefit Y marginal cost calculation based on the utility achieved by choosing to fly a
particular airline between one originYdestination pair instead of another. The difference
between benefit and cost is modeled as an unobservable variable y* such that
The error term is assumed to have a particular known distribution. The net benefit of
the choice is never observed, only the choice itself. Therefore, the observation is

and is known as the index function. The open issue is the parametric specification of
the error term.
The preponderance of airport choice studies rely on intercept interviews in the
airports. Consequently, the respondent has made an airline and airport choice from
among mutually exclusive alternatives. In this context, a multinomial model is
appropriate. The computationally least cumbersome model of
the error process is the multinomial logit. The logit model has the drawback that adding
an additional choice comes at the expense of reducing the probabilities of the original
choices, even when the added choice is no different from those already in the choice set.
This is known as the problem of the independence of irrelevant choices. To escape the
problem of independence of irrelevant alternatives inherent in the multinomial logit,
authors frequently use a nested multinomial logit. A numerically more cumbersome alternative is the multinomial probit model, in which the error term in equation (1) is assumed to have a normal
distribution. The multinomial probit model which overcomes the independence of
irrelevant alternatives problem is used here.
The individual studies and the methodological approach reviewed above all suppose
that the economic agent is choosing from among mutually exclusive alternatives. In the
phone survey conducted for the Philadelphia International Airport, the respondents
were not at a particular airport, having made a travel mode decision. Rather, they were
at home and were asked to reflect on all the choices that they had made in the previous
year. Hence, having flown from Newark Airport does not preclude having flown from
another airport in the region during the prior year, for example. With this in mind the
univariate binomial choice model of equation (1) becomes
for the four airports included in the Philadelphia International Airport study. The error vector
has a joint normal distribution. Since the net benefit of flying from a particular
airport is unobserved, the observed data on the dependent variable are the quadruplet
The open question is the modeling of the index function. The index function that is
used here is a mix of indirect utility arguments and tastes and preferences. The survey
results included data on the respondents_ age, gender, and income. The signs on age and
gender are indeterminate. The marginal effect of an increase in income on the
probability of using a more distant airport could be negative or positive. As an
individual_s income rises, she finds the opportunity cost of increased travel time to a
more distant airport to be a disincentive to using that airport. On the other hand,
service and fare might overcome that incentive.
The indirect utility arguments include whether the respondent_s travel agent tried to
steer them toward a particular airport choice and whether the respondent had obtained
the price of a comparable flight from an airport other than Philadelphia. The agent may
have insider information about fares and service at an airport that is not otherwise
available to the respondent. The advent of the Internet and its lower cost of information
gathering may weaken this argument. Consequently, the respondent values the agent_s
information and is more likely to use the recommended airport. One would expect that a
consumers price research would induce them to use the flight departing from the
cheaper airport.
Tastes and preferences are modeled from a sequence of questions regarding factors that
the traveler finds important in choice of airport. The survey3 asked for an ordered response
to eight such questions. Table 2 provides the questions and corresponding descriptive
statistics. Survey participants could rank an attribute of an airport and its services from 0
to 5; a response of 0 indicated that the factor was not at all important, a response of 5
indicated that the factor was extremely important in the decision making process.
If ability to choose a particular airline or fly an international carrier is important, then
one would expect that the respondent would be more likely to have flown out of JFK, all
other things equal, given its much wider choice of carriers. People for whom
distance to the airport is an important consideration would be less likely to have flown
out of JFK. If finding a non-stop flight is extremely important, then the respondent
should be more likely to have flown out of EWR. The folk wisdom is that because USAir
has dominated PHL for so long, it has the ability to charge higher fares. There is no
similar carrier dominance in the other three airports. Therefore, if price is an extremely
important consideration, then a respondent should be less likely to have flown out of
PHL in the preceding year. Since BWI has the greatest number of parking spaces per
passenger, one would expect that those for whom parking is extremely important would
be more likely to fly from BWI. All three airports are served by public transit. JFK has
the most difficult public transit system. It requires use of the subway and train changes.
On the other hand, there is a direct heavy rail link from Philadelphia_s major train
stations out to the airport, but hardly anyone uses the system. Ticket counter waiting
times at the different airports is not reported on a systematic basis. An alternative would
be ticket counters per passenger, but we were not able to locate that data.
The Data
In May and April 2000, a phone survey was conducted on behalf of the management
of the Philadelphia International Airport. Approximately 5,000 households in a market
region defined by the management of the Philadelphia International Airport were
contacted regarding their participation in the survey about travel outside the region and
modal choice. The phone contacts were selected from one of two sub-populations: those
who had previously expressed an interest in travel and those from the general
population. Those who had flown out of Philadelphia International Airport are overrepresented
in the sample.The resulting final sample had 1,100 usable responses, of
which 827 had traveled out of the region and 627 had flown out of one or more of the
major airports in the region.

</text>
