<text id="J77" category="" words="2001" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Creating and managing a virtual inter-organizational learning network for greener production: a conceptual model and case study" Author="Susan L. Manring and Samuel B. Moore" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="JOURNAL OF CLEANER PRODUCTION " WebAddress="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6VFX-4JCSK0W-1&_user=196517&_coverDate=12%2F31%2F2006&_rdoc=1&_fmt=high&_orig=search&_origin=search&_sort=d&_docanchor=&view=c&_acct=C000013818&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=196517&md5=317c6c6c6">

Effective sustainable industrial development requires the building, managing, and maintaining of inter-organizational networks. These networks are comprised of the diverse stakeholders
that are necessary for a triple bottom line approach to development. This includes the use of techniques that create economic success for business enterprises by meeting social and environmental objectives. Adopting sustainable business practices generally involve changing institutional visions and operations on many levels. These changes include coordination and formation of networks of organizations (public, corporate, and environmental) to act as strategic stakeholders representing specific issues.
Given the number of institutional and administrative challenges associated with sustainable industrial development and production methods, there is an ongoing need for conceptual models that increase understanding and clarity about the various forms of inter-organizational collaborative partnerships among stakeholders (Hawken [1]). A number of researchers have referred to the network phenomena in public administration since as early as 1978 in terms of: issue networks (e.g., Heclo [2]; implementation structures (e.g., Hjern and Porter [3], Trist [4]; inter-organizational policy systems (e.g., Milward and Wamsley [5]); advocacy coalitions (e.g., Sabatier and Jenkins-Smith [6]); policy formation and implementation
(e.g., Rainey and Milward [7], Mandell [8], Marin and Mayntz [9], Bressers, O'Toole, and Richardson [10], Agranoff [11], O'Toole [12]); and self-governing institutional arrangements (e.g., Ostrom, Gardner, and Walker [13]). There is emerging evidence that the application of network structures and learning organizational models, when placed within the broader context of sustainable development and production, can be very productive (Wheeler [14]). Wheeler noted the case of Shell in Nigeria, where the inability to form productive networks among diverse stakeholders dramatically slowed oil production and cost the lives of many people.
The differences between ''traditional'' and network-based structures can be shown graphically as depicted in Fig. 1. In this figure, ''A'' is a traditional organizational structure. The
''dots'' symbolize departments, units of operation, factories, shareholders or even stakeholders, all within a traditional organization.
Notice that these units are enclosed and aligned by the framework or structure of their organization. They may
be connected but they can connect only within their organizational framework (inside the box), and unless the size of the framework is increased, there is a barrier that must be overcome to include units that are not inside the box. Metaphorically, this framework creates alignment inside, but can also be seen as a barrier to units trying to work outside the framework, or to units outside the framework trying to connect inside.
In this manner, traditional organizational structures inhibit diverse connections.
There are significant costs associated with developing and maintaining organizational structure overhead (it requires energy to build and maintain a wall), as well as the costs for connecting
outside of the box (you have to dig under, climb over, rill through or destroy the wall). These are the challenges of traditional organizational structures in a dynamic global economy
that is driven by the forces of ''creative destruction'' and rapid change (Hart and Milstein [15]).
''B'' in Fig. 1 graphically represents a connected network structure. The links or edges between the units or vertices are forged as needed. There is no expenditure for maintenance
of an organizational structure and thus, no barriers to entry or exit. The only energy required is to find connections to the network.
In the dynamic global economy, removing the barriers to swift change is clearly a major asset.
This paper demonstrates the utility of applying an interorganizational network (ION) model that incorporates dimensions of a network structure with a virtual Web organization.
As the network acquires the properties of a learning organization, by generating multiple feedback loops to the stakeholders, the emerging shared perspective enables increased productivity through the adoption of sustainable development and production methods. The challenges of a networked structure, which are addressed in this paper, include how to forge the connections and achieve alignment among those connections (Dorogovtsev and Mendes [16]).
The model presented here is practically illustrated by an analysis of the process that promoted ''green chemistry,'' to reduce aquatic toxicity and harmful environmental effects, in the North Carolina textile dyeing and finishing (wet processing) industry during the late 1980s. This case illustrates that
an ION structure provided a framework that was flexible enough to involve diverse stakeholders as resources in problem solving, even inside of traditional business enterprises.
This occurred because the traditional business organizations were treated as a single member of the network and the network provided the governance and structure to the dialogue and process, not the businesses. The ION was also effective in enabling stakeholders to resolve environmental regulatory non-compliance issues at minimal economic cost to the stakeholders involved.
2. Background on North Carolina's aquatic toxicity situation2
The wastewaters discharged into the rivers of North Carolina are regulated by federal (USEPA), State (NCDWQ), and local Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) authorities as a tiered regulatory approach under the Federal Clean Water Act (CWA). The treated wastewaters are tested to ensure that the levels of organic and inorganic pollutants fall within a compliance limit that is based on the characteristics and ''best use'' of the water body receiving the treated wastewaters.
Since the advent of the CWA, wastewater treatment facilities have been under increasing pressure by stakeholders of the common resource to lower the concentrations and toxicity of the treated wastewater being discharged.
In 1982, the USEPA and the NCDWQ implemented a change in water quality testing that, for the first time, was based on aquatic bioassays. Bioassays take the treated wastewater and test it for acute toxicity and reproductive inhibition.
During this period of 1985e1995, over 50% of the wastewater being treated by POTW facilities in North Carolina came from textile dyeing and finishing operations. As the NCDWQ began to test POTW discharges that contained large amounts of textile dyeing and finishing process waters, it found a large portion of them were acutely toxic and an even larger portion produced discharges that were not suitable for reproduction of
aquatic life (Ausley [17]).
When the POTWs were found to have failed the toxicity compliance test, engineering firms were called in to give estimates on what changes in treatment plant design would be necessary to achieve a compliant, non-toxic wastewater. Costs to improve treatment plant designs were very large, estimated in the tens of millions of dollars, and it was unclear if the design changes could produce nontoxic treated effluents. Since budgetary constraints dictated that new treatment facilities were too costly, it was obvious that another approach was necessary.
It was also clear that these engineers, working within the mental models dictated by the framework of corporations, did not have the answers to resolving these challenges. Because of the nature of environmental regulations, NCDWQ was required to send notices of violation to the
POTWs, with fines levied. To avoid the fines, the POTW had to produce an action plan, which when accepted by the technical compliance branches of NCDWQ, produced a period of grace for the POTW while it resolved the problems, either by plant construction or by some other method. Since plant construction was not a viable economic option for many communities, ''some other method'' had to be devised. This resulted in opening dialogues with stakeholder groups, biologists and chemists, which were outside of the ''normal'' engineering based waste treatment conversations. Historically, the implementation of the 1974 Clean Water Act resulted in the engineering of additional filters on waste treatment facilities. These filters were costly to develop, produce and maintain and importantly, were not economically productive investments. As integrated approaches to pollution management matured, it became apparent that there was an alternative
to additional treatment for industrial waste streams, ''Pollution Prevention.'' Pollution Prevention (P-2) is the concept and approach that emphasizes rather than use wastewater filters, it is more prudent to redesign industrial processes to prevent the production of pollutants at their sources, in the first place. With the advent of environmental management systems in the mid 1990s, P-2 efforts became formalized and recognized
as additional tools for pollution abatement and were also called ''Cleaner Production.'' An example of the evolution of policy, P-2, and globalization can be found in an associated case of the textile industry in Demark. This case demonstrated the effects of reengineering processes, factories, and the chemicals used in textiles and the invention of new waste treatment methods. The case also demonstrated, sadly, that some of the industry left Denmark and moved into less regulated countries to avoid environmental costs of any kind (Sondergard [18]).
In the parallel North Carolina situation, historically and up to the mid-1990s, the textile industry was very important to the economic well being of the area. The challenge was to design an ad hoc inter-organizational network structure that included all the stakeholders to operate and supervise the P-2 effort and retain the industry as a viable economic force in the state. The network had to be designed to include controls and benchmarks that would allow NCDWQ to convince USEPA that a ''grace period'' could be allowed while the alliance of industry, POTW, NCDWQ, consultants, and stakeholders diagnosed the problem and developed the environmental management system. This involved elevating the level of confidence in a closely monitored dialogue-based process to the same level of respect given to the construction of additional waste treatment facilities.
3. The nature of the inter-organizational network in promoting sustainable development
An inter-organizational network (ION), such as the one required for North Carolina's Toxicity Prevention program, is a strategic partnership or alliance among the stakeholders who come together to collaboratively address and resolve mutual concerns regarding sustainable development and production methods. The ION is both larger and greater than the individual stakeholder organizations that comprise it, and the structure and processes of this superordinate entity directly impact stakeholder collaboration and consensus building efforts. For instance, the network that connected the various institutional stakeholders to NC's P-2 program had no hierarchical power and authority; it was a loosely coupled, dynamic political system, rather than a tightly bonded, homogeneous, hierarchically controlled system, however, critical stakeholders included the USEPA, NCDWQ, the local POTWs, NGOs, the public, the textile industry, and the textile industry supply chain.
Inter-organizational networks such as this one behave more as a group of affiliates than a traditional supply chain network.
They are like an organizational sandbox, where shifting roles and structures can be experimental. Furthermore, effective negotiations within IONs require the relaxing of stakeholder organizational boundaries, as the power structures are more democratic. Of the three types of networks (internal, stable, and dynamic) identified by Miles and Snow [19], the institutional arrangement among the stakeholders for sustainable development is most like a dynamic network, i.e., an ad hoc alliance among the strategic stakeholders. Each stakeholder organization
is independent and collaborates on a specific project or opportunity, based on its skills and expertise (Van Alstyne [20]). While it exists, this network is a ''highly decentralized and densely integrated social system that maximizes mutual influence and communication'' (Bovasso [21]). It may also act like a matrix structure utilized in many research and development settings, where resources are used as needs emerge, toward
the achievement of a common goal (Susskind [22]).
The inter-organizational arrangements required for NC's sustainable textile industry production shared the key principles of networked organizations (Lipnack and Stamps [23], Surowiecki [24]).
3.1. Unifying purpose
The stakeholder organizations became networked when there was a consensus about the value and goal of
collaboration on sustainable industrial development and production practices and pollution prevention.
3.2. Independent members
Each member of the network, whether an individual or a stakeholder organization, could stand on its own while benefiting from being part of the whole.
3.3. Voluntary links
The links that connected sustainable development stakeholders in various combinations were far more profuse and omni-directional than in other types of organizations. As communication pathways increased, the links continued to grow and develop.
3.4. Multiple leaders
The inter-organizational network tended to be leaderful, rather than leaderless. Each person or group (stakeholder) in the network had something unique to contribute. With more than one leader, the network, as a whole, had great resilience.

</text>
