<text id="J78" category="" words="2020" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title=" Tuning Genetic Control through Promoter Engineering" Author="Hal Alper, Curt Fischer, Elke Nevoigt, Gregory Stephanopoulos, Robert Langer" PublicationDate="2005" SampledFrom="Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America" WebAddress="http://www.jstor.org/stable/3376448">

Gene function is typically evaluated by sampling the continuum of gene expression at only a few discrete points corresponding to gene knockout or overexpression. We argue that this characterization is incomplete and present a library of engineered promoters of varying strengths obtained through mutagenesis of a constitutive promoter A multifaceted characterization of the library, especially at the single-cell level to ensure homogeneity, permitted quantitative assessment correlating the effect of gene expression levels to improved growth and product formation phenotypes in Escherichia coli. Integration of these promoters into the chromo-some can a flow for a quantitative accurate assessment of genetic control. To this end, we used the characterized library of promoters to assess the impact of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase levels on growth yield and deoxyxylulose-Psynthase levels on Iycopene production. The multifaceted characterization of promoter strength enabled identification of optimal expression levels for ppc and dxs, which maximized the desired phenotype. Additionally, in a strain preengineered to produce Iycopene, the response to deoxy-xylulose-Psynthase levels was linear at all levels tested, indicative of a rate-limiting step, unlike the parental strain, which exhibited an optimum expression level, illustrating that optimal gene expression levels are variable and dependent on the genetic background of the strain. This promoter library concept is illustrated as being generalizable to eukaryotic organisms (Saccharo-myces cerevisiae) and thus constitutes an integral platform for functional genomics, synthetic biology, and metabolic engineering endeavours F
Protein engineering via directed evolution and gene shuffling r (1, 2) has been extensively applied for the systematic improvement of protein properties such as antibody-binding affinity (3), enzyme regulation (4), and increased or diverse substrate specificity (5). A similar approach whereby continuously improved mutants are generated along a selection-defined trajectory in the sequence space can also be applied for the systematic improvement or modification of other types of biological sequences, e.g., ribozymes (6 7). We show here that promoters can also be engineered via directed evolution to achieve precise strengths and regulation and, by extension, can constitute libraries exhibiting broad ranges of genetic control. Typically, the deletion( 8) and strong overexpression (9 ) of genes have been the principal strategies for elucidation of gene function. These two methods sample the continuum of gene expression at only a few discrete points, determined by experimental feasibility (10) and not necessarily biological significance. Thus, the fi dependency of phenotype on gene expression may not be accessible due to the limitations inherent in these methods. Gene expression is controlled by a number of factors in the cell, including promoter strength, and transacting factors, cell growths tage the expression level of various RNA polymerase-associated factors, and other gene-level regulation. Of course, gene expression may not always correspond with enzymatic activity given protein level regulation, which may also be present. Nevertheless, several groups have attempted to control gene expression through the creation of promoter libraries ( 11-13). In this work, we present the development of a fully characterized, homogeneous, broad-range, functional promoter library and demonstrate its applicability to the analysis of such a genetic control. By characterizing the strength of these promoters in a quantitative manner with various metrics and subsequently integrating these constructs into the genome, it is possible to deduce the precise impact of the gene dosage on the desired phenotype. An alternative method for controlling gene expression is through the use of a single inducible promoter tested at various levels of inducer. Although inducible promoters allow for a continuous control of expression at the macroscopic level, practical applications of these systems are limited by prohibitive inducer costs, hypersensitivity to inducer concentration, and transcriptional heterogeneity at the single-cell level (14, 15). The latter factor, in particular, can limit the effect of inducers in a culture to a simple increase of the number of cells expressing the gene of interest instead of the overexpression of the gene in all cells. Inducible systems are suitable in certain applications (e .g., recombinant protein overproduction) (16); however, the elucidation of gene function and genetic control on phenotype requires well characterized promoter libraries, which behave in a similar manner at the single-cell level. As a result, the creation of a promoter library based on a constitutive promoter would eliminate the need to regulate inducer concentrations and avoid heterogeneities in cellular response. Methods Strains and Media. In specified strains, lycopene expression was performed by using the p AC-LYC plasmid (17) and assayed as described (18). Assays trains were grown at 37°C with 225 in M9-minimal media (19) containing 5 g/ liter D-glucose. When necessary, the M9 media were supplemented with 0.1% c as amino acids. All other strains and propagations were cultured at 37°C in LB media. Media were supplemented with 68 ,ug/ml chloramphen-icol/20, ug/mlk anamycin/100,u g/mla. Glucose monitoring was conducted by using the r-Biopharm (Swansea, U.K.) kit. Cell density was monitored spectrophotometrically at 6 00 nm. All PCR products and restriction enzymes were purchased from New England Biolabs. M9 minimal salts were purchased from U S Biological (Swampscott, MA), and all remaining chemicals were from Sigma-Aldrich. Primers were purchased from Invitrogen, and sequence information is listed in Supporting List, which is published a s supporting in formation on the PNAS web site. Saccharomyces cerevisiaest rain B Y4741( MAT a; his3A1;le u2A0; met15A0; ura3/v0) used in this study w as obtained from EURO-SCARF (Frankfurt).It was cultivated in yeast extract/peptone/ dextrose medium (10 g of yeast extract per liter/20 g of Bacto Peptone( Becton Dickinson) per liter/20g of glucose per liter). F or yeast transformation, Frozen-EZY east Transformation II (Zymo Research, Orange, CA) was used. To select and grow yeast transformants bearing plasmids with URA3 as selectable marker, a yeast synthetic complete (YSC) medium was used containing 6.7 g of yeast nitrogen base (Difco) per liter, 20 g of glucose/liter, and a mixture of appropriate nucleotides and amino acids (CSM-URA, Qbiogene, Irvine,C A), referred here as to YSCU ra. Medium was supplemented with 1.5% agar for solid media. Yeast cells were routinely cultivated at 30°Ci at 200r pm. For sorting single cells (TEF promoter mutations) by FACS into microtiter plates, each well contained 200 , ulo f YSC Ura- supplemented with 10m g/liter ergosterol and 420 mg/liter Tween 80 (20). Library Construction. Nucleotidea naloguem utagenesis was carried out in the presence of 20 , uM 8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine (8 -oxo-dGTP) and 6-(2-deoxy-13-D-ribofuranosyl)-3,4-dihydro-8H-pyrimido-[4,5-c][1,2]oxazin-7-one (dPTP) (TriLink Bio Technologies) (21). By using plasmid p ZE-gfp (ASV) kindly provided by M. Elowitz( California Institute of Technology, Pasadena)a s template (22) along with the primers PL sense Aat II and P L_anti Eco RI, 10 and 30 amplification cycles with the primers mentioned above were performed. The 151-bpP CR products were purified by using the Gene Clean Spin Kit (Qbiogene). After digestion, the product was ligated at 16°C overnight and transformed into library efficiency E . coli DH5a (Invitrogen). Approximately 30,000 colonies were screened by eye from minimal media-casamino acid agar plates, and 200 colonies, spanning a wide range in fluorescent intensity, were picked from the plates. To create the TEF promoter mutation library for S . cerevisiae, the plasmid p 416-TEF-yE Citrine was used as a template for the error-prone PCR of the TEF1 promoter by using the primers TEF Sense and TEF Anti. The mix of purified mutagenized PCR products was transformed into yeast together with p 416-TEF, which was cut with SacI/XbaI before (in vivo cloning). The CEN/ARS plasmid P416- TEF (23), containing the native TEFI promoter from S . cerevisiae, the CYC1 terminator, and the URA3 gene as a selectable marker, was obtained from American Type Culture Collection. The plasmid pKT140 was obtained from EUROSCARF. This plasmid contains the coding sequence of yECitrine, a yeast codon-optimized version of the yellow fluorescent protein( 24), which was used as a reporter protein in this study. To clone the yECitrine gene downstream of the TEF promoter, the coding sequence of  yECitrine was amplified via PCR from the plasmid pKT140 by using the primer yEC3ense and yECAnti. The PCR product was cut with ClaI and XbaI and ligated to ClaI/XbaI restricted vector p416-TEF. The resulting plasmid is referred to as p416-TEF-yECitrine. Library Characterization Initial Characterization. Approximately20 , ulo f overnight cultures of library clones growing LB were used to inoculate 5 ml of M9G mediums upplemented with 0.1% wt/vol casamino acid (M9G/ CAA), and the cultures were grown at 37°C with orbital shaking. After 14 h, a sample of the culture was centrifuged at 18,000x g for 2 min, and the cells were resuspended in ice-cold water. Flow cytometry was performed on a Becton Dickinson FAC Scan, and the geometric mean of the fluorescence distribution of each clonal population was calculated. To ensure that bulk population-averaged measurements could reflect the underlying single-cell behavior, only clones with clean monovariate distributions of fluorescence were retained for further analysis. Twenty-seven clones were isolated in this way. Sequencing revealed that these 27 clones represented 22 unique promoter sequences. Promoter Strength Metric. Shake flasks containing 50 ml of M9G/ CAA medium were inoculated with 1%v ol/vol of an overnight LB culture of a library clone. The culture turbidity( A6001 ,n,) and fluorescence (Packard Fusion microplate fluorescence reader, PerkinElmer) were monitored as a function of time. Fluorescence readings taken during the exponential growth phase were plotted as a function of turbidity. The best-fits lope to this line represent the exponential-phase steady-state concentration of  GFP, fss.  Because fss is affected by the cell growth rate oxygen-dependent maturation constant of GFP and the protease-mediated degradation of GFP as well as the promoter-driven synthesis of new GFP, it is not a suitable metric for promoter strength. Instead, we used a previously published dynamic model (25) that accounts for all of these factors. Under this model and under the assumption that the rate constant of protease-mediated degradation is the same for mature GFP as its precursor polypeptide, P, the rate of promoter-driven production of GFP can be expressed as in Eq. 1.
In Eq. 1, u is the growth rate, m is the maturation constant for the oxygen-dependent fluorophore activation of GFP, and D is the first-order rate constant for protease-mediated degradation. Estimates of m and D of 1.5 h-1 and 0.23 h-1, respectively (26, 27), were obtained from the literature. The parameters fss and u were measured separately for each member of the promoter library. P , in relative fluorescence units per absorbance unit per hour, was calculated from Eq. 1 for each clone. We performed duplicate cultures for each clone. Transcriptional Analysis. Cultures inoculated as previously were grown for 3 h, and the total RNA was extracted from a 1.5-ml sample with a commercial kit (RNEasy, Qiagen,V alencia, C A). All samples were diluted to a final concentration of 20 ,ug/ml and stored at-20°C. A commercial kit for RT-PCR ( iScript O ne-Ste RT-PCR Kit with SYBR green, Bio-Rad) was used with a charge-coupled device-equipped thermal cycler (iCycler,B io-Rad) for RT-PCRo f the&lt;@ transcript. Primers were used at a final concentration of 100 nM, and 20 ng of RNA was used as template in each 50-,ul reaction. We performed duplicate cultures for each clone and duplicate extractions for each culture. The threshold cycles for each sample were calculated from the fluorescence data with proprietary software ( Bio-Rad)
Chloramphenicol Resistance. pZE-promoter plasmids were created by PCR of the chloramphenicolac etyltransferase (C AT) gene from pACYC184 by using primers CAT_Sense_MluI and CATAntiKpnI and ligated into the proper p ZE-promoter construct, which was previously digested by KpnIa nd MluI. Exponential phase cultures grown in LB supplemented with kanamycin were plated onto LB a gar supplemented with kanamycin and various concentrations of chloramphenicol ranging from 0 to 500 ,ug/ml. After overnight incubation at 37°C, the lowest concentration of chloramphenicol that inhibited the growth of a clone was recorded
TEF Promoter Library Characterization. Measuring of specific fluorescence of TEF promoter library in S. cerevisiae was performed by using cells harvested from the logarithmic phased growth in shake flasks. Fluorescence of yECitrine was measured by using a fluorescence spectrometer (H ITACHIF -2500) with an excitation wave length of 502 nm and an emission wave length of 532 nm. The specific fluorescence referred to here is the ratio of fluorescence level measured and the optical density at 600 nm measured in the same cuvette.

</text>
