<text id="K11" category="" words="1999" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Matrimony. Pantheon" Author="Joshua Henkin" PublicationDate="2007" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.bookbrowse.com/excerpts/index.cfm/book_number/2051/index.cfm?fuseaction=printable&book_number=2051">

"You mean she's real?" Julian had thought Mother Goose was a cartoon character. 

"She was a writer," Mia said sunnily, "just like you." 

In the North End, on the corner of Hanover and Parmenter streets, stood a cluster of wooden arrows: "Roma." "Milano." "Venezia." "Capri." "Genova." Julian and Mia stopped into a specialty store where Italian women sliced ham for the customers and filled jars with Sicilian olives. 

Then they were back across town, to the Public Gardens, where Make Way for Ducklings was set. A row of bronze ducks lined the walkway. There was a pond in the middle of the gardens, and a bridge above it where two boys in Puma sweatshirts were playing tag. A Chocolate Labrador trotted across the bridge, wearing a red bandanna around its neck. Trees grew out of an island at the center of the pond, and on the periphery stood a statue of George Washington on a horse. A man was reading Make Way for Ducklings to his daughter. 

"Life imitates art," Mia said. 

It was lunchtime, so they went across the street to pick up sandwiches, turkey for Julian, roast beef for Mia, and between bites Julian explained that he'd been reading about supertasters. It was an actual scientific category, he said. Supertasters were different from other people. Their tongues were denser; they had more taste buds. 

"Say you like Brussels sprouts," he said. 

"I do." 

"And I don't. But when we eat Brussels sprouts, are we eating the same thing and just responding differently, or are our taste buds actually registering something different?" 

"Is that a philosophical question?" 

"I think so." 

But before she could answer him, he had moved from philosophy to English usage. He was listing the idioms he used to get wrong. He'd said "no holes barred"instead of "no holds barred"and "deep-seeded"instead of "deep-seated." "It's 'home in on,'"he said, "not 'hone in on.' Like a homing pigeon." Why, he wanted to know, was it "the whole nine yards" and not"the whole ten yards"? It took ten yards to get a first down. Or "have your cakeand eat it, too." It was no trick, he said, to have your cake and eat it. The real trick was in reverse, to eat your cake and still have it. That was what the idiom should have been: "to eat your cake and have it, too." 

"Or 'long in the tooth.'" Mia said. "What does that mean?" 

"Old." 

"But why? Do our teeth get longer as we age? Are we destined to become beavers?" 

They walked through Beacon Hill, Mia's grandparents' old neighborhood; Mia was taking him to see their house. Her grandparents were on her mind, she said; they always were when she came to Boston. 

"There are lots of antique stores here," he said. 

"This neighborhood used to be old money," Mia explained. "Now it's porcelain frogs and wooden Dachshunds." 

"Were your grandparents old money?" 

She shook her head. "They weren't new money, either. But they got by." 

They passed another antique store, and a pub, a pizza place, a post office, a leather shop, and now, off Charles Street, on Pinckney, on Revere, they were winding their way through the neighborhood, along the silent residential streets. A light went on in a living room, then flickered off. A Jaguar pulled out of a driveway, the sound of its engine hushed, guttural, and low. In a garden out back, two girls in slippers were walking a rabbit on a leash. The mansions stood sentinel on the hill, winking at them in the diminishing sunlight. 

"There it is," she said. 

"What?" 

"My grandparents' house." 

"Oh." 

"Anticlimax?" 

"No." 

"It's nothing special. It's a house. It's got a roof and floors, some plumbing." 

"It looks nice," he said, but then he felt bad because all he could see were a few shuttered windows and he didn't wish to sound insincere. 

"An old woman lives there now," Mia said. "You know what I think? They should make a law that after a person dies their house should remain empty for a while. Let it lie fallow. Come," she said, "I'm being macabre." She took him by the sleeve and they walked off. 

*****

They strolled on Newbury Street and Boylston and Newbury again, past Newbury Comics and the department stores and the Boston Public Library, heading west toward Kenmore Square and Fenway Park and, beyond that, Boston University. Commonwealth Avenue was like a European boulevard, with high-domed buildings and wide promenades. As they walked along it, rain started to fall, lightly at first but then harder. They were getting poured on now. They had neither the inclination nor the will to seek cover; they ran and ran, past Gloucester and Hereford, kicking up puddles as they went, their sneakers sloppy and rain-drenched, the canvas sticking to their socks. They crossed Massachusetts Avenue and now, on the corner, they bent over like sprinters catching their breath. 

Mia's hair was matted to her forehead; it stuck in clumps against her neck. A drop of rain rolled down her chin, and Julian brushed it off with the sleeve of his windbreaker. 

They drove home soaked, as if someone had thrown them fully clothed into Boston Harbor. When they stopped at the turnpike to get their ticket, Mia twisted the water from her hair. As she drove on, Julian fell asleep to the rhythm of the car, his nose, his whole face, pressed against the window. 

"Let's go out to dinner," Mia said. She told him she knew of a good place to eat, elegant but not too elegant; she hated restaurants where the waiter pulled out your seat for you. Julian agreed; fancy restaurants made him uncomfortable. 

They ordered a bottle of wine and quickly dispatched it. Julian felt a warming come across his face. He liked wine, though he knew nothing about it. Textures and aromas, nutty wines, fruity wines, which wines should be drunk with which foods: all this meant nothing to him. He didn't want to know about wine; he just wanted to drink it. He had an image of himself standing barefoot in some vineyard where his only job was to trample the grapes. His fingers and toes were purple--his whole body was--and Mia was with him; she was there to trample, too. "Tell me something about you." 

She laughed. "Are we getting to know each other?" She took a sip of her wine, and when she put down her glass the imprint of her lips was on the rim, an exact mold of her mouth. "I like watching you," she said. 

"Tell me something else." 

"I want to kiss you." She rested her hands next to her plate. Her forearms were tawny, bare, and slender, but also with a firmness to them, a heft of sinew. A single white candle sat between them, the wax dripping to the table. 

"Do you always kiss your dates?" 

"If I want to," she said. "If they want to kiss me back." 

He told her he wanted to kiss her back. He leaned across the table and so did she, their bodies hovering above their pasta bowls and the tiny saucer of olive oil with red pepper flakes swimming in it. 

"You're a very handsome man." 

He laughed. 

"Why? No one's ever called you handsome before?" 

"No one's ever called me a man." Her fingers were touching his, lightly, lightly, and his fingers were touching hers back. 

*****

At the dorms, Julian asked his roommate to vacate for the night. "I need privacy," he said. 

"But I live here." 

"Technically." 

"Not technically. In fact." 

"Then think of it as one of my peremptories." It was like jury duty, Julian explained. The lawyers could dismiss a certain number of jurors without giving any reason. 

Was it possible for a person to exist without sleep? According to The Guinness Book of World Records, the longest anyone had gone without sleep was twenty-one days. Laboratory mice died when deprived of sleep, yet when an autopsy was performed the cause of death could not be determined. Apparently the mice had died from lack of sleep, but you couldn't see it clinically. 

Their first week together, Julian and Mia stopped sleeping. They were coasting on adrenaline, Mia said. 

"On libido," said Julian. 

Banished from his room that first night, Julian's roommate hadn't come back the second or the third. Mia felt bad for Julian's roommate, but not so bad, she told Julian, as to want him to return. She and Julian were alone, and they made love where they wanted to, in Julian's bedroom, in the common room; they even made love on Julian's roommate's beanbag chair. To be nineteen and making love wherever you wished: this, Julian thought, was how a person should live. Mia was sprawled naked next to him, peaceful, recumbent on the beanbag chair, her eyes half closed, her hair touching his; the vinyl felt cool along his neck. The dorm was quiet, and above them he could hear a fly buzzing against a bare lightbulb. There was a candle on the shelf, and he got up and lit it. He lay next to Mia in the hollow imprint his body had left. She started to drift off. 

"You can't fall sleep," he said. "It's against the rules."

"I'm cold," she murmured. She took a blanket and spread it over them. She turned on the TV, where a kung fu movie was playing, and they watched it idly for a few minutes, then muted the sound and read to each other from books they chose randomly off the bookshelves. Julian read to Mia from The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, and Mia read to Julian from Freud's Totem and Taboo and from Thirteen Days by Robert Kennedy. They even took turns reading about photosynthesis and the Krebs cycle from Julian's roommate's biology textbook. 

Mia kissed Julian. She kissed his toes, his knees, his elbows. She kissed the tiny tuft of hair above his butt. It was four-thirty in the morning and they hadn't slept the night before. You got to the point when you were so tired you couldn't make a decision. You couldn't stay awake and you couldn't go to sleep. Before long, you were starting to hallucinate. 

Finally they fell asleep, and when they awoke the next morning Julian said, "Thomas Jefferson was in my dream last night. He was my student. I was Thomas Jefferson's professor." 

Mia looked at him dubiously. 

"Jefferson came in to complain about his grade. I'd given him a B-plus on the Declaration of Independence." 

"A B-plus!" 

"That's exactly what he said. He wanted at least an A-minus." 

"Thomas Jefferson!" Mia said. "You have very arrogant dreams." She placed her foot behind Julian and pushed him over her leg so he tumbled backward to the floor. As he fell, his legs kicked up and his testicles did, too. "Be careful," she said. "I was on the wrestling team in high school." 

"You were?" 

"Field hockey," she said. "Close enough." 

"Come," he said. "Let's shower." 

She stepped into the stall and raised her face to the water, holding her hair in a fist behind her head. He took her by the shoulders and drew her close to him, feeling the press of her nose against his face. 

Afterward, in class, he missed her already and he'd only just seen her. And when he saw her again she said she'd missed him, too. She loved everything about him, she said: the tiny dimple on his right elbow, the way his hair was so straight coming down over his forehead, all of it dark brown it was almost black except for a little patch of blond above the left ear. "I'm one-two-hundredth albino," he told her. She loved his toenails, she said, and the way in his sleep he wrapped her hair around his fingers. That was how she liked waking up in the morning, with her hair twirled taut around him.

</text>
