<text id="K15" category="" words="1996" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Song of the Crow. Unbridled Books" Author="Layne Maheu " PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.bookbrowse.com/excerpts/index.cfm/book_number/1786/index.cfm?fuseaction=printable&book_number=1786">

Still, it was his only answer, which he repeatedly struck. 

My Other finally plucked his way up to the nest top. He perched much closer to the edge than I did and spread his prickly wing points out to catch hold of the howling, but he failed to jump. He just crouched low and did what I did. We sat there and wondered about this Keeyaw creature from the heaving edge of the nest. Then My Other picked himself up and whipped his tiny bones in the direction of the powerful gusts. No! Stay there!" cried our mother, seeing his brave little twigs flapping. "Stay in the nest!" 

I realized she'd wanted to join us at the nest but didn't want to reveal our whereabouts to Keeyaw. 

Though we thought Our Many had been calling us out to fly, she must have meant it for Keeyaw. Crows have no alarm call for walk off, or grovel your way back across the underworld. Fly was the only call she had to drive Keeyaw away. 

And she dove down to mob him, strafing his whiskery head. But the wind weakened her attack. When she dove after him a second time, a sudden gust nearly pushed her up against the trunk. So she hung on to the trees between us and the beast, looking at him, then at us, then back to him, full of hesitation, until it turned to weary patience. Get back inside," she called, mute and panicked 

So I dove back into the safety of our nest's inner bowl and closed my eyes, until I felt more acutely the heaving and roiling of Our Giant through the air. My fearless Other, who was already practiced in the ancient art of imitation, stayed up in the headwinds and made the sound of Keeyaw's ax just fine. But no crow could imitate the sound of a tree falling, like the rippling of violent thunders, darker than doom, worse than the end, broken limbs, loose leaves flying. Frightened birds and creatures took off. Then our mother fled. The branches of our own tree sank, and there was a silence, like a weight falling in my chest. We felt the whole world tilt. When the Giant hit, the woods exploded. Each bounce brought more thunder, until it stopped. 

The forest was never so quiet as then. 

Except the cooling of the wind. And the murmuring of the yes. And the murmuring of the no. And the sighing beneath the leaves, waiting for the final word. 

Soon the rhythm of Keeyaw's ax resumed. 

And the wind picked up, arguing again through the grizzled mat of the beastman's beard, and My Other could imitate, with the high, nasally pitch of parody, the sound Keeyaw made, hacking away at the underworld, rending the tree of its branches, and the beastman would hesitate and look up, full of woe and worry, swinging those awful implements over his head and then down again. Tunk, tunk, tunk, sang My Other. And Keeyaw's mournful mustaches shook. 

We're told that his understanding of nature was so exact that he could select the tree, specifically a cedar tree, or a kind of cedar tree, that in the course of one-hundred and twenty years, once planted, could grow to the height of fifty meters, which is the measure he needed for the construction of the Ark. 

- Aaron Tendler, Noah and the Ark, Voyage to a New Beginning 

3
Mother of Many
Another tree gone, and the sky hung lower. 

The Giant lay dead, dumb, and naked, and Keeyaw kept smacking it, ripping the limbs free until the trunk lay wasted in the clearing. He went after the branches with the same grim intensity he went at the trunks, lost in mossy arboreal sadness, and he kept hacking away until he was further hidden from sight. Only then did our mother find it safe enough to fly to the nest. Her eyes, leaking the ancient ooze of her years, took us in lovingly as she lowered strips of half-chewed frog gut into our gapes. Then she cleaned the nest of our dung sacks, flew away with them in her beak, and then came back. 

Every once in a while the winds threatened to argue all over again, but the sky let out a long sigh and the wind went on its troubled way, leaving us to the devices of Keeyaw. 

My hungry brother and I strained above the nest to see what Keeyaw was up to. 

He heaped all of the severed branches into a loose, snaggy pile. Is he building a nest here?" I asked. 

I waited for an answer, staring at Our Many's claws, scaled and gnarly and clutched to the nest at my face. Above her hooks, her squat old body blocked out the sun. But then she was the sun, dark with love, ragged with comfort. As if she were well-being itself, we longed for the blue-black, worn-feather protection to come shining down over us. But she bristled now from wounded authority, and her beak kept working away at the unrest in her coat. 

Then "Eeiiwaaack! Eeiiwaaack!" off in the distance, soaring. 

Whereas most creatures flee the sound of Keeyaw, my father flew in, desperate for a look. "Fly Home!" Whenever our father heard the beastman's attack fall over the woods, he cried out in alarm, but also in eerie exultation. "Fly Home!" Was it a welcome? A threat? He flew in wild and large and threw his hooks out to land - even though the tree was no longer there - as if in denial of what Keeyaw had done. He must have thought his own absence had allowed the tree to fall. He lit far from our nest and let Keeyaw have it. He bobbed with each caw and his feathers flared as if Keeyaw were directly below, and the strange, terrible beast answered with the crack of his ax. Me! Me!" cried My Other. "I Am!" 

But not even the begging of his favorite could bring my father to the nest. 

Instead, Fly Home stayed where he was, leaning and lunging and spreading with each call, and our mother flew to the outlying woods to meet him. But their greeting was clipped and afraid. Our father had a huge, swimming brow of crown feathers where all his distant thoughts could live, and our thick old mother stretched herself up as best she could to rearrange his scattered brow. Can't you see?" she said. "What's happening to the woods?" Has he touched Our Giant?" No," she said. "I won't let him." 

And they quieted even further as if suddenly realizing the good luck that our own tree had been spared, and silently they watched Keeyaw, turning their heads, pecking at their perch, while the beastman walked in and out of the Giant's arms, carrying cracked sticks and heavy fans of cedar leaf. So. What did you bring us?" Our Many finally asked with a quiet sweetness. "From far off, from far off." Open your beak, and I will show you." 

My father gave a gentle tilt to his horn and shook the offering down into the sweet food pouch of her throat. 

Then he flared up and leaned into the wind. Meet me in the sky," he said, which was a common enough farewell among lovers but was especially gallant in the falling woods. 

Instead of flying away, though, he perched just above the downed Giant and began yelling again at the beastman. 

And the wild-haired Keeyaw stopped what he was doing long enough to poke his head out from underneath the heavy weeping of the tree as my father grew even more menacing with pride. But Keeyaw showed no fear and only blinked and squinted with a look of vague curiosity, as if he had bad eyes, or my father's attack was baffling him. My father continued harassing him with his hackles extended and his brow fierce. Keeyaw was about to creep back into the injured Giant when he stood back away from it. He walked up and down the entire sprawling length of the trunk and moaned, flummoxed by what he'd done, as if the whole thing would not release him from its enormous burden. And he took his frustration out on his beard, pulling at the bits of bark and leaf stuck there. When Keeyaw looked up again at my father's territorial bickering, the white-haired creature had a sinking expression, even in his beard. Was it understanding? Had Keeyaw had a change of mind, or whatever it was that drove him at the woods, bent on destruction? 

With defeated shoulders, he took the reins of his mule and walked off, dragging the animal away with him into the woods. 

My father swooped over him, assured of his prowess. Over and over again, he mobbed the man, and Our Many's eyes followed them, piercing into the unknown beyond the limbs of our spiny tree, where my father called from even farther off, from beyond the beyond, until his echo could no longer be heard. 

&lt;break&gt; 

In Keeyaw's absence, the woods remembered their silence. 

It was the hot, brooding silence of insects, and the silence of small songbirds high in the branches of the sweltering heat. They remained hidden from sight as if the treetops themselves chirped vacuously back and forth. And a strange inner weather began to affect Our Many's eyes, the spell of an old mother crow, which was what she was. Later in life, I would find the large winter roosts filled with elder siblings of mine, crows from all ends of the wind, all of them singing out variations of her song. Our mother had lived long enough and had enough nests to be known as a mother of many, a great-grandmother over and over again, and though I have yet to meet another mother of many, I've heard of others. Every crow's song includes at least one. Our stout, imperious mother had outlived two mates. Our father was her third. And like gurgling water from a waterfall, Our Many came down to us, and my brother and I - we opened our beaks to the sky, and waited. 

When all the food was gone, she sang. 

The bristles around her beak were thin with age and her eyes milky with cataracts. But when she opened her ancient horn, out came the call of fledges from innumerable nest times, from the seasons beyond counting, with a random whirl to the call, or the way she got stuck on one. Over and over again she cried out, "Sable  ... " 

In a muted, dreamy voice, since she was just over the nest. Where are you?" 

She answered her own call. Plucked away by owls." 

She fanned her wings open and flew down onto the abandoned tree, stretched out across a bed of scrub and fern. She bobbed there and sang into one of the few weeping branches that remained. She cawed inwardly, lunging with muscles of grieving gut, as if regurgitating her song, as if feeding and singing were one and the same. Nestor!" She called to some fledge of her memory, now lost inside the tree. Where? Where! Bloated by rain. Kettle, flung by the wind, eaten by mice, by flies, by maggots. Fledges snagged by hawks, by angry gods without names." 

Since crows can count up to seven, any bird beyond that in age is from the seasons beyond counting, and though it wasn't always true for my mother, the seasons beyond her counting were advancing. She could remember the many who had flown from her nest. She just couldn't tell how long ago they had come, or gone, or if they had gone, or where to. 

Then Our Many flew back up to the nest. 

Through her distant, cloudy blinking, I could swear she hardly saw us, but looked far into her song and whatever unfortunate simp her memory had conjured up just then.

</text>
