<text id="L01" category="" words="2003" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Cat Who Dropped a Bombshell. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons." Author="Lilian Jackson Braun" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="/">

"I remember the beautiful hands of Doris and Nathan. Musicians' hands are long and slender. Doris said they exercised their fingers for fifteen minutes every day. Her fingers flew over the keys without seeming to touch them. And Jeremy used to marvel at Nathan's fingering of the violin strings. . . . I know you like music, Qwill. Would you like to borrow my collection of their piano and violin recordings? Polly has told me about your magnificent music system at the barn!"

She said, "My favorite is Chopin'sPolonaise Brillante! You'll both love it!"

"I'd be honored," he said.

Then he added, "Friday's 'Qwill Pen' will be a'Late Great' profile of the Ledfields. Is there anything I should know?"

"I can tell you one thing," she replied with fervor. "They always did more than they were asked to do, and gave more than they were asked to give. They supported every worthwhile program: school, church, library, athletic, and civic."

Qwilleran said, "Did you know some of their mounted animals were in thePickax Then parade?"

"Not only that, but his wildlife museum was open twice a year to schoolchildren who had the highest grades!" Maggie said.

"The Ledfields visited the barn once, paying three hundred dollars a ticket. It was a benefit for the local literacy program. I was not able to meet them due to an embarrassing incident with Koko that ended the evening early."

Maggie had to smile. "Doris told me it was the most fun they had had in years! Your cat stole the show."

"Koko disgraced himself, but the evening was a financial success for a good cause."

Maggie said, "Nathan called it the best fund-raiser he'd ever attended--and he'd gladly pay to see it again."

When Quilleran left he was carrying a leather case of recordings to play on the barn system. He stowed them in the trunk of his car.

Having declined Maggie's offer of "a nice cup of tea," he went instead to Lois's Luncheonette, where he could get a wicked cup of coffee and listen to the gossip. He called it "taking the public pulse."

He found the place in an uproar. Every chair at every table was filled. All the customers were talking at once--about the Ledfields--the murders . . . the family scandal--and the Ledfields' will. Especially the will! Who would inherit? How much? The possibility that the fortune might be going out of state. Everyone seemed to have a cousin or father-in-law whose wife knew the Ledfields' housekeeper or whose uncle was their window washer.

Qwilleran drank his coffee while standing at the cash register, then walked to the office of HBB&amp;A, hoping Allen Barter would be at his desk. He was.

"What brings you out, Qwill?"

"I've been hearing strange rumors about the Ledfield bequests. Do I have to wait for tomorrow's newspaper?"

"Sit down and I'll fill you in. It's very simple. An old intermediate school will become the Ledfield Music Center, offering private lessons, classes, recitals, et cetera, all under the supervision of Uncle Louie MacLeod. . . . The Ledfield wildlife collection will be moved to a downtown site convenient for classes of schoolchildren. . . . The Old Manse will become a museum of art and antiques, with guided tours conducted by volunteers trained as guides, and with a respectable admission charge to discourage gawkers. Nathan envisioned it as an educational experience for visitors."

"Sounds good," Qwilleran said. "There are rumors that some of the fortune is going out of state."

"You've been hanging around the coffee shops, Qwill."

Next, Qwilleran left his car in the parking lot and walked to the newspaper. "Just touching base," he said to the managing editor.

"We'll be back to normal tomorrow," Junior said. "Will you have your usual 'Qwill Pen' for Friday?"

"I'll write a'Late Great' on the Ledfields."

"The terms of the will are scheduled to run tomorrow. It could be quite a sensation. The Ledfields go back to the nineteenth century, when mine owners made fortunes and there was no income tax. And they've had a century to invest it, so you know they were loaded. Whether they're leaving it to Moose County remains to be seen. . . . We're printing a large run tomorrow."

In the days that followed, Qwilleran's neighbors in the Village assumed he would stay there for the winter, since he had gone to the trouble of moving from the barn.

True, he had many friends there, and there were numerous activities in the clubhouse, but it could not compare with the barn for livability. The acoustics were magnificent, and he had a collection of the Ledfields' CDs waiting to be played. Altogether it was an odd situation. The barn made good country living in the city in the summer, and the condo made good city living in the country in winter.

Qwilleran pondered his options as he watched the cats gobble their dinner.

He asked, "Which shall it be, Koko? Stay here till spring . . . or move back to the barn now?"

Koko swallowed, made a few dental passes with his tongue and said "Yow-w-w" loud and clear!

And so, Qwilleran and the Siamese moved back to the barn--with its vast interior spaces, its balconies and ramps, its incredible acoustics.

Upon arrival, the cats first checked the bowls and plates (his and hers) under the kitchen table--then their private quarters on the third balcony. Yum Yum found her silver thimble. Koko remembered his new hobby: He dropped from a balcony railing, like a bombshell, into a cushiony sofa.

Pickax was glorying in its good fortune.

First, a former intermediate school was acquired for a music center, where young people could take piano or voice lessons from teachers commuting from Lockmaster. The high-school band could practice there without annoying the neighbors. Uncle Louis organized a choral club, and there was talk about staging a production ofThe Mikado.

Then an abandoned warehouse was adapted as a wildlife museum, and the Ledfields' mounted birds and beasts were exhibited in realistic settings created by the theatre club's set designer.

As for the Old Manse, it adapted well to a museum of art and antiques. Volunteers from the best families were trained as guides. There were fresh flowers in every room . . . the score of Chopin'sPolonaise Brillante was open on Doris's Steinway grand and on Nathan's music rack (his Stradivarius was locked up).

A preview of the mansion was being planned for those willing to pay five hundred dollars for a ticket. Guides would conduct them.

Then--six months after the demise of Doris and Nathan, the Ledfield estate dropped a bombshell!

After the doom and gloom of the hurricane, the accident at the Bloody Creek Bridge and--worst of all--the loss of the Ledfield family by unthinkable means . . . after all of this, Qwilleran and Polly were glad to be invited to the Rikers' condo for a Sunday afternoon repast.

"Less than a dinner," Mildred said, "but more than a lunch."

Qwilleran took Arch a bottle of something, and Polly took Mildred a silk chiffon scarf in a marbled pattern done by a local artist.

"The pattern is so unusual," Mildred cried. "And the silk is featherweight."

Polly said, "It's so weightless that I asked the druggist to put it on his pharmacy scale. He had to put a rubber band around it so it wouldn't float away. He said it weighed eleven and a half grams!"

Arch said, "If you roll it up it would fit in a shot glass!"

The first topic of discussion was the front-page story in Friday's paper: An anonymous donor had given the county-road commission a citizen's mandate to ensure the safety of the Bloody Creek Bridge according to the standard of the state engineers.

"Everyone," Arch said, "was wondering about the identity of the donor, but the release had come from a law agency, and secrecy was implied."

No conclusions were reached or even attempted. There was mumbled regret over the loss of Liz Hart . . . and consternation over the county's negligence.

Then the four survivors of the hurricane recalled their method of coping. Polly had phoned friends. Mildred had worked on the cookbook that's to be published. Everyone could guess how Arch had passed the time. As for Qwilleran, he always browsed throughBartlett's Familiar Quotations on a rainy day.

Now, to test the others, he asked, "Who is Gelett Burgess?"

In unison they responded, "I never saw a purple cow!"

"True! He had many talents but has been known for a century for a nonsensical poem. This past week I discovered a sequel to the original!"

He waited for their eager looks and then recited:

    Ah, yes, I wrote the "Purple Cow"--
    I'm sorry, now, I wrote it!
    But I can tell you, anyhow,
    I'll kill you if you quote it.

The others applauded.

Arch said he would rather be remembered for "The Purple Cow" than not remembered at all. And then Mildred said, "And we're all so proud to have the K Fund buying the Grist Mill! But who will replace Liz Hart? She was so charming!"

"Prepare for a surprise!" Qwilleran said. "A few years ago, when dining at the Boulder House Inn, did you occasionally meet a teenager? Her name was Jennifer."

They all remembered. She was very bright and personable. She was Silas Dingwall's daughter.

"Well, she has just completed a course in restaurant management at an eastern university. She and some fellow graduates have been traveling in France for gustatory experiences. She'll be perfect for the Grist Mill!"

"What a happy surprise!" Polly said.

Mildred added, "This has been a year of surprises, and I think there are more to come. I feel it in my bones!"

And so it went!

In September the Pickax Fourth of July parade took place on Labor Day.

In September, also, the Old Grist Mill opened under K Fund ownership--with a new manager.

In October, the Pickax Music Center opened with the Andrew Lloyd Webber musicalCATS, Uncle Louie MacLeod having secured the amateur rights to produce it. Besides, the choral group had all those costumes with tails left over from theKitKat review.

In October, also, Qwilleran moved his household back to the condo for the winter.

In November, the Ledfield Museum of Wildlife opened in a downtown warehouse, with mounted birds and beasts exhibited in naturalistic scenes created by the theatre club's set designers.

In December, a 500-dollar-a-ticket preview of the Ledfields' Old Manse raised $20,000 for child welfare. The sum was matched dollar-for-dollar by the K fund.

Also, in December, Koko became suddenly nervous--hearing inaudible noises and talking to himself. Qwilleran thought, something's going to happen! And then it happened!

In January, exactly six months after the demise of Nathan and Doris Ledfield, a sealed envelope that had long been in the vault of the law office was opened in the presence of witnesses. It was a document bequeathing a billion dollars for a Ledfield Academy of Music, specializing in keyboard and strings and of such excellence as to honor the name of Ledfield in music circles worldwide.

The announcement was released to news media from coast to coast. Included was an endowment in the form of blue-chip investments that would be available for expenses not covered by income from such an establishment.

There was one stipulation that stunned the witnesses and divided the good folk of Moose County. The magnanimous offer was made to any American city with a population of one million or more!

Press and pulpit lauded the Purple Point couple for their generosity in the past and their concern for the future quality of life in Moose County, specifically: the museum of art and antiques, a facility for the study and enjoyment of music, and a wildlife museum of interest.

Dissenters on the grapevine complained indignantly that the billion-dollar bequest should have stayed in Moose County to promote growth, build a new downtown, and improve recreation facilities.

</text>
