<text id="L02" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Shape Shifter. HarperCollins Publishers Inc." Author="Tony Hillerman" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="/">

Took down my number and
address and all that. And we wished each other luck. All
that sort of thing."
Bernie was refilling his coffee cup, looking even
prettier than he remembered, but not totally happy with
him at the moment. No matter, Leaphorn was feeling
fine. Rested, refreshed, enjoying the sweet smell of the
autumn breeze drifting in through those pretty white
curtains, bordered with lace, which replaced the grimy
blinds that once obscured the windows, noticing that this
little room seemed larger now and no longer assaulted
his nostrils with what he had thought of as the Jim smell,
the odor of some sort of special lubricant Sergeant Chee
always used on his pistol, his holster, belt, uniform straps,
probably his shoes, and maybe even on his toothbrush.
Now the place smelled . . . he couldn't think of a name for
it. It simply smelled good. Sort of like that subtle perfume
scent Bernie sometimes used. And through the open
window, the breeze brought in the hooting sound of a
dove, the chittering of robins nesting by the river, and as-
sorted whistles and chirps of the various birds the chang-
ing seasons brought to this bend in the San Juan River. He
could even hear the faint sound of the river itself gurgling
along just below Chee's old trailer home. Ah, Leaphorn
was thinking, how good it is to be in home territory again.
How good it is to be retired.
But Bernie was still thinking of Tommy Vang.
"Don't you wonder how he can possibly handle all
that by himself ? I mean, getting back to Laos, wasn't it?
Wouldn't there be all sorts of visa problems? Things like
that. And I'll bet he didn't even have a passport. And how
about the money? You haven't explained that."
"Well," Leaphorn said. And would have said more,
but Chee interjected himself into the conversation.
"Bernie cares about people," he said. "She's a sort of
dedicated worrier."
"Maybe she should have started worrying a little ear-
lier," Leaphorn said. "Done some serious worrying about
what she was getting into here."
Bernadette Manuelito Chee laughed. "No," she said.
"Now I just add Jim to the list of people I have to worry
about."
"What I'm curious about," said Chee, changing the
subject, "is why you got involved in this in the first place.
That call you made about the Totter obituary, for example.
You still haven't explained that. I'd like to know what that
was all about."
"I'll try to explain that," Leaphorn said. "But first let
me give Bernie some assurance that Tommy Vang can
take care of himself. Tommy had been sort of a travel
agent for Delos for years, as well as cook, valet, pants
presser, and so forth. He'd arrange Delos's trips, make
the reservations, get the tickets, all that sort of thing. Do
it by telephone, or sometimes online with the computer, I
guess. Used Delos's credit cards. I think he worked with a
Flagstaff travel agency. They knew him. Even got Delos his
boarding passes. No standing in line for Delos."
Bernie was not quite satisfied. "But how about the of-
ficial stuff ? Travel documents. I guess he wouldn't need a
passport to travel within this country, but if you're going
to another country, doesn't the airline want to see if you
have what it takes to land there?"
Leaphorn nodded. Thinking that was exactly the
question that had troubled him. Still did a little, for that
matter. But it hadn't troubled Vang. He'd asked Tommy,
and Tommy said Mr. Delos had lots of passports, lots of
visa papers. From where? And Tommy said lots of blank
forms from lots of countries, and eleven or twelve differ-
ent passports in his travel file there in his office. "From
different countries and with different pictures stuck in
them, loose, to stick a new one in if he needed to look
different."
Bernie was looking skeptical. Leaphorn nodded. But
Bernie wanted a better answer.
"So that's how he gets on the plane then. Just uses
phony papers. Same with getting off in Thailand, or Laos,
or where he's going?"
"Well, Tommy didn't seem to have any worries about
that. At least he told me he didn't."
"Just phony documents," Bernie said.
"Come on, Bernie," Chee said. "This Vang fellow
knows his way around. I wouldn't worry about him so
much. But I'd like to know about some other things.
Where did he get his traveling money, for example, and
just what happened to Mr. Delos? I'm guessing he must
be dead. But how did that happen? And what happened
to the truck Tommy Vang was driving?"
"The truck!" Bernie said, and laughed.
"I don't know for sure about the truck," Leaphorn
said. "Maybe he drove it to Phoenix, left it in the airport
parking garage, or maybe he left it parked at the Delos
house in Flagstaff, and called the limo service Delos used
and had them drive him to the airport. Either way, I guess
the truck gets hauled off and impounded eventually. As
for the other questions, I have to pause here a moment
and explain something. Something personal."
"Oh," Bernie said.
While he thought about how he was going to do that
explaining, he noticed Chee staring at him, looking grim
and determined.
"No heirs, you think?" Chee asked, still concerned
about the future of the truck. "No Delos family back there
somewhere?"
"I hope so," Leaphorn said. "If they show up to claim
that mansion of his and his property, I would dearly love
to talk to them. Find out who this man was. Where he
came from. All that."
"You don't know?" Bernie said.
Leaphorn shook his head.
"You haven't told us much of anything about what
happened to Mr. Delos, Lieutenant," Jim Chee said. "We
sort of gather that he must be dead. But what happened
to him?"
Leaphorn sipped the coffee, which was much, much
better than the coffee he'd remembered drinking here in
Jim Chee's home before Bernie had become Mrs. Chee.
"Sergeant Chee," Leaphorn said. "Bernie has not yet
been sworn in again as Officer Bernadette Manuelito.
Correct me, make that Officer Bernadette Chee. But I
gather she will soon be back in Navajo Tribal Police uni-
form and resuming her duties. So you both will be sworn
to uphold the law. Right?"
That provoked raised eyebrows but no answers.
"Therefore, I want you to know that if you manage
to pry everything out of me, a former lawman but now
retired to full standing as a layman, you might find your-
self with some decisions to make. And if you make them
wrong, I might find myself, ah, possibly in trouble."
Chee looked glum. Bernie made a horrified face.
"A homicide? A murder? What in the world happened?"
"Let's just drift off into a sort of vague fantasy,"
Leaphorn said. "Remember this as a sort of tale-telling
session. An exercise of flights of imagination. Now skip to the future. Imagine yourself under oath, being ques-
tioned. You are being asked what Joe Leaphorn told you
about this Delos affair. I want you to be able to say that
Leaphorn, old, in his dotage, and widely known in law en-
forcement as a tale teller, had just rambled along with a
sort of fantastic account involving a shape-shifter version
of skinwalkers, poisoned cherries, and things like that.
Very fantastic, not something to be taken seriously."
Chee didn't look happy with this. "In other words,
you're not going to tell us if Delos was killed, and if so,
who killed him, or any of that sort of stuff."
"In other words," Leaphorn said, settling back com-
fortably in his chair, "I am going to suggest you imagine
that this Delos has gone off to one of those private hunt-
ing places on the Colorado-New Mexico border to shoot
himself a trophy elk, and that he's ordered Tommy Vang
to run an errand first, and then come to the hunting cabin
to pick him up, bringing along a report on what he has ac-
complished. You with me?"
"I guess," Chee said, looking unhappy.
"All right, then. We'll imagine that Leaphorn, newly
retired and feeling sort of bored and disconnected, de-
cided he wanted to make amends with an elderly woman
he had offended when he was starting his police work.
And let's imagine that led him to cross paths with a skin-
walker - one of the shape-shifter variety, who about a
quarter century earlier had stolen ten gallons of pinyon
sap from a lady known as Grandma Peshlakai. This shape
shifter had once called himself Perkins, then other un-
known names, probably, and then Ray Shewnack. When
their paths first crossed, he had quit using Shewnack and
was calling himself Totter. You still following?"

"Go ahead," Bernie said. "We're listening."
So Leaphorn went ahead with this fantasy. The only
major interruption came when Chee stopped him, con-
tending that cherries couldn't be used to poison people
because the poison would make them taste too terrible
to swallow. Leaphorn handled that by referring Jim to the
textbook on criminal poisoning, in which the tasteless,
odorless, water-soluble poison was described, and from
that to the still-unsolved murder of Mel Bork, in which
Bork fell victim to a poisoned cherry. From that point he
skipped ahead, with neither Chee nor Bernie stopping
him with questions.
About ten minutes, and another cup of coffee, later,
he stopped. He took a final sip, clicked the cup down in
the saucer.
"So there we were," he said. "The sun was coming
up, Mr. Delos had shot his giant elk and left it for the
ranch crew to deal with. Tommy Vang had obtained travel
money, and I had gotten several fifty-dollar bills to repay
Grandma Peshlakai for her pinyon sap. Delonie had a
broken arm and a bruised rib that needed attention, so
we went home." Leaphorn made a dismissive gesture.
"End of episode," he said. "Now it's time for you two to tell
me more about your honeymoon."
"Wait a minute," Chee said. "What about this Delos
character. You just left him there? Or what?"
"Shape shifters, remember," Leaphorn said. "Delos was
one of them. Remember how it goes. You see one of them
doing something scary, and you shoot at him or some-
thing, and now it's an owl, or a coyote, or nothing at all."
Chee considered that. "I think you're sort of making
fun of me. Me being the man who would like to be a shaman." He produced a reluctant grin. "I guess that's all
right, though. It's your polite way of telling us that you're
not going to tell us what happened to Mr. Delos."
"Or whoever he was," Leaphorn said. "But I will make
you two a promise. You have a first anniversary of your
wedding coming up next summer. If you invite Professor
Bourbonette and me to that, we will come. If nothing bad
has happened by then - I mean relative to Mr. Delos and
all that - then I will finish telling you this fantastic tale.
Give you the last chapter."
Chee considered that, still looking unhappy. Shook
his head. "I guess we'll have to settle for that, Bernie. Is
that okay with you?"
"Not quite," Bernie said. "I want you to tell us about
going to see Grandma Peshlakai. I'll bet she was sur-
prised to see you. And happy, too. What did she say?"
"Well, surprised anyway," Leaphorn said, and grinned.
"I told her we had found the man who stole her pinyon
sap. And I told her we collected the money from him to
repay her. Fifty dollars for each bucket, and I handed her
the two fifty-dollar bills, and two other fifties for com-
pounded interest, and I said something like, 'Well, I finally
got the job done.'
"And she said, 'Well, young man, it sure took you a
long time to do it.'"

</text>
