<text id="L08" category="" words="2003" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Malpractice in Maggody" Author="Joan Hess" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="/">

"What exactly do you do all day?"

"I am in the process of determining what surgical procedures will best benefit our patients at various stages of their gradual progress. A positive self-image is vital to complete recovery."

He was annoying the hell out of me, and I knew I was doing a poor job of hiding it. Somehow, I didn't much care. "You mean nose jobs? Face lifts?"

He winced. "I prefer to use the approved medical terminology, but in essence, yes. Now why don't you run along and find Dr. Skiller? I need to call my attorney to discuss potential liability."

I stood up. "I'll use the opportunity to question her about what took place after the meeting. I am under no circumstances going undercover, Dr. Stonebridge. If you need a replacement for Miss Foss, I suggest you try a temp agency."

Fuming, I left him by the fountain and headed for the pool area to find an entrance. The man who'd been cleaning the pool had vanished. Now a muscular young man with gleaming blond hair was swimming laps as if he were training for the Olympics. A patient, I surmised, but if he was all that famous, it escaped me. Then again, I don't have cable and I rarely make it to the movies in Farberville. Maybe he'd won an Oscar or an Emmy or whatever people won these days. Probably not the Kentucky Derby.

I opened French doors and went down a corridor in the direction of the front of the building. A uniformed maid carrying an armload of towels hurried by without acknowledging me. I recognized the man who'd been guarding the gate during construction. He was now clad in neat white pants and a shirt, and when he saw me, disappeared around a corner. No one was crying or howling in a distant room. No bedpans clattered to the floor; no querulous voices complained. It was all very civilized for a loony bin, if that's what it was.

When I arrived in the reception room, the desk was unattended. More maids were moving about in one of the wings, presumably where the patients were battling demons in their exquisitely decorated suites. I drummed my fingers on the desk while I tried to decide what to do - which would not include filing or busywork. I already had a job, and more importantly, a date later in the day. What's more, I suspected that if I called Harve to squawk, I'd be told that he'd gone fishing for the weekend.

I was considering giving it a shot when Dr. Skiller appeared from an office behind the desk.

"So it's you," she said flatly.

Nothing like a warm greeting to liven up my day.

8

Ruby Bee was keeping an eye on Tekeella Buchanon, who was draped all over a potbellied truck driver in one of the booths. As long as they didn't start fooling around with buttons and zippers, she had no call to interfere. 'Course it might get interesting if Tekeella's boyfriend showed up, but last she'd heard, he was doing thirty days at the county jail for assault. She couldn't remember when she'd heard it, though.

She felt a flicker of alarm as the door opened and sunlight splashed onto the dance floor. Her alarm turned to disdain as Estelle wobbled in on four-inch heels, all gussied up like she was going to church. However, she held her tongue as Estelle sat down on her customary stool and took a Tupperware container out of a plastic bag.

They looked at each other for an uncomfortable minute, then Rudy Bee broke down and said, "You want something?"

"I made a batch of guacamole dip for your guests out back," said Estelle. "I just happened to have some avocados that were getting mushy."

Ruby Bee sniffed. "Oh, really? Last time I looked, the SuperSaver didn't have any avocados."

"I was shopping in Farberville, if you must know. Kmart was having a sale on purses, and I've been looking for a new one to go with my navy dress. Afterward, I stopped at a grocery store to pick up a few things."

"Like avocados," Ruby Bee said, nodding sagely.

Estelle chewed on her lip. "That's right. I found a recipe in a magazine for a chicken dish that called for avocados and black olives and salsa. The SuperSaver doesn't carry fancy things like that."

"So how did this chicken dish turn out?"

"I changed my mind about making it. I couldn't think of anything else to do with the avocados, so I made some guacamole. Do I need your permission to take it out back?"

Ruby Bee moved down the bar and began to wash mugs in the sink. "Doesn't matter to me, but I'm kinda surprised that you'd want to have anything to do with those foreigners. You want to leave your purse behind the bar in case they're pickpockets and thieves?"

"I don't know why you'd say such a thing, Rubella Belinda Hanks!"

"I'm sure they'll be forever beholden to you for your Christian generosity. The pope'll be impressed, too."

"If you'd druther, I can just leave," Estelle said, heating up.

"Pay no attention to me. Most likely they'll be thrilled out of their skins to get a bowl of mushy avocados. I'm surprised you didn't bring along a box of old underwear and rusty cans of tomato soup and pinto beans."

Estelle quivered, then composed herself. "I don't know what you want from me, Ruby Bee. I came here to make amends, but I ain't gonna grovel."

"Well, I ain't gonna grovel, neither," retorted Ruby Bee.

"It's just that ... well, it's complicated. If you don't mind, I'll pour myself a glass of sherry." When Ruby Bee shrugged, she reached behind the bar and found her bottle. "The thing is, back when I was living in Little Rock and singing at the lounge, there was this Italian fellow. I don't want to bore you with the details, so all I'm gonna say is that it didn't work out. I ended up mistrusting foreigners. I know those folks out back ain't Italians, but it's hard for me to feel comfortable about them."

Ruby Bee tossed the dishrag into the sink and went down to the end of the bar. "So tell me about him. Was he good-looking?"

"He had this really thick hair that was blacker than a mule skinner's molar," Estelle said dreamily. "He always brought me flowers on Saturday night. Not daisies, but big bouquets of roses tied with ribbons. I have to admit I was smitten with him, in spite of his annoying habit of sucking on his teeth. One night we drove out to a bluff overlooking the river and he told me all about his house in Italy and his wife, who'd died of some kind of mysterious ailment when she was only twenty-two."

"And then ... ?" Ruby Bee prompted her.

The ensuing conversation managed to undo a week's worth of animosity.

 

"I am not here as a replacement receptionist," I said to Brenda Skiller. "This is a murder investigation. My understanding is that Molly Foss was drowned in a fountain out back. Would you please tell me what you did after the staff meeting was over?"

"Sheriff Dorfer, if that's his name, agreed that you would ask your questions without causing undue alarm," she said coolly. "You cannot do so if you insist on attempting to bully everyone. I suggest you take several deep, cleansing breaths before you continue."

I couldn't quite bring myself to drop into a lotus position and focus on my navel. "I don't like this any more than you do, but we need to get it resolved quickly. What did you do after the staff meeting?"

She assessed me with no visible signs of warmth. "I agree with you that this must be dealt with expeditiously. After the meeting adjourned, I needed to pick up some invoices in the office. Miss Foss was here. I found what I needed and retired to my room. She and I did not speak."

"Didn't she announce at the end of the staff meeting that she was going home?"

"She did, but she lingered at her desk."

"Do you have any idea why?" I asked.

"Why would I? She was vapid, silly, and keenly aware of the effect she had on all the males in a quarter-mile radius. She couldn't master the computer or put files in the appropriate slots, but she could wiggle her ass and wink like a local beauty pageant queen. I found her behavior disgusting."

It didn't sound as if Brenda Skiller and Molly Foss shared tuna sandwiches and fashion tips at lunch. I tried again. "What time was this?"

"Eight-thirty or so. As I said, I took the invoices and left her here. I went to my office, did some work, and finished up at eleven. Dr. Stonebridge knocked on my door shortly after four o'clock this morning to tell me what happened. I dressed and waited with him in the garden for the authorities."

I perched on the edge of the desk. "Could Molly have been meeting someone?"

"I have no idea. When I last saw her, she wasn't really doing anything, just fiddling with the pens and paper clips. She seemed a little bit nervous. I did wonder briefly if she was waiting for Walter. He must have seemed exotic in comparison to her husband."

"You're quite sure it couldn't have been a patient?" I asked, thinking of the blond hulk I'd seen swimming laps.

"Absolutely not. They are all sedated by nine each night. We cannot have them wandering around the facility. We would be liable if something happened to one of them. Randall - Dr. Zumi - will be happy to provide you with the details of their medication."

I tossed this around for a moment. "Then you agree that either someone from outside managed to get over or under the fence, despite the guard and the dog, or that one of the employees is responsible?"

"I see no reason to speculate," Brenda said. "My only concern is for our patients, who will be following their schedules for individual and small group therapy, physical activity, meditation, and meals. Although I suspect you're no more competent than Miss Foss, you must assume her duties in order not to alarm them."

"Your cash cows," I said.

"In a manner of speaking, yes. You'll find a white coat in the office. Please wear it while you're here." She picked up a clipboard and thrust it at me. "Here is a list of those expected to require admittance during the day. They must identify themselves before you push the button to open the gate. Do not attempt to file anything or use the computer. Miss Foss left a muddle that will take me days to undo. If any of the patients ask about her, tell them she was called away for a family crisis."

"Wait a minute," I said as she headed down the hall. She did not look back as she disappeared. I was not pleased with her assumption that I would put on a white coat and guard the gate, but I realized I might have an opportunity to find out something about what was happening inside the compound. Thus far it was creepy, to put it mildly. The two doctors I'd encountered were more worried about maintaining a tranquil setting than they were about the brutal death of Molly Foss. Dr. Stonebridge was on the phone to his lawyer to discuss liability. Dr. Skiller was no doubt making sure the latest delivery of fresh vegetables was one hundred percent organic. Clearly, I needed to talk to Dr. Zumi and the personal trainer before I tackled the patients and the terrified staff of Mexicans - none of whom spoke English. I wasn't fond of the current proprietor of the Dairee Dee-Lishus, but I was very sorry he was not available to translate. Presuming he would.

</text>
