<text id="L11" category="" words="2012" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Raiders of the Lost Corset" Author="Ellen Byerrum" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="/">

Please don't let it be poisoned, she thought, and
stick some innocent tourist on the lower deck.
Angry at losing her sleek little pearl-handled blade, Natalija
yelped and body-slammed Lacey, throwing both of them to the
deck with a resounding thud. "What are you doing, you idiot?"
Lacey screamed. "Vic! Where are you?"
"You won't tell me where the corset is, so I'm going to kill you!
With my bare hands!" Natalija had a mad gleam in her eyes and
she certainly looked like she could do the job. But they were both
momentarily distracted by the sound of Vic's voice somewhere on
the lower deck.
"Lacey! What the hell  - ? Where are you?"
"Vic! Up here! Help!" Lacey managed to shout while trying to
roll away from Natalija. The madwoman was trying to climb on
top of Lacey and grab her throat.
Vic came racing up the stairs and slammed head on into Kepelov, running down the deck toward the two women. At least
Lacey thought it was Kepelov from her vantage point on her back
with Natalija clawing at her. Then suddenly the two men were
trading punches and one of them fell to the floor. He staggered
back up and they went at it again, and then they were both rolling
on the deck, fists thrashing furiously.
Lacey threw Natalija off long enough to scoot away from her
and back up against the railing. She tried not to worry about Vic:
He apparently had his hands full too. What on earth was Kepelov
doing here? Natalija dived for Lacey's throat again. Lacey pried
her hands from her throat and bit one as hard as she could, then she
kicked her off and rolled away. Natalija slunk across the deck,
sucking her wounded finger.
"Lying bitch!" Natalija cried. "I'm going to kill you."
Lacey managed to grab onto the railing and pull herself up by
one hand, directly above the huge red paddle wheel steadily slapping the water with its long, flat blades. The roar was deafening.
Dazed, Lacey shook her head. Vic seemed to be punching the
hell out of Kepelov, but Kepelov was still standing. Natalija coiled
like a cobra, nursing her injured hand, eyeing Lacey venomously.
Lacey leaned back against the railing and tried to catch her breath.
She watched Natalija warily as the woman crouched across the
deck from her.
Lacey looked over at Vic. He shoved an exhausted Kepelov to
the deck and then raised his head to look at her. He shouted.
"Lacey! Look out!"
Lacey glanced down. Natalija uncoiled and sprang at her in a
running leap. Somewhere nearby a woman screamed. Lacey instinctively hit the deck and clung to the bottom railing. She saw
sudden fear in Natalija's eyes as the woman realized too late she
had miscalculated, that a body in motion stays in motion. Natalija
Krumina hurled herself over the railing where Lacey had just
stood, clawing at it, unable to catch herself. She screamed as she
fell, and the heavy thud as her body hit one hard red paddle and
then the next seemed to repeat and repeat, until the paddle wheel
plowed her down, under the muddy waters of the Mississippi, and
she disappeared beneath the riverboat's churning wake. Her
screams stopped, but the sound echoed on in Lacey's head.
Vic abandoned Kepelov and ran to Lacey, lifting her up and
holding her so hard she could hardly breathe. "My God, Lacey, I
think my heart stopped when she came at you," he whispered. He
held her tight as they leaned over the railing to look for the woman
in the river. They never saw her again.
Kepelov's nose and lip were bleeding and his clothes were torn
and dirty, Lacey saw as he stumbled up to them. Vic lifted a weary
fist at him, but he held up his hands in surrender. "No more, no
more! I wasn't going to hurt her. Not Smithsonian," he said. He
turned back to Vic. "Why did you stop me, Donovan? I was after
that scheming bitch Natalija Krumina!" He pointed at the river.
"She's the one who shot me." Vic unclenched his fist and clasped
Kepelov's shoulder.
Trujillo strolled around the corner of the deck, a drink in his
hand and a pretty blonde on his arm. He stopped dead in his tracks.
"Oh, man! What did I miss? Mac's gonna kill me, isn't he?"


Chapter 39

Lacey didn't quite know why she invited everyone, including Kepelov and Griffin and Stella and Trujillo, to the Passion Flowers
boutique on Royal Street the next day.
Maybe she wanted a sense of symmetry for her story, or possibly to suppress the men's raging testosterone levels in that excessively girly dress shop, or maybe she was tired of being stalked
and this might end it once and for all. But she invited them all,
even the jewel thief and the ex-spy. Turtledove's cousins tracked
them down, and they promised to behave, even when she explained over and over that not only was there no Fabergé egg to
find, there might very well be nothing at all. She took the precaution of enlisting Turtledove and his cousins to stand guard over the
Russian and the Brit, not to mention the excitable Stella, while
Lacey made one last search for the corset.
Nicole Demaine was gracious and pleased that her shop would
merit a prominent mention in a story that might go around the
country, even the world. With some gravity she read aloud the note
from the crypt for the assembled group, while Trujillo took photographs. And on behalf of her mother, Madeline Demaine, she was
delighted to turn over to Lacey Smithsonian and The Eye Street
Observer Lacey's prime suspect: the antique dressmaker's dummy
that had been on display in her shop for decades.
Lacey had realized where she had to look when she finally
stopped shaking from the deadly encounter with Natalija, and they
had made their statements to the police. She waited to tell Vic until
they were finally alone. He said it was ridiculous, it wasn't logical.
How could she be sure? She told him she wasn't sure of anything,
and it didn't make any logical sense, just intuitive sense. But finding Magda's note hidden in her corset told her to keep looking for
the truth hidden inside. Magda had shed a drop of her blood to
wish Lacey luck. And now she kept hearing two dead women saying the same word over and over, Magda and Natalija, both of
them descended from the two Latvian soldiers who had stolen the
corset in Ekaterinburg long ago. They were both saying the word
"dummy."
Nicole brought a step stool and lifted the dummy down from
the ledge near the ceiling, where it had been keeping company
with antique hatboxes and other forgotten decor. She set it on a low
table in the center of the shop, which she closed for the occasion,
and whisked off decades of dust with a feather duster. She stepped
back and nodded to Lacey. Prick a finger for me, Magda, wherever
you are, Lacey thought.
Lacey examined the dressmaker's dummy carefully. Nicole Demaine had supplied her with a pair of thin white cotton gloves to
wear. The cloth covering the dummy had aged to a deep ivory,
smudged with dust, rust-stained around the metal neck plate, but it
was intact, its front seams straight and neat. But on the back of the
dummy Lacey saw a jagged seam, crudely sewn. "Secrets between
the stitches," she said to herself, that's what Magda wrote inside
my corset.
With trembling fingers, Lacey opened the jagged seam with a
seam ripper borrowed from Nicole. She slipped her gloved hand
inside the dummy and felt a flat wad of some material. She drew
it out slowly while the others held their breath. It was heavy. The
material was folded over and stiff with age and heavily stained.
Lacey carefully unfolded it: It was a small corset. It would fit a
very small-boned young woman, perhaps a teenager. There was a
hush of expectant silence. She wondered what color the corset was
originally, perhaps even pure white, in a finely woven cotton or
linen with a quilted covering. Now it was aged a dark yellow,
smeared and spattered with the brown of long-dried blood, its
laces cut. The corset was torn and gashed, some of the rips mended
by hand with irregular patches of a rougher homespun material.
Some were loose, their stitches brittle with age. The darkest brown
stains seemed to radiate from beneath the largest patches.
Lacey delicately lifted one of the loose patches with the seam
ripper to expose a long gash through which something gleamed.
She turned the corset toward the light. It flashed brilliantly, and
someone gasped. Through the gash Lacey saw large diamonds set
in platinum, perhaps a bracelet or a necklace. It was dazzling.
"Holy cow, Lacey," Stella blurted out, "what the hell is it?"
"A treasure, a dream, a nightmare," Lacey said. "Or all those
things." She lifted another loose patch: More diamonds glittered in
the shop lights. And then rubies. Vic gave a low whistle.
"My God," Kepelov said slowly, "it can't be real, can it?" He
reached out to touch it, but Turtledove cleared his throat gently. He
pulled his hand back. "But the corsets don't exist. They were all
cut apart and the jewels were taken by the Bolsheviks."
"Nothing's real till you bloody find it, mate," Griffin said. "The
Romanovs' bones didn't exist either. And then they dug 'em up a
few years back."
"This is incredible! It belongs to Russia," Kepelov proclaimed.
"To the Russian people."
"Ha! Finders, keepers, mate. But just wait till the live Romanovs hear about this."
"I feel an international incident coming on," Lacey said. Vic
hired Turtledove and his cousins on the spot to provide security all
the way back to Washington.
Lacey let everyone gaze at the corset and its contents, under Vic
and Turtledove's watchful eyes. She and Trujillo took endless photographs. Nicole posed with the dummy and the corset, a little
breathless, and then Lacey, and then Stella too. Lacey called Mac
at The Eye and listened to him laugh and yell for someone to get
the presses ready for a special edition. She even called Brooke at
her law office and listened to her squeal with joy. She let everyone
in the little dress shop marvel and wonder and speculate and talk.
And talk and talk.
Finally she put the corset in an archival document box lined
with acid-free paper and the dummy in a similar but larger box.
Handling them again would be a job for experts in historical garment conservation, and in Romanov jewels. And probably international diplomacy.
"Isn't it funny," Nicole Demaine said to Lacey as she packed it
all up. "I wanted to get rid of that dusty old thing years ago, but
Mother would never let me. She said it brought her good luck."
"Your mother was the only one," Lacey said. "It's brought everyone else bad luck." Including Magda Rousseau, Lacey thought. But
Magda brought me good luck. Maybe this will break the chain.
Vic held her close. "What about us, dragon-slayer? We never
get enough time, do we? Well, this is your lucky day. You just
proved it. So come on, make a wish. I'll make it come true."
Lacey looked at Vic, wondering. She thought perhaps they
were both finally making the same wish. But then she shook her
head, reluctantly.
"This dragon-slayer has to write a big story, fly home, and bake
a cake for Thanksgiving, remember?" She sighed. "Will you help
me, Vic?"
Vic kissed her and picked her up and spun her around until she
laughed and begged him to stop. "Let's go home and bake that
cake, sweetheart. I'm all yours."
"Good to know, cowboy." She kissed him again, and she kissed
him so he'd never forget it. "Now we just have to tell that to your
mother."

</text>
