<text id="L20" category="" words="2006" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The PMS Murder" Author="Laura Levine" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="/">

Traffic was a nightmare. Traffic is always a nightmare in L.A. Dinosaurs were probably backed
up on the Santa Monica Freeway in the Mesozoic
era. Which means I had plenty of time to put on
my makeup. Heck, I had enough time to do the
makeup for the cast of Phantom of the Opera.
Needless to say, my good mood was history.
I looked crummy and felt crummier. What's
worse, I'd lost all confidence in my ability to help
Rochelle beat her murder rap. What on earth
made me think the cops were going to take me seriously? Suddenly I wasn't even sure Marty was the
killer. All the facts pointed to him, but something
was bothering me. I had this strange feeling that
I'd been given a valuable clue that day, but I couldn't
put my finger on it.
By the time I got off the freeway, I was already
forty-five minutes late. Nothing like getting off to a
great start on my first assignment. I seriously considered turning around and going home. But I'd
come this far; I might as well see it through.
I checked myself out in my rearview mirror and
sighed. No miracle had happened on the ride
over. I still looked like crap. I reached for a tissue
and blotted my lipstick.
Isn't it strange how little things can be so important? If I hadn't blotted my lipstick, I never would've
figured out the truth.
Because when I glanced down at the tissue, that
elusive little clue swimming around in my brain
came bubbling up to the surface. At last I knew
what had been nagging at me - the lottery ticket
I'd found in Pam's purse at lunch that afternoon.
At the time, I'd noticed a red stain on the ticket. I
thought it was the jelly from Pam's donut. But
now, looking down at my tissue, I realized it wasn't
a jelly stain I'd seen on the ticket - but a lipstick blot.
I remembered that first meeting of the PMS
Club, when Marybeth held up her winning lottery
ticket and kissed it. She'd left a candy red lipstick
blot on the ticket. The same blot I'd seen on the
ticket in Pam's purse.
What, I wondered, was Pam doing with Marybeth's
ticket?
Suddenly I felt queasy. A horrible thought struck
me. Could Pam have possibly killed Marybeth for
the $50,000 lottery money? Maybe there was no
Bucko Burger commercial. Maybe the windfall she
was about to receive was from the State of California. Maybe she stole Marybeth's ticket and then
killed her before Marybeth could figure out what
she'd done.
I pulled up to the Stratford and gave my car to a
valet.
"You going to the Chang-Germanetti wedding?"
he asked, eyeing my ghastly bridesmaid gown.
"No, the Union National party."
"Really? You're wearing that to the Union National party? Major fashion boo-boo."
Okay, he didn't really say that. He just shrugged
and said, "Rooftop Terrace."
I headed inside and crossed the lobby of the
venerable old hotel, with its original architectural
moldings and massive crystal chandeliers.
Could it be? I thought, as I rang for the elevator.
Was Pam, my new second-best friend, actually a killer?
But that was impossible. Pam had been by my
side the night of the murder. She never left me,
not for a moment. She was never alone in the
kitchen that night.
But what if Pam was there earlier in the day?
Maybe it was Pam - and not Marty - who'd managed to sneak into the house on the afternoon of
the murder. Rochelle said that the only people
who'd been at the house that day were the plumbers
and the building inspector. Could one of them have
been Pam in disguise?
Pam was, after all, an actress. She had access to
makeup. And Pam was a stocky woman. With a
phony beard or mustache, she might easily pass
for a guy. Hadn't she been a very convincing man
all those years ago in The Odd Couple?
Yes, Pam could have been one of the guys at the
house that day. And Rochelle, distracted as she was
that afternoon, would never have recognized her.
She couldn't have been one of the plumbers,
though. Surely, they would have noticed a stranger
in their midst. But what about the building inspector? What if Pam was the inspector?
When the elevator came, it was empty. The only
other passengers who got on with me were an elderly couple and a room service guy with a cart. I
wasn't surprised it was so deserted. The Union
National employees had probably all shown up
ages ago.
The elevator, like the rest of the hotel, was a relic
from yesteryear, a spacious cabin with burnished
mahogany walls and gleaming brass railings. We
pressed the buttons for our respective floors, and
the elevator began its slow and stately ascent. At
this rate, it would take forever to reach the Rooftop
Terrace, but I was already so late for the party, it
hardly mattered.
Then suddenly I remembered something Pam
had said at lunch today. She'd said Marty probably
doctored the guacamole while Rochelle was preoccupied with the building inspector. How did she know
about the inspector's visit? I'd never mentioned it
to her.
No, Pam knew about the building inspector because she was the building inspector. While she was
upstairs "inspecting" the master bath with Rochelle,
she could've easily invented an excuse to check
something downstairs and dashed to the kitchen
to add a fatal dose of peanut oil to the guacamole.
Oh, God. Pam really was the killer.
The trouble with this case all along was that
everyone in the PMS Club seemed so nice. No one
seemed capable of murder. I knew one of them
had to be acting a part. I just never dreamed it was
the actress.
The elevator stopped on the fourth floor and
the elderly couple got off. The doors slid shut and
I was alone with the room service guy. Strange that
he was on the guest elevator. Didn't waiters usually
ride the service elevators? For the first time I noticed his jacket, and a frisson of fear ran down my
spine. If this was the Stratford Hotel, why did his
lapel say The Plaza? Was that unnaturally black
hair of his actually a wig? And was it my imagination, or was one side of his mustache slightly lower
than the other?
Then I looked down at his hands and saw he was
wearing something room-service guys rarely wear - 
nail polish.
"Pam!" I blurted out, before I could stop myself.
"It's me, all right."
There was a manic gleam in her eyes that froze
my blood. Gone were all traces of the friendly
woman I'd met at the Bargain Barn.
"Too bad you had to drop my purse today. Once
you saw the lottery ticket, I knew it was only a matter of time before you figured things out. So I
rented this costume and took a chance I'd get you
alone in the elevator. Guess I lucked out, huh?"
And with that, she tossed aside the metal cover
from the room service tray, to reveal a butcher
knife.
Oh, Lord. It was big enough to gut a whale.
Frantic, I sprinted for the control panel to push
the alarm button, but before I could reach it, Pam
yanked me back by my ponytail and hurled me
against the wall. I howled in pain.
She was stronger than me. A lot stronger.
"Don't be crazy," I said, holding my throbbing
head. "The elevator could stop any minute. What
if someone sees you?"
"They won't see me. They'll see a deranged
room service waiter." She picked up the knife and
I felt a wave of bile rise in my throat. "When they
find your body, they'll think a man did it. Maybe
even Marty. Don't forget. I've got that paper you
signed this afternoon blaming him for your murder."
I cursed myself for writing that damn statement.
Thanks to my stupidity, Pam was going to get away
with murder - twice.
But I couldn't just stand there and let her slice
me open like a Benihana chef. I had to keep her
talking and somehow get that ghastly knife away
from her.
"I don't understand," I said. "Why did you have
to kill Marybeth? Couldn't you have just stolen the
ticket?"
"She saw me take it from her purse. The bitch
had eyes in the back of her head. She threatened
to tell everybody. Can you imagine? Telling everyone that I was a thief?"
I refrained from pointing out that's exactly what
she was.
"I gave her a sob story about how sorry I was
and begged her not to say anything. She said she
wouldn't, but I knew that sooner or later she'd
blab. And until then, she'd torture me with the
threat of exposure every chance she got. She'd
enjoy that. And besides, I wanted that fifty grand.
You may not mind shopping at the Bargain Barn,
honey, but I'm sick of it.
"So you see," she said, her knife poised to attack, "I had no choice. Just like I don't have any
choice now. Which is really too bad. I tried to warn
you, you know."
"By putting those nails under my tires?"
"I thought for sure that would scare you off. It's
a shame you were so damn persistent. Now I have
to kill you. What a pity. I like you, Jaine. We
could've been friends."
"Can't we still be friends? I won't tell anyone; I
promise. Marybeth deserved to die. You were
doing the world a favor. And I'm sure Rochelle's
lawyers will get her off on a technicality. Let's forget about this silly murder thing and head on over
to Ben &amp; Jerry's."
"You don't really think I'm going to fall for that,
do you?"
No, actually I didn't, but it had given me time to
inch over to the metal lid she'd tossed on the
floor. I grabbed it now and swung it with all my
might, knocking the knife from her hands.
As I lunged for the knife, she lunged for me,
grabbing me by the train of my bridesmaid dress. I
heard the rip of the seams, already thisclose to bursting, as they tore apart. Then, just as I was about to
grab the knife, I felt a searing pain in my legs as Pam
rammed me with the room service cart and sent
me sprawling to the floor.
Before I knew it, she was on top of me, frantically searching for the knife, which had disappeared from sight, hidden somewhere under the
mountains of chiffon in my dress. At least the dratted dress was good for something. We spent what
felt like centuries but was probably only seconds
clawing at each other, my dress now completely
torn from my body.
By this time I was screaming for help at the top
of my lungs. Where the hell were all the people in
this hotel anyway? Couldn't anybody hear me?
Then, to my horror, I saw Pam retrieve the knife
from under a pile of chiffon.
"Sorry, Jaine," she said, holding it aloft. "Oh,
and by the way, thanks again for the resume."
Then, just as she was about to plunge the knife
into my chest, the elevator door dinged open, and
we were on the rooftop terrace, surrounded by a
crowd of gaping Union National employees. Thank
heavens. Someone had heard me.
The next thing I knew, a couple of security
guards were prying Pam off me and hauling her
away. And then the hunkalicious Andrew Ferguson stepped out of the crowd and kneeled down
next to me.
"I've heard of bad room service," he said, "but
that was ridiculous. Are you okay?"
Was I okay?? Of course I wasn't okay!! I was lying
there in front of half the staff of Union National
Bank, practically naked in my waist-nipper pantyhose and Reeboks!
"Yes," I managed to say. "I'm okay."

</text>
