<text id="L22" category="" words="2009" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Witch of Agnesi" Author="Robert Spiller" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="/">

She set her elbows on the breakfast island and sipped at her coffee. She'd chosen to wear an old pair of jeans and a ratty Michigan State Spartans sweatshirt. She wasn't sure what sort of statement she was trying to make, but at least she felt comfortable.

Armen, of course, still wore his "I throw peanuts at old ladies" muscle shirt. Somehow it looked as if he wore it for the first time that morning. He even smelled fresh. Bonnie had earlier snuck a whiff when she reached across him for syrup.

"I throw peanuts at old ladies?" She stared at his shirt across her coffee cup.

He slapped the words on his chest. "You like it? My homeroom got together and bought the shirt for my birthday."

He may as well have said, "I'm donating a kidney to an orphaned child." As far as Bonnie was concerned, there were few things more sacred than the gifts of students. She knew teachers who didn't feel as she did who relegated student gifts to deep drawers, or even tossed them away outright. No doubt, these people are soulless. Yet here sat a man who treasured a student gift so much he wore it away from school.

"Do they consider you someone who bedevils elderly women?" She tried to keep admiration out of her voice. "Am I going to have to watch out for you whenever you have a peanut in your hand?"

Armen stroked his mustache like a villain from some cheesy melodrama. "First of all, the shirt says old ladies. You hardly qualify. Secondly, my homeroom is seventh-graders. Who knows what goes on in their minds? There are days when I'm not sure they and I are members of the same species."

He rubbed the shirt message with the palm of his hand. "Still, they did good. It's a great shirt. I hoped you would like it."

"I love it." In that moment, she realized Armen had worn the shirt as a bit of a test. What would have happened if she hadn't liked it?

"What's on the agenda?" He picked up his coffee cup and walked it to the sink. He swished some water in it and set it to dry in the drainer.

The set of motions was so natural Bonnie had no doubt Armen kept his house meticulous. And he makes French toast as well. Be still, my beating heart.

"I need a shower, and I need to get Alice to a garage somewhere. Otherwise I have no way to get to work on Monday." She expected him to volunteer to take her.

He merely nodded. "Tell me exactly what happened when Alice stalled out." He stared at her, chewing the beard surrounding his lower lip.

She told him.

He listened without interruption, grunting at key points in her narrative. When she finished, he asked, "The gas pedal went spongy all at once, or has it been getting that way over time?"

She had to think. Alice had been having problems since the invention of rope, so Bonnie needed to isolate this particular malady. "The pedal's gone weird before."

"Had you tried fluttering it?"

The man was a mind reader. "How did you know?

Yes, and it even worked, but not this time."

Armen nodded, looking pensive. "Do you mind if I take a look while you take your shower?"

She shot him a mischievous smile. "Mister Callahan?"

He went red from his neck to his hairline. "I meant at the car." A smile crept onto his face. "Although - "

"Never you mind." She returned his smile. "You sure you want to get into Alice's engine? She's pretty dirty." Bonnie couldn't imagine anything she'd rather avoid than poking around the greasy innards of an old car.

"You just take your shower."

In the master bathroom, Bonnie stripped down and regarded her reflection in the vanity mirror. "You hardly qualify," Armen had said when she referred to herself as an old lady.

He couldn't mean her steelgray hair. That dropped her solidly into the old lady camp. She'd stopped dying it since Ben's death, and in the last year and a half, gray had chased off all other colors except white.

Her face, except for laugh lines around her eyes and mouth, remained as it had for the last twenty years. She was proud of those lines. Ben had liked her face, used to kiss her laugh lines, saying they were evidences of every joke he'd ever told her. She pushed that bittersweet memory aside and let her gaze travel to her breasts and stomach.

I guess one of the benefits of starting off flat-chested is that you don't give gravity a whole lot to work with. She laid the palm of her hand on her smooth stomach. Years of hiking the mountain trails around Colorado Springs had kept her fit. Her muscled thighs and calves were proof of that.

Leaning heavily on one crutch, she flexed her bicep and mugged in the mirror. Not bad. At least, she didn't have that jiggling business hanging beneath her arm. Maybe she wasn't such an old lady after all.

She decided not to inspect her backside, thinking she should quit while she was ahead. Leave well enough alone, Bonnie.

It took forever and more than a little self-pity to remove the plastic boot.

After a labored effort involving sponges, wet and slippery crutches, and a lot of cursing, she emerged from the shower bedraggled but clean. She promised herself when she no longer needed the accursed crutches she'd have a ceremony to burn them. Maybe she'd give the damn things to Rhiannon for next year's balefire.

Dressed in the same sweatshirt and jeans she'd worn for breakfast, she slid open the bedroom door. Armen stood at the kitchen sink washing his hands. Patches of grease streaked both arms and a long smear extended from his cheek, through his beard, and down his neck. A tiny speck even adorned one earlobe.

He squirted some dishwashing liquid onto a paper towel and scrubbed his elbows. He offered her a big you should be proud of me smile. "Your fuel filter was full of gook from a filthy gas tank. I pulled the filter off - little plastic and screen doohickey - rinsed it out with gasoline from your lawnmower gas can, and hooked the filter back up again. You should have seen the crud that came out."

He tapped his ear. "Listen."

At first Bonnie didn't hear anything, and then the drone of an engine rose above the other outside noises.

"Is that - ?"

"Alice, the little engine that could?" He nodded, and his grin widened. "You bet your sweet bippy. I think you should get that ancient gas tank of yours flushed, or you're going have this problem again. Also, you might have a problem with your fuel pump, but we can put one of those on later."

The use of the word "we" wasn't lost on Bonnie. It felt comfortable, a good fit, at least for the moment. "You're amazing, Mister Callahan."

Armen spread wide his hands in a gesture that was supposed to indicate, "Shucks, 'twern't nothing, Ma'am."

That, coupled with the grease on his face, made him look like a five-year-old in a fake beard playing at being an adult. A part of Bonnie wanted to hobble over and throw her arms around him. She resisted the temptation. Instead, she took the paper towel from his hand. She squirted on more Dawn and worked the towel into lather.

"Hold still. You have a monster smudge on your face, and I don't want to get soap in your eye." She set her crutches against the breakfast island and took a stool. "Come here."

"Yes, ma'am." He dropped his hands to his side and closed his eyes - once again the child, this time trusting the capable hands of an adult.

The closeness of him made her uneasy, lent a slight tremble to her hand. More than once while she tended him she had to swallow. He must have felt her hand shake, but never did he open his eyes or change his expression. She saved the earlobe for last and gave a token to the voice that wanted her to take him in her arms.

She kissed the clean earlobe and whispered, "Thank you."

He stepped back and opened his eyes. "You're welcome, Bonnie."

The way he said her name made her shiver. The saying held the promise of intimacy, of shared confidences and laughter. For a long moment they stood there, captive in one another's gaze. Then the moment passed. The look she offered him was a mixture of apology and embarrassment. The look he returned said he understood.

He handed her the crutches. "Come on. Let's get you reacquainted with Alice."

BONNIE AND ARMEN PULLED ALICE INTO THE SCHOOL parking lot around ten-thirty. The plan was to first swing by the school and pick up the fanny pack. Even if Armen didn't see the point of cell phones, Bonnie couldn't go another day without hers. Once she had her phone, she'd sit down and call Wendy Newlin, make sure the woman was okay, maybe even drop in if Wendy needed company. Later, they'd go see Donna Poole at the hospice.

When they reached Bonnie's classroom the phone was ringing. Bonnie surprised herself with how fast she could motor on her new crutches, beating Armen across the room to her desk. She latched onto the phone a split second before Armen could apprehend it. She stuck out her tongue at him and raised the phone to her ear. "City Dump."

"Nice." Franklin Valsecci chuckled. "You're developing a sense of humor."

"I've always had a sense of humor, youngster. You've just never appreciated it." She leaned the crutches against the desk and sat atop it. The effort left her breathless. "What can I do you for?"

"Just being a responsible civil servant and following up on last night's incident."

"Tell me you're not at Jade Hill. Franklin, don't you have any kind of social life?"

"Thank you so much for that cruel and unnecessary intrusion into my business. Especially since I'm taking time out of my demanding schedule to keep you in the loop." He sighed, a long drawn out affair that spoke of long hours and little sleep. "Yes, I'm here at the precinct. Missus P, I've got what might be a double homicide on my hands - if you consider a worse case scenario with Peyton Newlin. Now, if you're not interested in what I've got to say . . ."

She shifted the phone to her other ear. "Hold on. Of course I'm interested. Would it help if I said I'm sorry?"

"I'm not certain. You haven't said it yet."

It was her turn to sigh. "I'm sorry. Sheesh. You're a fine one to talk about a sense of humor."

A long silence hung in the air. "I guess that's as good as I'm going to get. Okay, here it is. You got my message last night?"

"Uh huh."

"Like I said on the message, we only took Jesse Poole in for questioning since he had a slew of witnesses who swear he never left the hospital. We had to let him go."

Bonnie shifted uneasily on the desktop, unable to get comfortable. She didn't want to hear where this conversation was going. "But I saw him. I'd know that truck anywhere."

"I believe you, but I've got a problem. The truck was in the parking lot when we came for Jesse. So here's the million dollar question. Did you actually see the driver of the vehicle?"

She felt heat rise to her cheeks. Armen gave her an inquiring look, but she held back any questions with a wave of her hand. "The cab was dark and a bright light was shining in my eyes. I didn't see the driver."

Franklin must have heard the despair in her voice because he came back quickly. "Don't open a vein just yet. How about the license plate?"

</text>
