<text id="L24" category="" words="2011" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Promise Me" Author="Harlan Coben" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="/">

Chapter 1
he missing girl - there had been unceasing news reports, always
flashing to that achingly ordinary school portrait of the vanished
teen, you know the one, with the rainbow-swirl background, the
girl's hair too straight, her smile too self-conscious, then a quick cut to
the worried parents on the front lawn, microphones surrounding
them, Mom silently tearful, Dad reading a statement with quivering
lip - that girl, that missing girl, had just walked past Edna Skylar.
Edna froze.
Stanley, her husband, took two more steps before realizing that his
wife was no longer at his side. He turned around. "Edna?"
They stood near the corner of Twenty-first Street and Eighth Avenue in New York City. Street traffic was light this Saturday morning.
Foot traffic was heavy. The missing girl had been headed uptown.
Stanley gave a world-weary sigh. "What now?"
"Shh."
She needed to think. That high school portrait of the girl, the one
with the rainbow-swirl background . . . Edna closed her eyes. She
needed to conjure up the image in her head. Compare and contrast.
In the photograph, the missing girl had long, mousy-brown hair.
The woman who'd just walked by - woman, not girl, because the one
who'd just walked by seemed older, but maybe the picture was old
too - was a redhead with a shorter, wavy cut. The girl in the photograph
did not wear glasses. The one who was heading north up Eighth Avenue had on a fashionable pair with dark, rectangular frames. Her
clothes and makeup were both more - for a lack of a better word - 
adult.
Studying faces was more than a hobby with Edna. She was sixtythree years old, one of the few female physicians in her age group who
specialized in the field of genetics. Faces were her life. Part of her brain
was always working, even when far away from her office. She couldn't
help it - Dr. Edna Skylar studied faces. Her friends and family were
used to the probing stare, but strangers and new acquaintances found
it disconcerting.
So that was what Edna had been doing. Strolling down the street.
Ignoring, as she often did, the sights and sounds. Lost in her own personal bliss of studying the faces of passersby. Noting cheek structure
and mandibular depth, inter-eye distance and ear height, jaw contours
and orbital spacing. And that was why, despite the new hair color and
style, despite the fashionable glasses and adult makeup and clothing,
Edna had recognized the missing girl.
"She was walking with a man."
"What?"
Edna hadn't realized that she'd spoken out loud.
"The girl."
Stanley frowned. "What are you talking about, Edna?"
That picture. That achingly ordinary school portrait. You've seen it
a million times. You see it in a yearbook and the emotions start to
churn. In one fell swoop, you see her past, you see her future. You feel
the joy of youth, you feel the pain of growing up. You can see her potential there. You feel the pang of nostalgia. You see her years rush by,
college maybe, marriage, kids, all that.
But when that same photograph is flashed on your evening news, it
skewers your heart with terror. You look at that face, at that tentative
smile, at the droopy hair and slumped shoulders, and your mind goes
to dark places it shouldn't.
How long had Katie - that was the name, Katie - how long had she
been missing?
Edna tried to remember. A month probably. Maybe six weeks. The
story had only played locally and not for all that long. There were those
who believed that she was a runaway. Katie Rochester had turned eighteen a few days before the disappearance - that made her an adult and
thus lowered the priority a great deal. There was supposed trouble at
home, especially with her strict albeit quivering-lipped father.
Maybe Edna had been mistaken. Maybe it wasn't her.
One way to find out.
"Hurry," Edna said to Stanley.
"What? Where are we going?"
There was no time to reply. The girl was probably a block ahead by
now. Stanley would follow. Stanley Rickenback, an ob-gyn, was Edna's
second husband. Her first had been a whirlwind, a larger-than-life figure too handsome and too passionate and, oh yeah, an absolute ass.
That probably wasn't fair, but so what? The idea of marrying a doctor - 
this was forty years ago - had been a fun novelty for Husband One. The
reality, however, had not sat as well with him. He had figured that Edna
would outgrow the doc phase once they had children. Edna didn't - 
just the opposite, in fact. The truth was - a truth that had not escaped
her children - Edna loved doctoring more than motherhood.
She rushed ahead. The sidewalks were crowded. She moved into
the street, staying close to the curb, and sped up. Stanley tried to follow.
"Edna?"
"Just stay with me."
He caught up. "What are we doing?"
Edna's eyes searched for the red hair.
There. Up ahead on the left.
She needed to get a closer look. Edna broke into a full-fledged
sprint now, a strange sight in most places, a nicely dressed woman in
her mid-sixties sprinting down the street, but this was Manhattan. It
barely registered a second glance.
She circled in front of the woman, trying not to be too obvious,
ducking behind taller people, and when she was in the right place,
Edna spun around. The possible-Katie was walking toward her. Their
eyes met for the briefest of moments, and Edna knew.
It was her.
Katie Rochester was with a dark-haired man, probably in his early
thirties. They were holding hands. She did not seem too distressed.
She seemed, in fact, up until the point where their eyes met anyway,
pretty content. Of course that might not mean anything. Elizabeth
Smart, that young girl who'd been kidnapped out in Utah, had been out
in the open with her kidnapper and never tried to signal for help.
Maybe something similar was playing here.
Edna wasn't buying it.
The redheaded possible-Katie whispered something to the darkhaired man. They picked up their pace. Edna saw them veer right and
down the subway stairs. The sign read c and e trains. Stanley caught
up to Edna. He was about to say something, but he saw the look on her
face and kept still.
"Come on," she said.
They hurried around the front and started down the stairs. The missing woman and the dark-haired man were already through the turnstile. Edna started toward it.
"Damn it."
"What?"
"I don't have a MetroCard."
"I do," Stanley said.
"Let me have it. Hurry."
Stanley plucked the card from his wallet and handed it to her. She
scanned it, moved through the turnstile, handed it back to him. She
didn't wait. They'd gone down the stairs to the right. She started that
way. She heard the roar of an incoming train and hurried her steps.
The brakes were squeaking to a halt. The subway doors slid open.
Edna's heart beat wildly in her chest. She looked left and right, searching for the red hair.
Nothing.
Where was that girl?
"Edna?" It was Stanley. He had caught up to her.
Edna said nothing. She stood on the platform, but there was no
sign of Katie Rochester. And even if there was, what then? What should
Edna do here? Does she hop on the train and follow them? To where?
And then what? Find the apartment or house and then call the police. . . .
Someone tapped her shoulder.
Edna turned. It was the missing girl.
For a long time after this, Edna would wonder what she saw in the
girl's expression. Was there a pleading look? A desperation? A calmness? Joy, even? Resolution? All of them.
They just stood and stared at each other for a moment. The bustling
crowd, the indecipherable static on the speaker, the swoosh of the
train - it all disappeared, leaving just the two of them.
"Please," the missing girl said, her voice a whisper. "You can't tell
anybody you saw me."
The girl stepped onto the train then. Edna felt a chill. The doors
slid closed. Edna wanted to do something, do anything, but she couldn't
move. Her gaze remained locked on the girl's.
"Please," the girl mouthed through the glass.
And then the train disappeared into the dark.

CHAPTER 2
here were two teenage girls in Myron's basement.
That was how it began. Later, when Myron looked back on all
the loss and heartbreak, this first series of what-ifs would rise up
and haunt him anew. What if he hadn't needed ice. What if he'd
opened his basement door a minute earlier or a minute later. What
if the two teenage girls - what were they doing alone in his basement in the first place? - had spoken in whispers so that he hadn't
overheard them.
What if he had just minded his own business.
From the top of the stairs, Myron heard the girls giggling. He
stopped. For a moment he considered closing the door and leaving
them alone. His small soiree was low on ice, not out of it. He could
come back.
But before he could turn away, one of the girls' voices wafted
smoke-like up the stairwell. "So you went with Randy?"
The other: "Oh my God, we were like so wasted."
"From beer?"
"Beer and shots, yeah."
"How did you get home?"
"Randy drove."
At the top of the stairs, Myron stiffened.
"But you said - "
"Shh." Then: "Hello? Is someone there?"
Caught.
Myron took the stairs in a trot, whistling as he went. Mr. Casual.
The two girls were sitting in what used to be Myron's bedroom. The
basement had been "finished" in 1975 and looked it. Myron's father,
who was currently lollygagging with Mom in some condo near Boca
Raton, had been big on two-sided tape. The adhesive wood paneling, a
look that aged about as well as the Betamax, had started to give. In
some spots the concrete walls were now visible and noticeably flaking.
The floor tiles, fastened down with something akin to Elmer's Glue,
were buckling. They crunched beetle-like when you stepped on them.
The two girls - one Myron had known her whole life, the other he
had just met today - looked up at him with wide eyes. For a moment
no one spoke. He gave them a little wave.
"Hey, girls."
Myron Bolitar prided himself on big opening lines.
The girls were both high school seniors, both pretty in that coltish
way. The one sitting on the corner of his old bed - the one he had met
for the first time an hour ago - was named Erin. Myron had started dating Erin's mother, a widow and freelance magazine writer named Ali
Wilder, two months ago. This party, here at the house Myron had
grown up in and now owned, was something of a "coming out" party
for Myron and Ali as a couple.
The other girl, Aimee Biel, mimicked his wave and tone. "Hey,
Myron."
More silence.
He first saw Aimee Biel the day after she was born at St. Barnabas
Hospital. Aimee and her parents, Claire and Erik, lived two blocks
away. Myron had known Claire since their years together at Heritage
Middle School, less than half a mile from where they now gathered.
Myron turned toward Aimee. For a moment he fell back more than
twenty-five years. Aimee looked so much like her mother, had the
same crooked, devil-may-care grin, it was like looking through a time
portal.
"I was just getting some ice," Myron said. He pointed toward the
freezer with his thumb to illustrate the point.
"Cool," Aimee said.
"Very cool," Myron said. "Ice cold, in fact."
Myron chuckled. Alone.
With the stupid grin still on his face, Myron looked over at Erin. She
turned away. That had been her basic reaction today. Polite and aloof.
"Can I ask you something?" Aimee said.
"Shoot."
She spread her hands. "Was this really your room growing up?"
"Indeed it was."
The two girls exchanged a glance. Aimee giggled. Erin did likewise.
"What?" Myron said.
"This room . . . I mean, could it possibly be lamer?"

</text>
