<text id="N05" category="" words="2001" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Fire Trap" Author="Earl Emerson" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="/">

1. THE Z CLUB

Captain Trey Brown, Engine 28, C shift

I was seventeen the first time I stole India from my brother.

They say you never forget your first love, and I guess it's true, because

even though I haven't laid eyes on her in almost two decades, I find my

thoughts straying in India's direction often. But then, my life changed

forever that summer, so why shouldn't my thoughts stray to that time?

There were a lot of changes during the course of those months: our oldest

brother dying in a car wreck, India's sister the victim of an assault that

changed her life and mine forever, the dark evening I got myself

blackballed out of the Carmichael family on what was essentially a hand

vote.

Perhaps it is because memories of youth are so often marbled with

yearning that I believed parts of our summer might one day be recovered.

Memories of desire heated to the melting point dim slowly. The summer

India and I cheated on my brother, I was seventeen and she had just turned

eighteen. At the time I believed we were more in love than any other two

people on earth. Had events turned out differently, that feeling might have

eased out of my soul of its own accord instead of being jerked out like a

gaffed flounder. Oddly, her last name is Carmichael now, a detail that

lends more angst to my recollections than anything else.

Being excommunicated from the family was only the beginning of my

troubles. At seventeen I came as close as I ever would to a jail cell, and

then had the stuffing beaten out of me by two ex-pro boxers while Barn/

Renfrow stood by and watched. Renfrow's back now, too, which shows how

circular life can be.

Though I hadn't laid eyes on India during the intervening years, I'd seen

pictures of her in the newspaper: at a Mariners game sitting with the

president of the ball club and his wife; a wedding photo the week after she

married Stone Carmichael; and more recently, functioning as the hostess

at a charity ball attended by Puget Sound's hoity-toity, the odd software

billionaire sprinkled in among the five-thousand-dollar gowns and designer

tuxedos. For me the photos were freeze-frame glimpses of a life I'd been

banished from

Even now I remember our last night together, the silky feel of her breasts

under my touch, the ultimate tension in my loins as her thighs tightened.

Oddly enough, she married into the only family on this planet who held me

in lower regard than her own family did, But that's a long story. Only weeks

ago Seattle suffered its most devastating fire in recent history, and the

irony that disaster can reunite us just as disaster once split us apart does

not elude me. Today I am a lonely man of common tastes, who wonders

occasionally not whether his lost love thinks of him as frequently as he

thinks of her, but whether she thinks of him at all.

This morning I debated whether or not to take the Harley to work, but in

the end decided the riots would probably be over by six forty-five when I

left the house. The radio reported rock throwing in the Rainier Valley,

random gunshots on Beacon Hill, bricks thrown at a fire station several

blocks from my home. In the nine days I'd been out of town, the public

outcry over the fire had snowballed from bitch sessions to rioting. If things

continued in this vein, it was only a matter of time before more deaths

were added to the fourteen at the Z Club fifteen if you counted the witness

who was murdered two blocks from the fire.

It was four weeks after the tragedy, a Friday morning, early October, and

Seattle was sleepwalking through a typical fall of fog-shrouded mornings

and hazy afternoons, The news said rain was moving in,

At the intersection of Martin Luther King and Jackson, a gaggle of black

teenagers stood idly in the fog, I could tell from their body language that

they'd been out all night, hunting up hassles and emboldening one another

with tough talk and macho posturing, A small grocery store on the

northwest corner revealed broken windows and graffiti streaming across

the front door like cartoon captions, As I waited at the red light, one of the

boys realized I was the only motorist at the intersection and threw a half-

full beer bottle onto Jackson, where it burst twenty feet from my front tire.

Several of them laughed, the others waiting for my reaction. I wanted to

tell them that if this was a black-white revolution, perhaps they should go

after a white guy instead of yours truly, but all I did was blip my throttle a

couple of times and roar away when the light changed,

I'd been in a cocoon of my own making for the past nine days, having flown

to Las Vegas on my annual trek with my mom and brother, my real family. I

hadn't had time to catch up on all the news, but I knew the official fire

department report had come out two days ago and yesterday the papers

had unloaded a bombshell that made the report look like a pack of lies.

Since then, all hell had broken loose. While my minor burns from the Z Club

fire had healed, the community rebellion had grown worse,

This would be my first shift on Engine 28 in almost a month, and as much

as I detested Las Vegas, making the trip each year specifically for my

mother and brother, who couldn't get enough of it, the journey had been a

respite from the angry speeches, department arm-twisting, and political diatribes prompted by the Z Club fire.

As did other papers in the country, the Las Vegas Review-Journal had

carried daily updates on the unrest in Seattle. USA Today sported a photo

of bodies under a large tarpaulin on the sidewalk outside the Z Club, and it

was because of those bodies that last Friday and Saturday night African-

American youth rioted in Seattle in a manner that hadn't been seen here

since the late sixties. Monday morning, almost sixteen hundred marchers,

black and white, forced the mayor to stand in the rain outside the

municipal building and give a conciliatory speech about knitting the

community back together. So far nobody had been killed in the riots,

although one police officer received a broken shoulder when some moron

dropped a cinder block from a roof. Each day there had been organized

marches, and later, under cover of darkness, a different set of protesters

staged mini-riots, break-ins, and looting.

According to reports I heard on the radio, the vice president's visit this

morning had forced the SPD to maintain an expansive presence on the

streets. I was afraid my little brother Johnny, who had a penchant for

lunacy and a compulsion to be part of any crowd, would get sucked into the

maelstrom, so I had hoped the ruckus would have died down by the time we

returned from Nevada. In fact, we had taken the Vegas trip a month early

trusting in just such an eventuality. But instead of dying down, the turmoil

had mushroomed.

Thirteen black civilians and one white firefighter had died at the Z Club

fire. One version of the story had a mostly white fire department pouring

water into the building in a cowardly style from the sidewalk while frantic

young blacks tried to escape the premises without any help. Another

version painted a picture of firefighters so intent on saving one of their

own that they ignored relatively easy civilian rescues, leaving more than a

dozen African Americans to die. If I bought into either of those scenarios, I

might have been tempted to march in the streets, too.

Yesterday afternoon the mayor's office issued its official reaction to the

fire department's report on the Z Club fire and to the news stories

yesterday morning which supposedly debunked that report. The TV news

had been filled with cautiously worded affirmations from city

administrators and fire department brass juxtaposed with statements from

the outraged local NAACP chapter president, from angry black ministers,

from family and friends of the victims, and from more fortunate

partygoers who'd escaped the Z Club that night. Melinda Burns, the lieutenant I would be relieving on Engine 28 this morning, was

interviewed during one newscast, announcing rather lamely that it was

"always a shame when people had to die at a fire." From the department's

perspective, the interview probably wasn't a great idea, since Melinda was

white, the victims were black, and that that distinction had been the

number one topic of contention from the get-go.

Situated on Rainier Avenue, Station 28, rnyhorne away from home, was a

stereotypical firehouse with three tall roll-up apparatus bay doors and hard

tile floors throughout. Because of the institutional nature of our structure

and furnishings, I often thought the building could serve as the living

quarters for the staff in a state facility, most likely a nuthouse.

I shut off the Harley and rolled into the station without getting off, walking

the bike quietly between the rigs to the rear of the station under the

basketball hoop, It was seven a.m., and most of the firefighters from

yesterday's shift were just climbing out of their bunks, In half an hour,

today's crews would take over and hold the fort until seven-thirty tomorrow

morning: four firefighters on Ladder 12, three of us on Engine 28, and two

paramedics on Medic28,

Lieutenant Burns, who met me outside the engine officer's room, was thick

through the middle like someone who'd been drinking beer for too many

years but had been a star athlete in college: rugby and lacrosse. She was

anxious about living up to department standards, even though as far as I

could tell, she generally surpassed them,

"All heck's been breaking loose," she said,

"Oh, yeah?" I left the door open a few inches while I went into the small

engine officer's room, tugged off my motorcycle boots, and stepped into a

freshly laundered fire department uniform I'd carried to work in my

saddlebags,

"We bunked four times last night," she said from the hallway, "Had two

Dumpster fires down near Alaska. Got called to the South Precinct after

they pepper-sprayed a couple of guys outside one of the holding cells, They

must have had eighteen or twenty people under arrest for rioting, People

are really bent out of shape over that report. Tonight might be more of the

same,"

"Yeah, it's Friday."

It was unexpected and a little sad to see the black community so angry at

the fire department. Historically it was the police department that

attracted our wrath, as it had not been too long ago when police officers

killed a mentally unstable black man who'd held two women hostage for ten

hours. Although the guy had been armed only with a kitchen knife, the

police shot him seven times, which did a grand job of stirring up righteous

indignation. Four months later when the Z Club fire came along, the black

community was still simmering,

"By the way, Melinda. I saw you on the news, You looked good,"

"The chief called and chewed me out, They want either a chief or the PIO

to be talking to the media, Nobody else,"

"There was a memo to that effect before I left. You didn't see it?"

"I did, but they stuck a microphone in my face and asked me to say

something, and I just went ahead and shot my mouth off. I don't know

why."



"So what's going on around here?" I'd changed and was in the corridor, the

two of us walking toward the beaner/, which had begun to fill up with

yawning firefighters from yesterday's shift, Somebody was grinding coffee

beans in the kitchen alcove.

</text>
