<text id="N08" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Wild Fire" Author="Nelson Demille" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="/">

Bain Madox stared at Harry, and Harry stared back. Madox looked
about sixty, Harry thought, very fit, unseasonably tanned, swept-back
gray hair, a long, thin, hooked nose like an eagles with gray eyes to
match. Harry also thought this guy looked rich, but not stupid rich.
There was something about Madox that signaled strength, power, and
intelligence. Command and control. And Madox didn't seem one bit
nervous about having abducted and detained a Federal agent. This was
not good, Harry knew.
Madox took a cigarette from a wooden box on his desk and asked.
"Do you mind if I smoke?"
"I don't give a fuck if you burn. Call the sheriff. Now."
Madox lit the cigarette with a silver desk lighter and puffed thoughtfully, then asked, "What brings you here, Detective Muller?"
"Bird-watching"
"I don't mean to be rude, but that seems like a sissy hobby for a man
involved in anti-terrorism."
"You're about one minute away from me placing you under arrest"
"Well, then, let me use that minute wisely." Madox examined the
items strewn across the desk: Harrys cell phone and pager, which were
now shut off, his key chain, the Handycam. die Nikon digital camera,
the binoculars, the Sibley bird guide, a terrain map of the area, the
compass, the wire cutters, Harry's credentials, and his 9mm Glock 26,
the so-called Baby Glock that was easier to conceal. He noticed that
Madox had removed the magazine, which was smart of him.
Madox asked Harry, "What am I to make of this?"
"Whatever the fuck you want to make of it, pal. Give me my shit,
and let me the fuck out of here, or you'll be looking at twenty years to
life for kidnapping a Federal agent."
Madox made a face, suggesting he was annoyed and impatient.
"Come on. Mr. Muller. We're well beyond that by now. We need to
move forward."
"Fuck you."
Madox suggested, "Let me play detective. I see here a pair of binoculars, a small video camera, a very expensive digital camera with a
telescopic lens, and a bird guide. From that, I can conclude that you
are an enthusiastic bird-watcher. So enthusiastic, in fact, that you also
have these wire etitters in the event a fence comes between you and a
bird. Plus, a 9inm handgun in case a bird won't stay still long enough
for you to photograph it." He asked Harry. "How am I doing?"
"Not too good."
"Let me keep trying. I also see here a U.S. geological survey map
on which is drawn in red the perimeter of my property, plus the gatehouse, and this lodge and other structures. This suggests to me that an
aerial photograph was taken of my property, and these man-rnade
features were transferred to your map. Correct?"
Harry didn't answer.
Mr. Madox continued, "I also see here on my desk this badge and
a card that identifies you as a retired New York City police detective.
Congratulations."
"Eat shit and die."
"But what interests me most is this other badge and ID card that
say you are a Federal agent with the Anti-Terrorist Task Force. Not
retired." He stared at the photo ID. then at Harry Muller and asked.
"Working today?"
Harry decided to try the cover story one more time, just in case
this guy wanted a reason to cut him loose. "Okay, let me tell you again
what I told your paranoid rent-a-cops. I'm up here for the weekend
camping. I watch and photograph birds. I'm also a Federal agent, and
by law I have to carry my credentials and my piece. You shouldn't put
two and two together and come up with five. Understand?"
Madox nodded. "I do. But put yourself in my position. And I'll put
myself in yours. I'm Federal Agent Harry Muller. and I'm listening to a
man who tells me that all the circumstantial evidence I see in front of
me - evidence of surveillance - can be explained as bird-watching. So,do I let you go? Or do I demand a more logical and truthful explanation? What would you do in my position?"
"Sorry, I can't hear you over your loud shirt."
Mr. Madox smiled, then opened the Sibley guide, put on his eyeglasses. and selected a page. He asked Harry, "Where are you most
likely to encounter a loon, Mr. Muller?"
"Near a lake."
"That was too easy" He flipped a few pages. "What is the color
of a cerulean warbler?"
"Brown."
Mr. Madox shook his head. "No, no. Mr. Muller. Cerulean means
blue. Sky blue. One more. Two out of three is passing." He flipped
through the book again. "What color is the male - ?"
"Hey, take that book, put a coat of K-Y jelly on it, and shove it up
your ass."
Mr. Madox closed the guide and threw it aside. He turned to his
computer screen. "Here are your digital photos. I don't see any birds
in them. I see, however, that you seem interested in one of my utility
poles ... and let's see ... here's a telescopic shot of the tower behind
my lodge . . . close-ups of my lodge . . . ah, there's a bird perched on
my roof. What is that?"
"A shit-seeking hawk."
Madox picked up the Handycam, switched it to Replay, and
looked through the viewfinder. "Here's the pole again ... you noticed
the plastic boughs. I assume ... here's the lodge again . .. nice views
from where you were standing . . . that bird is flying away. What was
that? Looks like a great blue heron, but he should have migrated south
by now. It's been unusually warm this fall. Global warming, if you
believe that crap." He put down the camcorder and asked, "Do you
know what the solution is to global warming? No? I'll tell you. Nuclear winter." He laughed. "Old joke." Madox sat back in his chair and lit another cigarette. He blew
perfect smoke rings and watched them as they rose and dissolved.
"That's a lost art."
Harry Muller glanced around the room as Bain Madox practiced
his lost art. He could hear the breathing of the two men behind him as he shifted his gaze to a wall that was covered with framed certificates of some sort. Harry thought that if he could get a handle on
who this guy was, it might be helpful.
Madox noticed Harry's gaze and said, "The one on the top left is
my certificate for the Silver Star. Next to it is the certificate for the
Bronze Star, then the Purple Heart. Then there's my commission as a
second lieutenant in the United States Army. Next row are the usual
service medals, including the Vietnam Campaign Medal and a Presidential Unit Citation. I served in the Seventh Cavalry Regiment of the
First Air Cavalry Division. The Seventh Cav was General Custer's old
unit. That's part of the reason for the name of this club. I might tell
you the other part later, but if I do. then I'll have to kill you." He
laughed. "Just joking. Hey. smile. Just joking."
Harry forced a smile. Asshole.
"The last row is the Combat Infantry Badge, my Expert Rifleman
Badge, my Jungle Training School diploma, and. finally, my Army discharge. I left the service after eight years with die rank of lieutenant
colonel. We made rank fast in those days. Lots of dead officers opened
up the promotion list. Did you serve?"
"No." Harry decided to play along. "I was too young, then they
ended the draft."
"Right. They should bring it back."
"Absolutely," Harry said. "They should draft women, too. They
want equal rights, they should have equal responsibilities."
"You're absolutely right."
Harry was on a roll and continued, "My son still had to register
for the draft in case they ever bring it back. But my daughter didn't.
What's that all about?"
"Precisely. You have a son and daughter?"
"Yeah."
"Married?"
"Divorced," Harry replied.
"All. inc. too.'
"Women will drive you crazy." Harry said.
"Only if you let them."
"Well, we let them."
Madox chuckled. "We do. Anyway, you're here on surveillance for
the Federal Anti-Terrorist Task Force. Why?"
"How long were you in Vietnam?"
Madox looked at Harry Muller for a few seconds, then replied,
"Two tours of one year each, then a third tour that was cut short by an
AK-47 round that missed my heart by an inch, nicked my right lung,
and broke a rib on the way out."
"You're lucky to be alive."
"I tell myself that every day. Each day is a gift. Have you ever been
shot at?"
"Five times. Never got hit."
" You're lucky to be alive." Madox stared at Harry. "It changes you.
You're never the same again. But it's not necessarily for the worse."
"I know. I've got friends who've been hit.' He thought of John Corey. but he was fairly sure that Corey was the same wiseass both before
and after getting hit. He said. "Sometimes. I think I should have volunteered. Vietnam was over, bur 1 could have still served. Maybe I would
have caught the Grenada Invasion or something."
"Well, don't be hard on yourself. Most American men have never
served. And to tell you the truth, war is a damned scary thing. And now
we're engaged in this war on terrorism, and you. Mr. Muller. are apparently on the front lines. Correct?"
"Uh ... yeah."
"And by terrorism, we generally mean Islamic terrorists. Correct?"
"Yeah ... but - "
"So, are you looking for Islamic terrorists here? Can I help?"
Harry was forming a thought, but Mr. Madox went on, "If there's
anything I can do, Mr. Muller, just let me know. There's no one who
feels more strongly about winning the war on terrorism than I. How
can I help?"
"Uh ... well... here's the thing. About five years ago. I was on this
case of Irish Republican Army guys - terrorists - only about fifteen
miles from here. They had a training camp." Harry filled in Madox on
the case and concluded, "We sent eight guys to Federal prison for terms
ranging from three to twenty years."
"Ah, yes. I remember that because it was so close to here."
"Right. So, this is the same thing. Were checking a lot of private
preserves to see if there's any suspicious activity involving the IRA.
We've had intelligence reports that - "
"So, this has nothing to do with Islamic terrorists?"
"No. Not today. We're doing IRA."
"Seems like a waste of time and resources in light of 9/11."
"Well. I think so. too. But we need to keep on top of everything
and everybody."
"I suppose." Madox thought a moment, then asked, "So. you
think the Custer Hill Club is . .. what? A training camp for the Irish
Republican Army?"
"Well, the bosses had a tip about activity in this area, so I got picked
to take a peek. You know, in case people were using your property without you knowing."
"No one can enter my property without me knowing, as you just
found out."
"Yeah, I see that. I'll report - "
"Certainly not people engaged in paramilitary training."
"Yeah. I - "
"And that doesn't explain why you were taking pictures of my lodge.
You should be out in the woods looking for these IRA people."
"Yeah. I got turned around."
"You certainly did. The point is you arc on surveillance."
"Well. yeah. I need to check about a dozen properties in the area."
"I see. So. I shouldn't feel singularly honored?"
"Huh?"
"I shouldn't feel picked on?"
"No. Just routine stuff."
"That's a relief. By the way, do you have any sort of government
warrant for these activities?"
"I do ... but not with me."
"Aren't you supposed to carry the warrant with you?" He waved his
hand over the desk and said. "We didn't find anything, even when we
looked up your rectum." Mr. Madox smiled.
"Hey, fuck you! Fuck you!" Harry stood. "You motherfucking scumbag piece of shit!"

</text>
