<text id="N10" category="" words="2000" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Relentless" Author="Robin Parrish" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="/">

How was it possible?
All he remembered of this old man was a handful of visits as a young boy
and old pictures he had seen once of his grandparents together. He'd never
even heard from the old man after his parents died, and assumed him to
be dead as well.
"What's going on? Why am I . , , going in circles?" Grant stammered.
"I know it's uncomfortable, It won't last any longer than necessary, I
assure you," the old man said, "But you could destroy this entire structure
with a single thought, if you laid eyes on it, Which is the precise reason for
the blindfold, Your friend Hannah told you her abilities only worked on line -
of-sight, She was partially right. Awareness is the real key, You could
destroy an object behind you right now if you knew where it was,"
Grant didn't reply, absorbing this.
His grandfather pressed on. "It's the same for all of you. Morgan can only
remember facts that she's directly exposed to. Payton can only enact his
super-burst of speed against opponents that he can see. Likewise, if
you're disoriented, your powers are useless."
"I could still let out a blast of energy in all directions," Grant said, his jaw
rigid, his teeth grinding.
"Of course you could," the Keeper replied. "But if you did, Alex would no
doubt suffer the consequences as well."
"What did you do with her?" Grant asked in as much of a menacing tone
as he could muster,
"She's here, She's fine, For the moment."
Alex watched,
Strapped to a stationary table of her own in the structure's colossal inner
chamber, she watched as across the room, the table holding Grant slowly
spun.
She couldn't move, couldn't speak, Tape covered her mouth.
Three armed guards surrounded her, watching her every move.
Which seemed like overkill,
After all, what could she do in this position?
Let's hope they're thinking that} too . . . she mused,
Meanwhile, she kept her eyes trained on Grant,
Waiting for an opportunity, an opening, to put her plan into motion , , ,
"What is all this about?" Grant cried. "What have you done to me? What
do you want? "
"I want to stack the deck in your favor. Rig the game so you win. I want
the drinker," the Keeper replied, as if it were obvious. "Events are
unfolding very quickly, so time is short. But I 'U try to explain as best I can.
Let me begin at the beginning . . .
"As I told you on the phone, the Rings of Dominion-as well as the
Dominion Stone itself-were hidden for millennia. Buried and sealed in a
place shrouded in utmost secrecy, they were entombed. Sealed beneath the
earth by the Secretum of Six. The Dominion Stone covered their hiding
place."
"What is the Stone?" Grant asked as he continued to quietly spin.
"A marker, pointing to both the past and the future. They say it cannot be
destroyed, But somehow, it was broken centuries ago by the enemies of
the Secretum, Wars were fought for centuries for possession of the Stone
and the rings-most especially your ring, the Seal of Dominion, Legend has
it that the Seal was sought by dictators and rulers the world over, including
the likes of Napoleon, Hitler, and Alexander. But thanks to the efforts of
the Secretum, the Seal has been kept safe throughout history, and no one
was permitted to wear it, Until you."
"Was it the ring that caused the Shift?" Grant asked,
"No," the Keeper replied, " / caused the Shift, You see-or well, I suppose
you don't at the moment, but if you could - I'm wearing a ring myself, a
ring almost as special as yours, Not gold in color but silver, with a blue
stone. And the talent it gives me is the transfer of consciousness from one
living being to another,"
"How can you be one of the Loci if I can't feel you?"
"There has always been a Keeper to lead the Secretum, and the Keeper has
worn the ring I now wear since the Secretum was formed, They say that it
was stolen- taken -from the opposite number of he who once owned your
ring. The one this ring was taken from-'He alone knows the soul of
man,'" the Keeper quoted knowingly, "And as the Secretum came to
realize, if you can see a thing, then you can change it,"
"Why do all this?" Grant said, trying not to shout, His rage was
resurfacing in the form of impatience. "Why bother Shifting us, if it's not
necessary for using the rings?"
"Now you're disappointing me," the Keeper said edgily. "There is only
one practical application of this: anonymity. Think of it, Grant, You are the
most powerful being on the planet, yet for all intents and purposes, you do
not exist. Untrackable. Untraceable. A member of society, yet completely
unknown by it. You're the perfect soldier. You can do anything by simply
thinking it, and no one need ever know who you are."
Tears formed behind Grant's eyes once again, soaking into the cloth over
his eyes,
"This body I'm wearing, these people you put us inside of , , , who were
they before?"
"Husks. Vessels," the Keeper said with a hint of disgust, "Yours was a
soldier who worked in covert ops, which is why you're able to fight so well.
His instincts remain in you, But they were volunteers, all of them. For
them, it was the highest calling,"
"You've killed so many, You're responsible for everything that's happened
to me, aren't you?"
"Of course,"
"But why send Konrad and Drexel to try and kill me? How does that help
you?"
"All part of the process. The apartment, the money, the car - it all came
from me. Resources you needed to fulfill your role. If you hadn't been
through even/thing you've gone through, if you hadn't learned, adapted,
and grown with each new experience ... if you hadn't survived, then you
wouldn't have been worthy of your destiny. But I never doubted it."
Grant was reminded of something Daniel had told him the day they met.
"Where you see random occurrences, i see a purpose/' Daniel had said.
Alex tensed,
Whatever else may have been happening here, this man was starting to
get through to Grant, She could see it, She could practically feel the wheels
turning in Grant's head,
And there was no time , , ,
High above them, reality itself was rending at the seams, falling apart.
Plunging the world into ruin,
Come on, Grant. . . make a move!
"So now you know the truth about how you were made, Above us is the
why," the Keeper said simply, "Aboveground, the surface is crumbling. A
cataclysm like nothing the earth has ever seen is taking place,"
"You're just going to turn me loose to go fight it?" Grant asked
incredulously, his temperature still rising.
"It's not quite that simple," the Keeper replied. "Destiny has come
calling. But it's still up to you to answer."
Grant frowned.
"You must pass the final test. Prove to me that you are prepared to take
this all the way. Right now, I have three armed men with semiautomatic
weapons ready to fill Alex's body with holes-"
"Leave her alone! " Grant screamed
"That choice is yours to make. They will obey your command. If you tell
them to, they'll fire, and you'll be released to go perform your function. If
you order her life spared, then countless others will lose their lives to the
threat above, Prove to me that you're willing to pay any price to get the
job done, and this will end,"
Grant was trembling,
"I don't care if you are my grandfather, you're either very brave or very
foolish to be making me angry," he said quietly,
"I have nothing to fear from you," the Keeper replied matter-of-factly.
"You're powerless until / let you go, You can't even save Alex in your
current state."
Grant gave a calm, easy laugh and his body relaxed,
On his finger he felt the warm glow of his ring begin to rise,
"I don't have to save her," Grant said, His blindfolded head slowly turned
to point straight at Alex's location across the room, and stayed fixed on
her position as he continued to rotate. "I can feel her,"
The tape ripped itself off of Alex's mouth, and he heard her shout, though
it seemed more in delight than pain.
" Terror," Alex said to the guards surrounding her, and Grant heard the
men howl in fright and dropping to the floor.
Grant continued to whirl in place but he felt Alex next to him. And her ring.
"We removed your ring," the Keeper growled. "How could you possibly?"
"How quick the mighty forget," she said, rising from the table. " 'A ring
can only be removed after its wearer dies,' " she recited.
"Hannah , , , her ring . . ." he whispered. He backed away.
"You may not have to fear your grandson, bubbles," she said, nodding at
Grant. "But if you remember what / can do with one of these things"- she
held up her ring-"then you should fear me! "
At the word fear, Grant heard the man topple, screaming and begging.
"By the way," Alex said, her voice closer now. " / quit."
Grant heard her scuffling about him and then the sound of gears clicking
into place. At once, his spinning slowed, then a few seconds later, stopped
entirely. Alex pulled the cover from Grant's eyes and he forced himself to
stand, despite his dizziness,
He looked up for the first time at the vast chamber they were in.
Overflowing with scientific equipment and gear, as well as computer
stations and huge monitors, the room was monstrous in size, stretching
several stories high, Balconies overlooked their position from above. The
Dominion Stone rested on an easel nearby, a bright spotlight illuminating it
from overhead,
Grant approached his grandfather, who was still cowering on the floor,
shivering,
Grant, too, was shaking. But not in fear.
Alex grabbed him by the arm. "We've got to go-"
They were knocked off of their feet by an explosion.
Alex lost her concentration and the Keeper sprang to his feet, fingering a
remote device of some kind in his hand.
"That's more like it," he said, eyeing Grant. "I've been waiting for you
to exert yourself."
A contingent of over fifty soldiers-all wearing gray jumpsuits with no
insignia-entered the chamber, surrounding them on even/ side.
"Grant," Alex said, grabbing his arm again, "knock these guys out and
let's just get out of here,"
But Grant wouldn't budge, his eyes locked on his grandfather,
"Grant, forget him! Don't listen to anything he says! " she exclaimed,
"You really think I would (et you escape?" the Keeper replied, "You think I
wouldn't be prepared?"
His finger was still on the remote, even though the bomb it triggered had
already gone off . . .
"Consider that first blast just a warm-up, His big brother is next, more
than enough force to level this entire cavern and bring the building on the
surface crashing down as well,"
"You're willing to kill yourself over this? Why? " Grant asked between hard
breaths.
"When I called you on the telephone earlier, I sealed my fate by defying
the Secretum. I am no longer one of them; their purposes for you are not
mine, i want to unleash your full potential. That's all I 've ever wanted, The
Secretum wants you under its thumb. They believed I was working toward
that goal, but I wanted what was best for my blood and kin. To do that,
your defenses had to be removed one-by-one through a very carefully calculated
game. I 'm sorry for the pain the process has caused you, but it was the
only way."

</text>
