<text id="N12" category="" words="2004" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Ordinary Heroes" Author="Scott Turow" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="/">

1. STEWART: ALL PARENTS KEEP SECRETS


AII parents keep secrets from their children. My father,
it seemed, kept more than most.
The first clue came when Dad passed away in
February 2003 at the age of eighty-eight, after sailing into
a Bermuda Triangle of illness - heart disease, lung cancer,
and emphysema - all more or less attributable to sixty
years of cigarettes. Characteristically, my mother refused
to leave the burial details to my sister and me and met the
funeral director with us. She chose a casket big enough to
require a hood ornament, then pondered each word as the
mortician read out the proposed death announcement.
"Was David a veteran?" he asked. The undertaker was
the cleanest-looking man I'd ever seen, with lacquered
nails, shaped eyebrows, and a face so smooth I suspected
electrolysis.
"World War II," barked Sarah, who at the age of fiftytwo still raced to answer before me. The funeral director showed us the tiny black rendering
of the Stars and Stripes that would appear in the paper
beside Dad's name, but my mother was already agitating
her thinning gray curls.
"No," she said. "No war. Not for this David Dubin."
When she was upset, Mom's English tended to fail her.
And my sister and I both knew enough to keep quiet when
she was in those moods. The war, except for the bare details of how my father, an American officer, and my
mother, an inmate in a German concentration camp, had
fallen in love, virtually at first sight, had been an unpleasantness too great for discussion throughout our lives. But I
had always assumed the silence was for her sake, not his.
By the end of the mourning visitation, Mom was ready
to face sorting through Dad's belongings. Sarah announced she was too pressed to lend a hand and headed
back to her accounting practice in Oakland, no doubt relishing the contrast with my unemployment. Mom assigned
me to my father's closet on Monday morning, insisting that
I consider taking much of his clothing. It was nearly all disastrously out of fashion, and only my mother could envision me, a longtime fatso, ever shrinking enough to
squeeze into any of it. I selected a few ties to make her
happy and began boxing the rest of his old shirts and suits
for donation to the Haven, the Jewish relief agency my
mother had helped found decades ago and which she almost single-handedly propelled for nearly twenty years as
its Executive Director.
But I was unprepared for the emotion that overtook me.
I knew my father as a remote, circumspect man, very orderly in almost everything, brilliant, studious, always civil.
He preferred work to social engagements, although he
had his own polite charm. Still, his great success came
within the mighty fortress of the law. Elsewhere, he was
less at ease. He let my mother hold sway at home, making
the same weary joke for more than fifty years - he would
never, he said, have enough skill os a lawyer to win an argument with Mom.
The Talmud says that a father should draw a son close
with one hand and push him away with the other. Dad basically failed on both accounts. I felt a steady interest from
him which I took for affection. Compared to many other
dads, he was a champ, especially in a generation whose
principal ideal of fathering was being a 'good provider.'
But he was elusive at the core, almost as if he were wary
of letting me know him too well. To the typical challenges
I threw out as a kid, he generally responded by retreating,
or turning me over to my mother. I have a perpetual memory of the times I was alone with him in the house as a
child, infuriated by the silence. Did he know I was there?
Or even goddamn care?
Now that Dad was gone, I was intensely aware of
everything I'd never settled with him - in many cases, not
even started on. Was he sorry I was not a lawyer like he
was? What did he make of my daughters? Did he think the
world was a good place or bad, and how could he explain the fact that the Trappers, for whom he maintained a
resilient passion, had never won the World Series in his
lifetime? Children and parents can't get it all sorted out.
But it was painful to find that even in death he remained so
enigmatic.
And so this business of touching the things my father
touched, of smelling his Mennen talcum powder and
Canoe aftershave, left me periodically swamped by feelings of absence and longing. Handling his personal effects
was an intimacy I would never have dared if he were
alive. I was in pain but deeply moved every minute and
wept freely, burbling in the rear corner of the closet in
hopes my mother wouldn't hear me. She herself was yet to
shed a tear and undoubtedly thought that kind of iron stoicism was more appropriate to a man of fifty-six.
With the clothing packed, I began looking through the
pillar of cardboard boxes I'd discovered in a dim corner.
There was a remarkable collection of things there, many
marked by a sentimentality I always thought Dad lacked.
He'd kept the schmaltzy valentines Sarah and I had made
for him as grade-school art projects, and the Kindle County
championship medal he'd won in high school in the backstroke. Dozens of packets of darkening Kodachromes reflected the life of his young family. In the bottom box, I
found memorabilia of World War II, a sheaf of brittle papers, several red Nazi armbands taken, I imagined, as
war trophies, and a curled stack of two-by-two snaps,
good little black-and-white photos that must have been shot
by someone else since my father was often the subject,
looking thin and taciturn. Finally, I came upon a bundle of
letters packed in an old candy tin to which a note was tied
with a piece of green yarn dulled by time. It was written in
a precise hand and dated May 14, 1945.
Dear David,
I am returning to your family the letters you have
sent while you have been overseas. I suppose they
may have some significance to you in the future.
Inasmuch as you are determined to no longer be a
part of my life, I have to accept that once time
passes and my hurt diminishes, they will not mean
anything to me. I'm sure your father has let you
know that I brought your ring back to him last
month.
For all of this, David, I can't make myself be
angry at you for ending our engagement. When I
saw your father, he said that you were now being
court-martialed and actually face prison. I can
hardly believe that about someone like you, but I
would never have believed that you would desert
me either. My father says men are known to go
crazy during wartime. But I can't wait any longer
for you to come back to your senses.
When I cry at night, David - and I won't pretend
for your sake that I don't - one thing bothers me the
most. I spent so many hours praying to God for Him
to deliver you safely; I begged Him to allow you to
live, and if He was especially kind, to let you come
back whole. Now that the fighting there is over, I
cannot believe that my prayers were answered and
that I was too foolish to ask that when you returned,
you would be coming home to me.
I wish you the best of luck in your present
troubles.
Grace
This letter knocked me flat. Court-martialed! The last
thing I could imagine of my tirelessly proper father was
being charged with a serious crime. And a heartbreaker
as well. I had never heard a word about any of these
events. But more even than surprise, across the arc of time,
like light emitted by distant stars decades ago, I felt pierced
by this woman's pain. Somehow her incomprehension alloyed itself with my own confusion and disappointment
and frustrated love, and instantly inspired a ferocious curiosity to find out what had happened.
Dad's death had come while I was already gasping in one
of life's waterfalls. Late the year before, after reaching fiftyfive, I had retired early from the Kindle County Tribune, my
sole employer as an adult. It was time. I think I was regarded as an excellent reporter - I had the prizes on the
wall to prove it - but nobody pretended, me least of all,
that I had the focus or the way with people to become an
editor. By then, I'd been on the courthouse beat for close
to two decades. Given the eternal nature of human failings, I felt like a TV critic assigned to watch nothing but reruns. After thirty-three years at the Trib, my pension,
combined with a generous buyout, was close to my salary,
and my collegiate cynicism about capitalism had somehow
fed an uncanny knack in the stock market. With our modest tastes, Nona and I wouldn't have to worry about
money. While I still had the energy, I wanted to indulge
every journalist's fantasy: I was going to write a book.
It did not work out. For one thing, I lacked a subject.
Who the hell really cared about the decades-old murder
trial of the Chief Deputy Prosecuting Attorney that I'd once
thought was such a nifty topic? Instead, three times a day,
I found myself staring across the table at Nona, my highschool sweetheart, where it swiftly became apparent that
neither of us especially liked what we were seeing. I wish
I could cite some melodrama like an affair or death threats
to explain what had gone wrong. But the truth is that the
handwriting had been on the wall so long, we'd just regarded it as part of the decorating. After thirty years, we
had drifted into one of those marriages that never recovered its motive once our daughters were grown. Nine
weeks before Dad's passing, Nona and I had separated.
We had dinner once each week, where we discussed our
business amiably, frustrated one another in the ways we
always had, and exhibited no signs of longing or second
thoughts. Our daughters were devastated, but I figured we
botfh deserved some credit for having the guts to hope for
better at this late date.
Nevertheless, I was already feeling battered before
Dad died. By the time we buried him, I was half inclined
to jump into the hole beside him. Sooner or later, I knew
I'd pick myself up and go on. I'd been offered freelance
gigs at two magazines, one local, one national. At five
foot nine and 215 pounds, I am not exactly a catch, but
the expectations of middle age are much kinder to men
than women, and there were already signs that I'd find
companionship, if and when I was ready.
For the moment, though, out of work and out of love, I
was far more interested in taking stock. My life was like
everybody else's. Some things had gone well, some
hadn't. But right now I was focused on the failures, and
they seemed to have started with my father.
And so that Monday, while my mother thought I was
struggling into Dad's trousers, I remained in his closet and
read through dozens of his wartime letters, most of them
typed Army V-mails, which had been microfilmed overseas
and printed out by the post office at home. I stopped only
when Mom called from the kitchen, suggesting I take a
break. I found her at the oval drop-leaf table, which still
bore the marks of the thousands of family meals eaten
there during the 1950s.
"Did you know Dad was engaged before he met you?"
I asked from the doorway.
She revolved slowly. She had been drinking tea, sipping
it through a sugar cube she clenched between her gapped
front teeth.

</text>
