<text id="N17" category="" words="2011" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Days of Destiny" Author="Jay Schein" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="/">

Nathan was totally confused. He suddenly found himself in surrealtype surroundings, and he had no idea how he got there. He felt an oppressive heat and was sweating profusely. Beads of perspiration were running
down his forehead and his face, forming tiny droplets on his chin. Every
few seconds, several would drip to the ground and make tiny wet impressions on the parched pavement. He focused momentarily on the teardropsized spots, as though evaporating moisture was the only thing that seemed
real in his situation. Where am I? How did I get here?
What was at first confusion quickly turned to fear. There was nothing
but empty space surrounding him - no physical objects and nothing he
could touch or feel. He looked around again and was shocked to see a huge
wall of stone that had not been there just a moment ago. It was as though
it appeared out of nowhere.
Panic emerged in the rapidly mounting shortness of his breaths and
the unsettling sensations that were beginning to grip him within his chest.
He tried to calm himself by focusing on the wall, as it was the only tangible
object he saw. It stretched endlessly on either side of him and seemed to
disappear at some point outside of his line of vision. It was as though everything in the world was swallowed up except for him and the wall. He was
desperate to make some sense of this, for he was feeling as though he was
losing his mind. He was far too much of a practical and methodical thinker
to allow himself to panic.
As his eyes scanned the wall, he noticed that the larger stones formed
the foundation; while higher above him the stones became progressively
smaller. He noticed hundreds, if not thousands, of cracks and crevices
between the stones, every one of them stuffed with tiny pieces of paper.
He had an impulse to run - but which way, and to where? He had no idea
of where he was. 1be wall must be the key, he thought. Perhaps it was an
illusion, or there was an opening he could not see - a secret door within the
wall through which he could walk and be freed from this madness.
Nathan slowly reached out and extended his hands to touch the roughhewn stones. He ran his fingers down the wall and realized he had no
sensation or feeling. Perhaps the wall was an illusion all along? As he tried
to focus, he sensed that someone was watching him. He even thought he
saw a man and a woman walking toward him. It happened so quickly that
it seemed like the flash of a camera - that sudden brilliant light that blinds
you for the moment and then its gone - leaving nothing but spots before
your eyes.
Just then, he heard sounds like firecrackers. They were short, rapid
bursts, similar to an automatic weapon - the sound of a machine gun he
had once heard in an old-time gangster movie. His heartbeat increased by
the second. The pounding within his chest seemed to be the only reality
that he was still alive. Those rapid-fire sounds began again, only this time
they seemed louder, as though they were right behind him.
Instinctively, Nathan fell to the ground. His body slammed hard
against the coarse pavement. He held his arms over his head in an attempt
to protect himself from whatever threat there was. The bursts continued,
and now there was a second sound, the clinging of hundreds of small metal
objects bouncing on the cement.
Bullet casings, he thought, but there were none that he could sec. The
same sounds continued for another minute or so, and then suddenly, they
stopped. An eerie silence quickly enveloped all his senses, as he thought,
am I injured? He knew something was wrong, but there was no pain or evidence of physical injury.
His attention quickly turned to a wet, sticky liquid that had not been
there when he first fell to the ground. It was forming all around him in a
puddle and growing larger as he watched. Slowly, Nathan reached out his
hand to see what it was. He placed his index finger into the puddle, raised
his hand, and saw that it was blood.
Rut whose blood is it? Where did it come from? I have no pain anywhere
in my body, so it can't be mine, was all that he could reason for the moment.
He abruptly sat up and examined his chest, his legs, and his arms. Then
he heard tiny splatters on the cement behind him, resembling the sound
that his drops of perspiration made a while ago. Nathan stretched his arms
behind him as far as he could reach, attempting to feel his lower and upper
back. His fingertips brushed against small holes in his skin, oozing his lifeblood from each of them.
But bow can that be? he thought. I don't feel any pain! There was nothing else to reason except that he had been shot multiple times by someone or something he could not see. He had only heard the sounds of the
gunfire.
The entire event was so surreal that he felt there was no choice but to
simply give up his will and accept his circumstances. His conscious life was
seeping from his body so quickly that he began to feel a sense of weightlessness. His eyes drifted over toward the wall, and he sensed an overall
peace within him as though everything would be okay. Do I get to meet God
now? he thought.
A feeling of disorientation was taking hold of his conscious mind when
the silence of the moment was suddenly broken by screams. They were
deafening, high-pitched shrills that echoed all around him. As quickly as
the fear had left him, it erupted from within as he was filled with an overwhelming panic. Nathan struggled to his feet. The intensity of the screams
increased, and he also tried to scream, but no sound came from his mouth.
He attempted to run, but his legs wouldn't move. He looked down at his
feet and realized that he was standing in a puddle of his own blood. He
tried to scream again for someone to help him, but no help came.
Suddenly the light around him began to dim, growing darker and
darker, until finally it was pitch black. Sweat and blood were literally pouring from his body, and he was sure that he was dead because of the blackness. This cant be, I'm thinking and reasoning. People who are dead don't
think and reason - they are dead!
It was a moment suspended in time; a moment of the known being
unknown and the real becoming surreal. Nathan began to weep, and he fell
back to his knees. He lifted his arms and cried out for God. He inhaled all
the air he could draw into his lungs and exhaled a scream that magnified
itself tenfold as it pierced the night.
The scream was so loud that it was heard by just about everyone in
the college dorm. They all came running to his room to sec what had happened. Several commented that it sounded as though someone were being
murdered. When he realized that his sweatshirt and his sheets were soaked
with his own perspiration, all he could do was to sit up and weep, his shoulders shaking from the sobs.
His roommate, Josh, and some fellow classmates attempted to console
and calm him. In the twenty-one years of his young life, it was the most
realistic and frightening nightmare that Nathan had ever experienced. It
was too realistic, and he could not shake that sinking feeling in the pit of
his stomach. It was so real that every now and then, without the slightest
provocation, the memory of that nightmare would come back and touch
his conscious mind. He was always left with the same sinking feeling, and
regardless of his efforts to change his thoughts, he had a foreboding sense
that the nightmare was some sort of a supernatural warning.
It was a proud day for Nathans parents, as he was the third generation
of rabbis about to graduate and be ordained. Me was quite tall - a striking young man that stood out on the stage of the now-gathered graduating class of The Rabbi Isaac Eichanan Theological Seminary of Yeshiva
University. Yeshiva is a private university, however not limited to just a
seminary-type education for those pursuing Jewish ministry. The university
has a broad educational base that provides extensive choices in curriculum.
Located in New York, the university has an enrollment of about 5,600 students. Albert Einstein College of Medicine is affiliated, The Benjamin N.
Cardozo School of Law, as well as many programs in medical and scientific
research.
Nathans father, Harry Blumberg, who was also an alumnus of Yeshiva,
could distinctly see his son's face among the other graduates, even from the
balcony of the auditorium. With all of Harry's acquaintances at Yeshiva, he
was a humble man and refused any favors such as lower level seats. It was
Harrys humility and wisdom that drew people to him.
Nathan, possessed a uniquely similar, warm personality that endeared
him to everyone he met. His dark brown eyes would hold an intense, serious gaze, and just as it seemed he was about to challenge you, he would
display the warmest smile that would capture the heart of the people he
encountered. His 6'4" frame was lean but muscular, and he stood straight
and proud as the commencement ceremonies began. His tailored pinstriped
suit and burgundy silk tie had hung in his closet for months and had been
freshly pressed for this proud occasion. Harry had presented the suit, shirt,
and tie to him as a token graduation gift. He had planned a much larger
gift after graduation, but Nathan never suspected it was a trip to Israel.
Harry had long dreamt of his son presiding over Temple Beth Orr - 
the synagogue he founded nearly thirty years ago. Now he was getting old,
and a heart attack just a year ago had begun to slow him down. This once
energetic and beloved rabbi knew it was time to retire. There was no mistake that Nathan was the apple of his eye, and Harry let everyone in his
small congregation know that he would one day inherit his pulpit. Most of
the congregation, having been there for many years, had watched Nathan
grow up. They loved him and respected his devotion to Judaism, just as they
loved and respected Harry. They had all encouraged Harry to retire and
allow his son to carry on the family tradition of devoted rabbis.
She was sitting in the third row, staring intently at the stage. When
Nathan saw her, he was instantly mesmerized. At first glance it seemed
as though she was looking directly at him. She was lovely - no, she was
exquisite - and a picture of natural beauty. She took Nathans breath away
the moment he saw her. She looked as though God had taken special time
to chisel every feature and set her apart as an example of His handy work!
This was not the best time to be gawking at a girl in the audience, Nathan
realized, but he simply could not help himself.
The graduates were all lined up and began walking up the steps to the
main stage. Nathan nearly fell over the man in front of him as he missed a
step while focusing his attention on that amazing girl in the third row.
He had never seen a young woman so beautiful, and he was instantly
attracted to her. Her skin was radiant, and he saw tiny shimmers of the
bright lights dancing on her long dark hair. I have got to stop this! He
thought. I have never reacted this way over a woman before. Who is this
angel?
"Josh," Nathan whispered to his roommate who was standing to his
right. "Look at the third row in the center and tell me who that girl is."

</text>
