<text id="N24" category="" words="2005" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Saboteurs" Author="W.E.B. Griffin" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="/">

There really isn't any way to absolutely know if all the fires are out.

Maybe all the agents aren't dead.

Maybe others are laying low.

Then again, maybe there aren't any others.

The only way to find out for sure is to wait and see if there are any more bombings, while keeping the intel lines open.

Which I can do from Washington while working on something else.

Like going to work with Canidy.

He sighed.

But all that can wait till after I see Ingrid again.

The cabbie tuned the radio in the dash to a new station. The programming was going to a commercial break.

The announcer said, "The news is next after this message from one of our sponsors."

An obnoxious advertisement, sponsored by the Tri-State Ford Dealers, came and went, and then the announcer's voice came back on again.

"And now for today's breaking news," he said. "In a press conference in Washington, D.C., a half hour ago, FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover - "

Fulmar said, "Turn that up, will you?"

The driver did, and they both listened as Hoover said, "I repeat, we have found no evidence to suggest that this train wreck in Oklahoma was anything more than a very tragic event involving a gas leak ... ."

Say it often enough, Fulmar thought, it becomes the truth.

Fulmar said to the driver, "That's all I needed to hear. You can turn it down or change the station."

He looked out the window and wondered what Ingrid was doing right now.





[ THREE ]



Palermo, Sicily
2240 19 March 1943 



First impressions were important, Major Richard M. Canidy, USAAF, knew, and the thing that most impressed him about Sicily was how it appeared utterly unaffected by the fact that there was a war going on.

Although he had taken great care to evade any German or Italian coast watchers when he had landed just up the beach from Mondello, and when he had deflated the rubber boat and buried it, and then when he had passed through the tiny seaside town, his efforts seemed misspent.

He had not seen a single soul.

There had of course been a dog, and a slew of damned feral cats - but not a single human being.

Mondello may as well have had its sidewalks rolled up.

It was only now, as Canidy continued to walk the ten-plus kilometers to Palermo, paralleling a two-lane macadam road but staying far off it, that he finally saw someone.

It was a man, and he was inside a small stone house off in the distance.

Canidy saw him through the window and watched as he walked across the room - and blew out the candles for the night.

Amazing, Canidy thought, shaking his head and looking up at the twinking stars in the dark sky. Is the whole island on snooze?

He started walking again.

I don't know.

But I do know that the last thing I'm going to do is let my guard down.

I plan on being back at that beach when the sub returns in six days ... .



Canidy came closer to the capital city and its glow of lights began pushing back the pitch-black night.

Now, as he entered the outskirts of town with its brightly painted modern buildings constructed of masonry, he finally saw some people. He passed a man, then another, then saw a couple holding hands as they walked across a piazza.

Not many, but at least it was some life.

He walked until he came to what he recognized from photographs was the Quattro Canti district. It was the city center, the medieval "four corners" area, and its ancient Norman-built stone buildings loomed in the night shadows.

He looked around, then walked on, heading in what he thought - hoped - was the direction of the University of Palermo. 

I may as well check it out now, in the dark, with no one around.

Who knows? Maybe I'll get lucky and bump into the professor.

He chuckled.

Yeah, right.

Fifteen minutes later, after covering five blocks and backtracking two, he found affixed to a street-corner wall a metal sign with an arrow and the word UNIVERSITÀ.

Voilà! Canidy thought. 

Or is it "Eureka!"?

He reached the university after three blocks.

The school itself was a disappointment. There was no campus. And with no campus there were no fields for playing sports, no complex for housing students - nothing that gave a genuine sense of a school.

There was, instead, only more of the same masonry-style buildings he had seen in the modern parts of the city. Across the top of the main building's façade was basic signage, the black block lettering on a white background proclaiming: PALERMO UNIVERSITÀ.

Canidy walked up and got a closer look in the big window of the main building.

There was a security guard inside, sitting on a wooden folding chair with a billy club resting across his knees - and sound asleep.

The funny thing to do would be to bang loudly on the window and watch this guy go flying.

It'd also be the stupid thing to do.

Canidy looked around some more and found that the lights were out all around the university's building, the doors locked tight.

At a corner, he came to a coffee shop. Its door was open, and he could hear the sound of voices floating out.

He walked to the door and looked inside. There were eight students at the small round table and they had books with them. But judging by the fact that a couple of the girls were sitting in the laps of the boys, it appeared that the last thing they were there for was the study of academics.

One of the girls - a beautiful twentysomething with dark, inviting eyes, jet-black hair, and large breasts barely restrained by her sleeveless blouse - noticed Canidy at the door and smiled at him.

He grinned back, then walked on.

Love conquers all.

He turned onto a street named for Leonardo da Vinci - earlier, he'd passed one named for Michelangelo - and followed it downhill. He could see the port in the distance.

When he reached the bottom of the hill, he saw that there were a number of boats moored in the port. They were tied either to the long pier or to buoys in the harbor.

He also saw that there was absolutely no one around.

He surveyed the area.

At the pier was one large cargo ship, eighty, ninety feet long, with a flat deck that had large hatches and tall booms. It was the biggest vessel in sight. The rest were all fishing boats of various brightly painted wooden designs, six of them about forty feet in length, but the bulk of them were about twenty feet long and, interestingly, pointed at both ends. There were a half dozen more of these twenty-footers pulled up on the shore of pebbles, lying on their side, apparently in for repair of some sort.

Overlooking the port were apartments and homes built almost to the water's edge. They were dark and quiet.

Dockside was a series of shops, including what looked to be a fish market, their doors and windows closed and locked. Lining the outside wall of the fish market were wooden tables painted in bright greens and yellows and reds. He had seen similar ones at the Fulton Fish Market. They were built at a thirty-degree angle, with deep sides to hold ice, for the display of fresh-caught fish.

Something on the dock moved and Canidy crouched behind a corner of an apartment.

He looked again, and saw a cat standing next to where one of the twenty-footers was tied. The boat was covered almost completely by a tarp, and as Canidy watched the cat leapt from the pier and landed in the middle of it.

Almost immediately, the cat came flying back onto the pier - and not by choice, Canidy saw.

The tarp was pulled back and an angry male stuck his head up. He slurred something in Sicilian at the cat, then threw a bottle for good measure.

Canidy chuckled softly.

Sounds like someone had a bit to drink tonight and had to sleep on the boat.

Or maybe that's where he always sleeps.

I've had worse ... .

Canidy caught himself in a yawn.

I'd like to settle into one right now myself.

But no matter which one I pick, that'll be the one where the owner is casting off lines at oh-dark-hundred - and finding me aboard, snoring, will not be the highlight of his day.

Or mine.

Canidy then looked back at the beached twenty-foot boats.

But no one's going fishing in those anytime soon.

He walked down to the second-farthest one. It was turned on its starboard side, its hull facing the fish market and shops. He pulled back on its tarp and saw that the interior had been gutted. There was a very long, smooth area where he could crawl in and pull the tarp back for concealment.

He looked at his watch and saw that it was now almost one o'clock.

May as well get rest while I can.

He took a long leak on the pebble beach, then settled inside the boat, put his .45 under his duffel, rested his head on top of it, and yawned.

And the Gramercy Park has the nerve to call itself a luxury hotel ... .



The sound of small diesel engines came loudly across the water and almost echoed inside the boat hull where Canidy lay rubbing his eyes.

Judging by the light coming in the edges of the tarp, he figured it was just turning dawn and a glance at his wristwatch confirmed it. Both hands were on the six.

Men's voices filled the air, and there was the sound of foot traffic on the wooden pier.

Canidy peeked out of the tarp, saw there was nothing but another boat hull looking back at him, and crawled out of the boat.

He peered around the boat. The piers were bustling with fishermen loading their boats for the day; some boats had already cast off lines and were headed out of the harbor.

Some of the shops were now open. Canidy noticed the smell of coffee on the salt air, and that someone had put ice in the display tables outside of the fish market. Customers were already coming and going.

Canidy turned around and relieved himself in what he thought was probably the same spot he had five hours earlier. He started to grab his duffel and throw it on his back but stopped. He made a close examination of the boat and the work done on it thus far and decided that the boat had not been touched in months.

No one's coming in the next hour or so.

He slipped the .45 into the small of his back, adjusted his Greek cap, then headed for the shops, hoping he might get lucky sneaking a cup of coffee.

As he walked across the beach, he studied the steady traffic going on and off the pier. All of the men looked approximately the same - same dark pants and sweaters, same olive complexions, and pretty much the same head of hair (though this varied greatly; some had beards or mustaches while others were clean-shaven).

Canidy stepped up on the pier and joined the line headed to the shops. He followed two men into one and saw that it wasn't a shop so much as a bare-bones communal room. There were two wooden tables. On one were baskets of fruit and breads. On the other, in the corner, were two big coffeepots. One was being refilled by a tiny, wrinkled woman who Canidy guessed had to be eighty, eighty-five.

Hell, she could be a hundred and eighty-five, for all I know.

The fishermen were freely helping themselves, no one paying for anything.

The woman looked at Canidy and she moved her thin wrinkled lips into something of a smile. She poured coffee into a chipped and stained white porcelain cup and held it out to him.

</text>
