<text id="P03" category="" words="2005" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="I'm In No Mood for Love. HarperCollins Publishers Inc." Author="Rachel Gibson" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="/">

She'd been all over town in search
of one she liked, but she hadn't found it. There
had to be something suitable in the stacks of bed
linens in the Wingate attic.
The day after she told Sebastian that she couldn't
see him any longer, she'd taken down her Batten-
berg lace. He'd hated it, and it reminded her too
much of him. She just couldn't look up at it every
night when she went to bed.
It had been three weeks since that day in the
mall when she'd run into Lonny and realized that
she had once again fallen in love with a man who
was incapable of loving her back. And this time
she couldn't even say it was because she'd been
lied to. Sebastian had never loved her, and she'd
known that going in. She just hadn't known she
would fall in love with him.
After the fallout in her mother's backyard,
she'd gone home and crawled into bed for three
days, overdosing on John Hughes and Merchant-
Ivory licks until her friends had staged an inter-
vention.
The good news was, she hadn't reached for a
bottle or a warm body to make herself feel better.
She hadn't even wanted to. The bad news was that
she didn't think she was ever going to get over the
heartache of loving Sebastian Vaughan. It went
too deep in her soul. Was too tangled around her
heart.
Clare opened an old wardrobe and searched
through her ancestor's linens. It was all very lacy
and girly, and after an hour of looking and i nd-
ing nothing, she moved out of the attic and down
the old curving staircase. A voice from the
kitchen stopped her at the bottom of the steps.
Stopped her and shattered her all at once.
"Where's Clare?"
"Sebastian? When did you get here?" Joyce
asked.
"Clare's car's outside. Where is she?"
"Goodness! She's in the attic looking at lace."
Heavy footfalls moved across the tile and the
hardwood loors and Clare's hand shook. She'd
been told he wasn't expected. As she turned, he
walked into the entry and her grasp tightened on
the banister. Her chest got that imploding feeling
again, just as strong as the day she'd stood in Brook-
stone dying inside.
Sebastian walked across the foyer as if the devil
were on his heels, and before she could even think
to move, he was in front of her, his green gaze in-
tense as he stared down into her face. He was so
close, the open edges of her black cardigan touched
the front of his blue dress shirt.
"Clare," he said. One word that sounded a lot
like a caress, then he lowered his mouth and
kissed her.
For several stunned seconds she let him. Let her
soul remember. Let it pour through her and warm
up the lonely places only he could touch. Her heart
seemed to weep and rejoice at the same time, but
before he could take any more from her, she lifted
her hands and pushed him away.
"You look so good to me," he whispered as he
ran his gaze across her face. "I feel alive for the
irst time in weeks."
And he was killing her. All over again. She
looked away before her love for him swamped her
and she started to cry. "What are you doing?" she
asked.
"The last time I saw you, I told you that if you
walked away, I wouldn't come after you. But here
I am." With the warm ingers of one hand, he
brought her gaze back to his. "I'm going to turn
thirty-six in two months, and I'm in love for the
irst time in my life. Since you're the woman I
love, I thought you should know."
She felt everything inside her go real still.
"What?"
"I'm in love with you."
She shook her head. He had to be teasing her.
"It's true. The heart-pounding, steal-your-breath,
crazy-for-one-woman kind of love."
She didn't trust him. "Maybe you just think
you're in love and you'll get over it."
Now it was his turn to shake his head. "I've
spent my life waiting to feel something bigger and
stronger than myself. Something I couldn't ight
or walk away from or control. I've waited all my
life . . ." His voice shook, and he paused to take a
breath. "I've been waiting my whole life for you,
Clare. I love you, and don't tell me I don't."
Clare blinked back the sudden sting in her eyes.
That was the most beautiful thing anyone had
ever said to her. Better than she could make up
herself. "You better not be trying to trick me."
"No tricks. I love you, Clare. I love you and I
want to spend my life with you. I even watched
Pretty in Pink."
"Really?"
"Yes, and I hated every minute of it." He took
her hand. "But I love you, and if it makes you
happy, I'll watch teen licks with you."
"You don't have to watch teen licks with me."
"Thank God." He lifted his free hand and
brushed her hair behind her ear. "I got you some-
thing, but it's out in the car. I didn't think Joyce
would let it in the house."
"What?"
"You said you wanted a husband and children
and a dog. So, I'm here with one very carsick York-
shire terrier puppy and a willingness to work on
the kids part."
Once again he'd looked into her lonely heart and
given her what she'd wanted. Plus a dog. "I don't
have anything to give you."
"I just want you. For the irst time in a long time,
I feel like I'm exactly where I'm supposed to be."
The tears she wasn't even going to try to hide
spilled over the bottom of her lashes. She rose on
her toes and wrapped her arms around his neck. "I
love you."
"Don't cry. I hate crying."
"I know. And shopping. And asking for direc-
tions."
He wrapped his arms around her and squeezed
tight. "I sold my condo and I don't have a place to
live. That's what took me so long to get here once
I decided where I needed to be."
"You're homeless?" she asked into the side of his
neck.
"No. My home is with you." He pressed a kiss to
her temple. "I never understood when my mother
used to say that she'd inally found her home. I
didn't understand how one place could feel any dif-
ferent from another. I do now. You are my home
and I don't ever want to leave."
"Okay."
"Clare." He pulled back and held up a ring. A
princess-cut, four-carat diamond.
"Oh my God!" she gasped. She looked from the
ring to his face.
"Marry me. Please."
Emotion clogged her throat and she nodded. She
was a romance writer, but she couldn't think of one
romantic thing to say besides, "I love you."
"Is that a yes?"
"Yes."
He let out a pent-up breath as if there had ever
been any doubt. "There's one more thing," he said
as he slid the ring onto her inger. "I have an ulte-
rior motive for buying the dog."
The ring was the most beautiful thing she'd ever
seen. She looked up into his face and amended that
to the second most beautiful thing. "Of course you
do." She wiped beneath her eyes. "What is it?"
"In exchange for the girly wussy dog," he said,
humor lifting the corners of his mouth, "no girly
wussy lace on the bed."
Since she'd already put away her lace bedding,
that was an easy compromise. "Anything for you."
She rose on the balls of her feet and kissed Sebas-
tian Vaughan. He was her lover, friend, and very
own romantic hero, proving that sometimes a girl's
worst nightmare turned into her happily ever after.


EPILOGUE
Clare poured a cup of coffee and looked out the
back screen door into her yard. Sebastian stood
in the middle of the lawn wearing nothing but a
pair of beige cargo pants. The morning sun bathed
his chest and face in gold as he pointed across the
yard.
"Get your job done," he said to the Yorkshire
terrier sitting on his bare foot. The dog, Westley - 
named after the hero in The Princess Bride - stood
and walked on short little legs to plop down on
Sebastian's other foot.
Westley loved Sebastian. Followed him around
and worshiped him. For his devotion, most often
than not, he got called Wusstley. But when Sebas-
tian thought no one else was around, he scratched
the dog's small belly and told him he was a "little
stud."
Sebastian had moved into Clare's house two
months ago, and within a week antique pieces had
moved out. Which was ine with Clare. His sofa
and chairs were more comfortable than hers, and
she didn't have a serious attachment to her great-
great-grandfather's gout footstool. The cherub ped-
estal was staying, though.
"Come on now," Sebastian said as he looked
down at Westley. "We can't go back inside until
you get busy."
In May they'd stuck a For Sale sign in the front
yard, and hoped to have the house sold by the time
they married in September. Finding a new home
was proving more dificult than planning a wed-
ding. Melding both their tastes wasn't easy, but they
were determined to compromise and work it out.
Lucy, Maddie, and Adele were happy for Clare
and thrilled to be her bridesmaids, although Adele
and Maddie had made her promise that there
would be no tulle this time.
Sebastian walked several feet across the yard,
and Westley followed close behind. He pointed to
the ground. "This is a good spot." Westley looked
up, barked as if he agreed, then sat on Sebastian's
foot.
Clare smiled and raised the coffee mug to her
lips. She'd met her friends for lunch just the day
before. Lucy was still thinking about starting a
family. Dwayne was still leaving random stuff on
Adele's porch, and Maddie was still planning on
spending the summer at her cabin in Truly. But as
they'd left the restaurant, Maddie had given a hint
that perhaps something was unusual. Well, unusual
for Maddie. With a strange look on her face, she
said, "Digging into other people's sordid pasts is a
whole lot easier than digging into your own."
There were things in Maddie's life. Dark secrets
she'd never shared. If and when she did, her friends
would be there to listen.
Clare opened the screen door and walked out
into the sunlight. "I see you've just about gotten
that dog whipped into shape," she said.
Sebastian put his hands on his hips and looked
up at her. "Your mutt is worthless."
She bent and scooped up the dog. "No, he's not.
He's very good at barking at the mailman."
Sebastian took the mug from her and dropped
his arm around her shoulders. "And imaginary
cats." He took a drink of coffee, then said, "Dad
and I are ishing Saturday. Wanna come along?"
"No thanks." She'd ished with the two of them
once. Once was enough. Worms and ish guts
were something they would never compromise on
or work out.

One of the biggest surprises about Sebastian, be-
sides his attempts at being romantic, was his rela-
tionship with her mother. He didn't take Joyce's
frosty, dictatorial nature personally, nor did he take
any crap from her, and the two got along wonder-
fully. Better than Clare would have ever imagined.
"Once the dog does his business, let's go take a
shower." Sebastian handed her back the coffee and
added, "I'm in the mood to get you soapy."
She set Westley on the ground and rose. "I am
feeling a little dirty." She pressed her lips to his
bare shoulder and smiled. He was always in the
mood, which worked out beautifully because she
was always in the mood for him.

</text>
