<text id="P05" category="" words="2022" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="When He Was Wicked. Harper&Collins Publishers" Author="Julia Quinn" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="/">

He wanted to marry her.
He just didn't think he could live with his conscience if he did.
"Are you quite all right?" Colin asked.
Michael blinked. "Perfectly so, why?"
Colin's head tilted slightly to the side. "For a moment there, you looked ... " He gave his head a shake. "It's nothing."
"What, Bridgerton?" Michael nearly snapped.
"Surprised," Colin said. "You looked rather surprised. Bit odd, I thought."
Dear God, one more moment with Colin Bridgerton, and the bloody bastard would have all of Michael's se­crets laid open and bare. Michael pushed his chair back. "I need to be going," he said abruptly.
"Of course," Colin said genially, as if their entire con­versation had consisted of horses and the weather.
Michael stood, then gave a curt nod. It wasn't a terribly warm farewell, considering that they were relations of a sort, but it was the best he could do under the circum­stances.
"Think about what I said," Colin murmured, just when Michael had reached the door.
Michael let out a harsh laugh as he pushed through the door and into the hall. As if he'd be able to think about anything else.
For the rest of his life.
Chapter 13
 ...  all at home is pleasant and well, and Kilmartin thrives under Francesca's careful stew­ardship. She continues to mourn John, but then of course, so do we all, as, I'm sure, do you. You might consider writing to her di­rectly. I know that she misses you. I do pass along all of your tales, but I am certain you would relate them to her in a different fash­ion than you do to your mother.
 - from Helen Stirling to her son, the Earl of Kilmartin, two years after his departure for India 
The rest of the week passed in a supremely annoying blur of flowers, candy, and one appalling display of poetry, re­cited aloud, Michael recalled with a shudder, on his front steps.
Francesca, it seemed, was putting all the fresh-faced debutantes to shame. The number of men vying for her hand might not have been doubling every day, but it cer­tainly felt like it to Michael, who was constantly tripping over some lovesick swain in the hall.
It was enough to make a man want to vomit. Preferably on the lovesick swain.
Of course he had his admirers as well, but as it was not suitable for a lady to call upon a gentleman, he generally only had to deal with them when he chose to do so, and not when they took it upon themselves to stop by unan­nounced and for no apparent reason other than to compare his eyes to - 
Well, to whatever one would compare your average gray eyes. It was a stupid analogy, anyway, although Michael had been forced to listen to more than one man rhapsodize over Francesca's eyes.
Good God, didn't any of them have an original thought in his head? Forget that everyone made mention of her eyes; at the very least one of them could have had the cre­ativity to compare them to something other than the wa­ter or the sky.
Michael snorted with disgust. Anyone who took the time to really look at Francesca's eyes would have real­ized that they were quite their own color.
As if the sky could even compare.
Furthermore, Francesca's nauseating parade of suitors was made all the more difficult to bear by Michael's com­plete inability to stop thinking about his recent conversa­tion with her brother.
Marriage to Francesca? He had never even let himself think about such a notion.
But now it gripped him with a fervor and intensity that left him reeling.
Marriage to Francesca. Good God. Everything about it was wrong.
Except he wanted it so badly.
It was hell watching her, hell speaking to her, hell living in the same house. He'd thought it was difficult before - loving someone who could never be his - but this ... 
This was a thousand times worse.
Colin knew.
He had to know. Why would he have suggested it if he didn't?
Michael had held on to his sanity all these years for one reason and one reason only: No one knew he was in love with Francesca.
Except, apparently, he was to be denied even that last shred of dignity.
But now Colin knew, or at least he damn well sus­pected, and Michael couldn't quite quash this rising sense of panic within his chest.
Colin knew, and Michael was going to have to do something about it.
Dear God, what if he told Francesca? That question was foremost in his mind, even now, as he stood slightly off to the side at the Burwick ball, nearly a week after his momentous meeting with Colin.
"She looks beautiful tonight, doesn't she?"
It was his mother's voice at his ear; he had forgotten to pretend that he wasn't watching Francesca. He turned to Helen and gave her a little bow. "Mother," he murmured.
"Doesn't she?" Helen persisted.
"Of course," he agreed, quickly enough so she might think he was just being polite.
"Green suits her."
Everything suited Francesca, but he wasn't about to tell his mother that, so he just nodded and made a mur­mur of agreement.
"You should dance with her."
"I'm sure I will," he said, taking a sip of his cham­pagne. He wanted to march across the ballroom and forcibly remove her from her annoying little crowd of ad­mirers, but he couldn't very well show such emotion in front of his mother. So he concluded with, "After I finish my drink."
Helen pursed her lips. "Her dance card will surely be filled by then. You should go now."                 
He turned to his mother and smiled, just the sort of dev­ilish grin designed to take her mind off of whatever it was that had her so fixated. "Now why would I do that," he queried, setting his champagne flute down on a nearby table, "when I can dance with you instead?"
"You rascal," Helen said, but she didn't protest when he led her out on the floor.
Michael knew he'd pay for this tomorrow; already the society matrons were circling him for the kill, and there was nothing they liked better than a rake who doted upon his mother.
The dance was a lively one, which didn't allow for much conversation. And as he twisted and turned, dipped and bowed, he kept catching glances of Francesca, radi­ant in her emerald gown. No one seemed to notice that he was watching her, which suited him just fine, except that as the music reached its penultimate crescendo, Michael was forced to make one final turn away from her.
And when he turned back to face her again, she was gone.
He frowned. That didn't seem right. He supposed she could have darted out to the ladies' retiring room, but, pa­thetic fool that he was, he'd been watching her closely enough that he knew that she had done that just twenty minutes earlier.
He completed his dance with his mother, bade her farewell, then ambled casually over to the north side of the room, where he'd last seen Francesca. He had to move quickly, lest someone tried to waylay him. But he kept his ears open as he moved through the crowds. No one, however, seemed to be speaking of her.
When he reached her previous location, however, he noticed French doors, presumably to the back garden. They were curtained and closed, of course; it was only April, and not warm enough to be letting the night air in, even with a crowd of three hundred heating up the room. Michael was instantly suspicious; he'd lured too many women out to gardens himself not to be aware of what could happen in the dark of the night.
He slipped outside, making his exit unobtrusive. If Francesca was indeed out in the back garden with a gen­tleman, the last thing he wanted was a crowd trailing in his wake.
The rumble of the party seemed to pulsate through the glass doors, but even with that, the night felt quiet.
Then he heard her voice.
And it sliced his gut.
She sounded happy, he realized, more than content to be in the company of whatever man had lured her out into the dark. Michael couldn't make out her words, but she was definitely laughing. It was a musical, tinkling sound, and it ended in a soul-searing, flirtatious murmur.
Michael put his hand back on the knob. He should leave. She wouldn't want him here.
But he was rooted to the spot.
He'd never - ever - spied on her with John. Not once had he listened in on a conversation that wasn't meant to include him. If he stumbled within earshot, he had always removed himself immediately. But now - it was different. He couldn't explain it, but it was different, and he could not force himself to leave.
One more minute, he swore to himself. That was all. One more minute to assure that she was not in a danger­ous situation, and - 
"No, no."
Francesca's voice.
His ears pricked up and he took a few steps in the di­rection of her voice. She didn't sound upset, but she was saying no. Of course, she could be laughing about a joke, or maybe some inane piece of gossip.
"I really must - No!"
And that was all it took for Michael to move.
Francesca knew that she shouldn't have come outside with Sir Geoffrey Fowler, but he had been polite and charming, and she was feeling a trifle warm in the crowded ballroom. It was the sort of thing she'd never have done as an unmarried debutante, but widows weren't held to quite the same standards, and besides, Sir Geof­frey had said that he would leave the door ajar.
All had been perfectly pleasant for the first few min­utes. Sir Geoffrey made her laugh, and he made her feel beautiful, and it was almost heartbreaking to realize how much she'd missed that. And so she had laughed and flirted, and allowed herself to melt into the moment. She wanted to feel like a woman again - maybe not in the fullest sense of the word, but still, was it so wrong to enjoy the heady intoxication of knowing that she was desired?
Maybe they were all after her now infamous double dowry, maybe they wanted the alignment with two of Britain's most notable families - Francesca was both a Bridgerton and a Stirling, after all. But for one lovely evening, she was going to let herself believe it was all about her.
But then Sir Geoffrey had moved closer. Francesca had backed up as discreetly as she was able, but he took an­other step in her direction, and then another, and before she knew it, her back was against a fat-trunked tree, and Sir Geoffrey's hands were planted against the bark, each uncomfortably close to her head.
"Sir Geoffrey," Francesca said, endeavoring to remain polite as long as she possibly could, "I'm afraid there has been a misunderstanding. I believe I would like to return to the party." She kept her voice light and friendly, not wishing to provoke him into something she would regret.
His head dipped an inch closer to hers. "Now, why would you want to do that?" he murmured.
"No, no," she said, ducking to the side as he came in closer, "people will be missing me." Dash it all, she was going to have to stamp on his foot, or worse, unman him in the manner her brothers had taught her back when she was a green girl. "Sir Geoffrey," she said, trying one last time for civility, "I really must - "
And then his mouth, wet and mushy and entirely unwelcome, landed on hers.
" - No!" she managed to squeal.
But he was quite determined to mash her with his lips. Francesca twisted this way and that, but he was stronger than she had realized, and he clearly had no intention of letting her escape. Still struggling, she maneuvered her leg so that she might jam her knee up into his groin, but before she could do that, Sir Geoffrey seemed to ...  quite simply ...  disappear.

</text>
