<text id="P06" category="" words="2001" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="She's No Princess. HarperCollins Publishers Inc." Author="Laura Lee Guhrke" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="/">

When Peel is con-
firmed as Prime Minister, he's going to offer to
give you back your ambassadorship and send
you to Constantinople to patch things up. He's
sure the king will agree to the appointment."
They wanted him back. Never in his profes-
sional career had Ian ever felt a sweeter moment
of triumph than he did right now. He closed his
eyes for a moment, savoring it, allowing the satis-
faction of it to sink in.
Just then, a commotion was heard out in the
corridor.
"Where is Sir Ian?" bellowed a deep, male, un-
mistakably Italian voice. "Is he with Lord Stan-
ton? Are they in here?"
"Your Highness, if you will - "
"Out of my path." The door opened and Prince
Cesare came striding into the room, followed by
Stanton's clerk, a very embarrassed-looking
Count Trevani, and a pair of Cesare's guards.
Ian and Stanton both rose at once and bowed.
"Your Highness," Ian greeted his father-in-law
with cool civility and nothing more. He glanced
past Cesare, Count Trevani, and the guards, but
he did not see Lucia. "Have you finished your
visit with my wife?"
"Visit?" Cesare spat the word at him. "Is that
what you call it?"
By now, Ian figured he ought have some un-
derstanding of the Italians, but he didn't. They
still had the power to confound him. "I beg your
pardon?"
Cesare's face flushed with rage. "Never in her
life has Lucia asked me for anything. Always
when I see her, she puts her chin up, so, and
looks ready to spit in my face. But not when she
comes on your behalf. No! For you, she asks for
favors. For you, she goes down on her knees. A
daughter of my blood on her knees?" His voice
rose to a shout. "It is unpardonable that you send
her to beg for you!"
"What?" Ian did not need to feign his aston-
ishment. Lucia on her knees to her father? It
wasn't possible. "Your Highness, I have no idea
what you are talking about. You summoned - "
"Hah!" Cesare raked his gaze over Ian with
venom. "She wrote the letter asking to see me,
but I am not fooled." He pointed an accusing fin-
ger at Ian. "You sent her to me. Get him back his
profession, she says. Please, Papa, talk to his gov-
ernment, she says. I want him to be happy, she
says! Happy?" Prince Cesare slapped the back of
one hand against the palm of the other three
times in rapid succession. "I ask her what right
has he to be happy after what he did, and she
says what happened was all her fault! What have
you made her, Englishman, that she comes so to
me and takes the blame for your dishonor? Did
you make her say these things? She says no, but I
think, yes!"
Ian stared at the prince, and as he understood
just what had happened and what Lucia had
done, he realized William was right. There were
times when everything in life fell perfectly into
place. The aimless lethargy that had been haunt-
ing him for weeks vanished, and in its place was
something else. A feeling of coming home. He
knew who he was and what he wanted and
where he belonged. He stepped around Cesare
and walked to the door.
"I am not finished!" Cesare roared, turning.
"Where are you going?"
Ian paused and looked at Stanton. "Well, I'm
bloody well not going to Anatolia." With that, he
walked out the door, leaving William to the un-
enviable job of international diplomacy. He had
far more important work to do.
Lucia went into the library at Portman Square
and sat in her favorite place on the desk, remem-
bering the times she and Ian had sat here talking
in the wee small hours. She wondered how long
it would be before they sent him to Constantino-
ple, or some other place. He'd come home some-
times, she reminded herself, but that wasn't much
consolation. The only thing that comforted her
was knowing Ian would soon have his life back
the way he wanted it.
At first, Cesare had refused to grant her re-
quest. She should have known even begging on
her knees wouldn't move him. She had been
forced to use blackmail, and she was relieved he
had complied, for she couldn't really have writ-
ten her memoirs for the scandal sheets. Ian
wouldn't have liked it.
A home without a husband beside her wasn't
what she had envisioned for herself, but that was
the way it had to be. For her, a home and a family
were enough for happiness, but she had fallen in
love with a man for whom those things would
never be enough. Perhaps that was because he did
not love her in return. Though he had done the
honorable thing and married her, love had not
been his reason for doing so. Nonetheless, he had
given her a home, a place in the world. Now, she
had given him back his purpose, and he would be
himself again. That was all she wanted.
She imagined him sitting in the chair as she
had seen him so many times. The night he'd told
her about his first love. How they'd gotten drunk,
and she'd told him about her past.
"I love you," she said as if he was sitting there.
"I hope the Turks don't give you too much trou-
ble. Just - " She caught back a sob. "Just remem-
ber not to show your emotions, and you'll keep
the upper hand."
"Don't cry."
She lifted her head and turned to see him
standing in the doorway. Only when he blurred
before her eyes did she realize what he'd said.
"I'm not crying," she said, then immediately bit
her lip and had to turn her face away.
"Liar."
She stared at his chair, blinking back tears.
She'd hoped for more time before he came back
from Whitehall. Time to compose herself. But it
was too late. Now she was unraveling, and he'd
see it. Being so honorable, he'd feel guilty about
going away.
He walked around in front of her, put a hand
under her chin, and tilted her head back to look
at her. "Lucia, what have you done?"
He knew.
"I suppose Cesare told you." She scowled
through tears. "I asked him not to, but I should
have known he wouldn't listen. Damn him."
"He burst into Stanton's offices in a fury, shout-
ing at the top of his lungs, blathering about how
you came and begged him to help me get my job
back." His hands slid down her arms. "Wife, I
don't know whether to kiss you or shake you.
When I think of what it must have cost you to go
to him - " He broke off and his hands tightened
on her arms. "Why did you do it? Why?"
"I love you. I had to give you back what I took
from you."
He pulled her off the desk and kissed her hard.
"Don't ever do anything like that again," he or-
dered. "I mean it. Don't ever sacrifice your pride
for me or anyone else!"
"Well, it's done now." She swallowed hard and
stared at the perfect knot of his cravat. "So when
do you leave for Anatolia?"
"I'm not going to Anatolia."
"You're not?" She lifted her face. "Where are
you going?"
Ian wrapped his arms around her waist. "Dev-
onshire."
Lucia's heart gave a leap, and she was terribly
afraid she'd misunderstood. "What do you
mean?"
"I'm saying I turned them down. Told them
no."
"You did? But why? Your work is everything to
you. If you do not have your work, what will you
do?"
He pretended to think it over. "Arrange mar-
riages, perhaps? I'm getting rather good at that, I
think." He tightened his arms around her waist.
"By the way, I've been to see your mother."
Lucia blinked at the abrupt change of subject.
"You went to see Mamma?"
"Yes. I called on her after I left Whitehall. It
was a diplomatic assignment to arrange her mar-
riage to Lord Chesterfield."
"What?" Lucia was becoming more astonished
by the moment. "Mamma will never marry Ches-
terfield. She told me so."
Ian kissed her nose. "That's why I'm the diplo-
mat, my dear, and you're not. I have gotten both
parties to come to terms, and the wedding is in
December. I had to do it, so I hope you don't
mind. After all, I couldn't possibly stand for Par-
liament if my mother-in-law is a courtesan. I'd
never get the votes."
"You're going to be in Parliament? You would
rather do that than be an ambassador?"
"I told you I wouldn't drag a wife and children
all over the world. Don't you remember?"
"You said it wouldn't be right," she choked. "But
you didn't marry me by choice, so I thought - "
"So you thought I'd just go off and resume my
old life without you?"
"I thought returning to your profession would
make you happy. I thought it's want you wanted."
"You're what I want. How could leaving you
ever make me happy?" He cupped her face in his
hands. "Do you remember the day of our picnic,
and how you said I had this strange look on my
face?"
"Yes."
"That was the moment I realized how much I
need you, need you more than anything else, in-
cluding my career."
"Oh, Ian!" she cried, afraid to believe it. "I don't
want you to ever regret that you married me."
He smiled, and his fingertips caressed her
cheeks. "Regret it? How could I?" You are my
passionate Italian wife. You are the woman who
is going to give me children and whose bed I in-
tend to sleep in every night. You're the reason I'll
wake up every morning with a smile on my face.
I love you, I will be in love with you every day of
my life, and the only day I'm leaving you is the
day they put me in the ground."
He loved her. He wasn't leaving. Joy welled up
inside Lucia, flooding up and spilling over until
she couldn't contain it. She began to laugh and
cry at once.
"Here we go again." He pulled a handkerchief
out of his pocket and handed it to her.
"You turned them down," she said, her voice
muffled by his handkerchief. "For me."
"Damned right. Why should I settle for being
a mere ambassador when I can be treated like a
king? I believe that was what you promised your
husband, wasn't it?"
"Yes." Lucia tossed his handkerchief aside and
wrapped her arms around his neck. "Does that
mean I'm truly royal now?"
"You? My dear, you may be Prince Cesare's
daughter, but you're no princess. Most of the time,
you're a blight on my sanity." His arms tightened
around her. "By the way, there's one thing I want
to know."
She raked a hand through his hair, messing it
up with a sigh of pure contentment. "What?"
"Did you let me win that chess game on pur-
pose?" He pulled back and looked at her. "Did
you?"
Lucia opened her eyes very wide. "Of course,"
she said. Deliberately, she bit her lip.
He laughed, his arms tightening around her
again. "I want a rematch."
"All right." She paused with a wicked smile.
"On one condition."
"No. The condition was that I teach you to play
billiards, and I did. No more conditions."
"You'll like this one."
"I liked the last one. Too much if I recall." His
mouth curved up at one corner. "So what is this
new condition I'm going to like?"
"That you take me upstairs right now and start
treating me like a queen."
Ian didn't need to be told twice. "Yes, Your
Highness," he said, lifted her into his arms, and
headed for the door.

</text>
