<text id="P07" category="" words="2008" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="An Unlikely Governess. HarperCollins Publishers Inc." Author="Karen Ranney" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="/">

She closed the door quietly behind her and walked
down the hall to the Duke's Chamber. As Robert's gov­
erness, it was incumbent upon her to ensure that his
manners were perfect for this evening. Perhaps a little
conversation before they descended to the dining room
wouldn't be amiss.
Her knock wasn't answered. Slowly, she turned the
handle and pushed the door ajar. The room was empty.
Hopefully, Robert had gone down to dinner early and
was not hiding somewhere. She really didn't have the
energy to find him.
Halfway down the staircase, she gestured to a maid
just as the girl was sliding behind a hidden panel.
"Where is the dining room?"
"On the first floor, the third room in the east wing."
She bobbed a curtsy and disappeared from sight,
much as Beatrice would like to do. The directions were
sparse, but she finally found the room.
Unlike the area where they'd eaten breakfast, the for­
mal dining room at Castle Crannoch was a monument
to the family's history. There were claymores, shields,
tartans, and banners hanging from the ceiling and the
wall, interspersed with hunting pictures and portraits of
dogs and horses. It was the most fantastic juxtaposition
of really bad art she'd ever seen in her entire life.
To her relief, Robert was already seated at the table.
Not at the head of it, but to his uncle's left. Rowena was
on Cameron's right. Another place was set far down on
the left side of the table, far enough to be considered an
insult. She took her place without comment, nodding to
the family. The only response she received was Robert's
smile.
Dinner was a strange affair. Robert was in rare form,
finding the silliest things about which to giggle. Other­
wise, however, the young duke minded his manners
without being prompted to do so.
Rowena Gordon ignored her for the entire meal.
Whenever Cameron addressed a remark in her direc­
tion, Rowena affected to study the sconce on the far
wall, no doubt measuring the length and width of the
candle since the last time she had done so.
Was Rowena Gordon jealous of every female at Cas­
tle Crannoch? Was it simply because Beatrice was new
or that she'd been hired without Rowena's consent?
"Were you in London long, Mrs. Gordon?" she
asked.
Once again, Rowena studied the sconce. Was she go­
ing to answer her? Or simply ignore her again? Equal
parts of embarrassment and irritation made Beatrice
wish she hadn't asked.
"Not long, no. But long enough, perhaps."
"Two months, Miss Sinclair," Cameron said.
"Did you find London to your liking?"
"I enjoyed it as well as I was able, being separated
from my husband."
"They say that sooner or later the entire world goes
to London."
"Do they?" Rowena smiled absently, in that exasper­
ating way beautiful women do, as if they could not be
bothered to curve their lips. Perhaps the effort was too
exhausting, and they needed to save their energy for
flirtatious glances and fanning themselves.
She should not be so intent upon initiating a conver­
sation with the other woman. Yet, politeness dictated
she at least attempt to do so. Rowena, however, was
making it exceedingly difficult to be polite.
Finally, the woman looked directly at her, the first
time she'd done so during the whole of dinner.
"What are your qualifications to be the Duke of
Brechin's governess, Miss Sinclair? Have you impec­
cable references?"
She had no references.
Beatrice glanced at Cameron Gordon, who was
watching her with an inscrutable expression on his
face, almost like a cat watching a mouse. There was go­
ing to be no assistance from him. Why? Because she'd
dared to challenge him this morning?
Once again, she had the thought she'd be better off
simply marching down the mountain. She'd find some
type of employment. Better yet, perhaps she'd even re­
turn to Edinburgh with Devlen when he next visited.
Surely in Edinburgh she could find a position with a
normal family.
As it was, however, she needed to answer the woman.
"While it is true my stitchery is not very competent,"
she said calmly, "I can read three languages. I speak
French as well as Italian and German, and can converse
on a variety of subjects secular or religious. I've helped
tutor young men in Latin, and I've had sufficient train­
ing in mathematics, geography, and economics."
"It seems you're talented in a variety of tasks, Miss
Sinclair. However, you need not narrow your employ­
ment to that of a governess. You could be suitable for a
diversity of employment, such as a milliner's assistant
or a barmaid, for example."
"I've no interest in hats, and while I don't object to
spirits because of any moral stance, I simply cannot
abide the smell of ale. Oddly enough, the owner of the
tavern at which I applied thought I was too old and ugly
to be employed by him." She looked directly at
Rowena. "I'm gratified you don't feel the same."
She didn't mention she'd no longer had a choice as to
what she would do. She had to become employed or sell
her body for a meal. "Virtue" was a word having mean­
ing only for the well fed, the warm, and the secure.
Had she simply exchanged one set of problems for
another? Perhaps, but the present set of problems came
equipped with a well-stocked larder and a salary that
had been mentioned in passing but still had the power to
make her jaw drop in shock.
She forced a smile to her face, and returned to her din­
ner, wishing Rowena Gordon had remained in London.
Dinner was excellent, roast beef and duckling, each
in a creamy sauce, vegetables, and a wonderful sweet
torte that was so light it almost floated off the plate. But
Beatrice couldn't help but wonder if being fed, however
fulsomely, was enough to offset living a furtive life
among people who suspected each other of unspeak­
able acts and hidden desires.
For the first time, she could understand why Robert
didn't want Cameron to know about the incident in the
woods. The two of them, boy and governess, ex­
changed a glance. She smiled, a look of collusion, and
vowed to keep his secret.
"I didn't expect to see you home so soon, sir." Saun­
ders stepped back, placed his fingers deftly around the
collar of Devlen's snug jacket and helped him skin it off.
"To tell you the truth," Devlen told the other man, "I
didn't expect to return home this early."
He walked into his library, satisfied when he noticed
his staff had lit all the candles in the sconces and the oil
lamps on the mantel and the desk.
"Was the gathering not to your taste, sir? I under­
stand some members of the royal family were to be in
attendance."
"They were, Saunders. Edinburgh society was
graced tonight with a few inbred cousins and more than
enough titles to throw around. They would have, I be­
lieve, gladly dispensed with the titles in exchange for
another fortune or two. Why is it, Saunders, that the
higher up in society one goes, the more one affects not
to need money and yet the more one must have it?"
"I'm sure I don't know, sir."
"You may go," he said, dismissing the other man
with a flick of his hand. Saunders disappeared from a
room with a relieved sigh.
Devlen was used to being alone, but this last week,
he'd begun to crave company. He disliked mysteries, es­
pecially those of his own nature. Why was he so restless?
The knock on the door was unexpected, and he
turned, waiting.
Saunders peered inside the room, his usual affable
appearance marred by a disconcerted expression.
"Sir, you have a visitor."
"At this hour?" He glanced at the mantel clock. Nine
o'clock. Not late enough to retire, but certainly too late
for a business appointment.
"A Mr. Martin, sir. He says it's vital he speak with
you."
Martin was the owner of a company he was thinking
of buying. The man had developed a type of percussion
powder that interested him. His company, however, was
lamentably run, without organization, and in financial
chaos. Martin was facing ruin, unless Devlen purchased
the sagging company as well as the man's new invention.
Devlen sat behind his desk and nodded to Saunders.
When Martin was ushered into his library, he ges­
tured to the chair opposite his desk.
Martin sat, hat held tightly between his hands.
"Have you thought about my proposal?" Devlen asked.
"I have. I don't want to sell. But I've no choice,
have I?"
"You always have a choice. I don't want it said I
browbeat you into a decision."
He stood, offered the man a glass of whiskey. Martin
took it, drank it too quickly, and set the tumbler down
on the edge of the desk. Devlen took his own glass and
returned to his chair.
"I want to be partners instead of giving you every­
thing. I'll sell you half."
He raised one eyebrow. "What good is half a com­
pany to me?"
Martin didn't answer.
Devlen leaned back in the chair, waiting.
Because I have the knowledge and you don't. Because
I'll make you money. Because I'll keep my new inven­
tion unless you agree to my terms. All comments Devlen
expected to hear from the man sitting opposite him.
Martin, however, simply stared down at his hat and
remained mute.
Devlen had no patience with people who couldn't
define exactly what they wanted and how they wanted
it. A man should always be able to articulate his wishes
and goals.
"Well?"
Still, the man didn't look at him.
"Why would it be to my advantage to buy half your
company? I'm not used to being a partner. I prefer to
own things outright."
Martin looked up. Devlen was horrified to note tears
in the other man's eyes.
"It's all I have."
Devlen stood and walked to the window.
A more compassionate man might have given in at
that point. But he'd never been judged as exceptionally
compassionate. Shrewd, yes. Sensible, certainly. Dog­
matic, intense, ambitious, all labels he accepted be­
cause society insisted upon tagging its members.
"Are you married, Mr. Martin?" He didn't turn to
look at the other man.
"Yes, I am. Twenty years now."
"Do you love your wife?"
"Sir?"
Devlen turned to face the other man. "A curious
question, but humor me. Do you love your wife?"
Martin nodded.
"How did you decide you loved her?"
The other man looked confused, and Devlen couldn't
blame him.
"Well, it was an arranged marriage, sir. Her father
knew my father."
"So, you decided you loved her after a few years?"
Martin smiled. "More like a few weeks. She was a
pretty little thing, with blond hair and the prettiest eyes.
Hazel-like, but if she wore a blue dress, they were blue.
She has this green thing she likes to wear for special oc­
casions, and I could stare at her eyes for hours when she
does. It's like they're pools or ponds." He shook his
head and stared down at his shoes.
"Do you love her for her appearance, Mr. Martin?"
He rapidly shook his head, his attention still on his
shoes. "She's the kindest soul I've ever known. She'll
rescue a person as soon as she will a stray dog, Mr.
Gordon. You might even say she's rescued me."
"Then your company isn't the only thing you have,
Mr. Martin. It's not even the most important thing in
your life."
Martin looked up at him curiously. "You believe a
man's marriage is more important than his business,
sir? Then why have you never married?"
Devlen returned to his desk.
"You haven't given me a good enough answer, Mar­
tin. Why should I settle for half?"
Martin had run his company into the ground. He'd
taken a brilliant idea and let it fester.

</text>
