<text id="P09" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Something Sinful. HarperCollins Publishers Inc." Author="Suzanne Enoch" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="/">

"He's to face charges of theft here. A detachment of sol-
diers was dispatched to collect him from the warehouse
where Yun had him stashed. He should be at the Old Bailey
by now."
Charlemagne nodded, relieved. "He caused a fair amount
of trouble for us, but under the circumstances I'm inclined to
forgive him. He gave them my name rather than Sarala's."
"Shay!"
He turned to face Prinny in the far doorway. "Yes, Your
Majesty?"
"Invite me to the wedding."
"With pleasure."
"That settles that," Melbourne said, as they all left Carl-
ton House. "There's no chance of elopement for you now."
"Are you certain you want to see us at Westminster Ab-
bey?" Sarala asked, putting a hand on the duke's arm.
He covered her hand with his. "I am certain. Hanover and
I are going to White's for luncheon. Where are you off to?"
Charlemagne looked down at Sarala, warmth coursing
through him. "I thought I'd take her about for a bit more
sightseeing. And I want a word with Captain Blink, if I can
get in to see him."
"Don't be too grateful to him," his brother returned. "He
began this mess."
"It ended well enough." Shay lifted Sarala's fingers and
kissed them.
She smiled. The sight she most wanted to see was Shay
naked again, but she would do her best to be patient. Four
more weeks.
Jenny waited for them, and Shay handed them into his
coach. "Where are we going, then?" Sarala asked as the
coach rolled into the street.
"Since you were only able to view the Egyptian room at
the British Museum, I thought you might enjoy seeing the
Roman collection there."
"Yes, please," she said with a smile. "But first tell me this:
Have you heard anything about DeLayne?"
"Melbourne heard through his cousin that he's making
plans to return to India." Gray eyes gazed at her. "You're not
sorry for him, are you?"
"No. I just keep thinking that he went from believing he
owned the world to being the laughingstock of all of his
peers."
"He would have done the same to you."
She sighed. "I know. In a sense, though, it's hardly fair
that he gets India."
"And you only get me?"
The wooden panel at Shay's shoulder exploded inward.
Sarala shrieked as he tumbled sideways. "Shay!"
He clawed to his feet, kicking the door opened as
he straightened. "Wait here," he growled, and launched
outside.
She was blasted well not waiting there. Sarala jumped to
the ground to the sight of absolute chaos. The coach was
stopped in the middle of the street, pedestrians running and
yelling and mostly rushing forward to see the tangle of dark
suits and greatcoats smashing into one another in front of
the bakery. John DeLayne.
Charlemagne heaved the viscount to his feet and swung a
fist at him. DeLayne blocked the blow, grabbing the lapel of
Shay's coat and hurling the two of them through the bakery
window. In the confusion of feet as everyone swept forward
to get a better view, Sarala saw a pistol. Pushing hard, she
made it through the crowd and crouched to grab it. The
muzzle was still hot.
DeLayne had actually tried to kill one or both of them.
He probably didn't care which. Shaking, she clutched the
pistol, lifting it. "Move aside!" she yelled.
More screams erupted as she waved the weapon, but the
spectators moved. She pushed the bakery door open with
her shoulder and stalked inside. A knife in one hand, John
slashed toward Shay. Shay ducked, striking out with a light-
ning punch that sent DeLayne reeling backward.
"Stop!" Sarala moved closer, aiming the pistol at John.
"Don't make me shoot you!"
"You'll have to shoot me!" the viscount sputtered, stag-
gering back to his feet. "You've already ruined me!"
He took a step toward her, and Shay tackled him in the
chest, sending the two of them through the wooden coun-
ter. With a wrench he grabbed the knife away from the
viscount and tossed it aside. "Don't shoot him," he panted,
blood streaking down one cheek. "I've been wanting to do
this for days."
"I am not going to allow you to beat him to death, Shay,"
she snapped, worried both by the blood and by the ferocious
light in his eyes. For the first time she realized just how
tightly he'd been holding himself in check, and how serious
Melbourne's warnings for him to mind his temper had
been.
"Then what's to keep him from shooting through win-
dows at us again?" Shay demanded, hitting the viscount
again. DeLayne sank to his knees, his eyes rolling back in
his head.
"What's all this?" A bevy of men in the garb of Bow
Street Runners shoved past the bystanders and into the small
bakery.
"Thank goodness," she breathed, releasing the spent
weapon as one of them grabbed it from her. "That man," she
stated, jabbing a finger at the reeling DeLayne, "just tried to
kill us."
"I did not!" the viscount mumbled through bloody teeth.
"He attacked me!"
"There's a hole in my carriage, and one in my shoulder,"
Shay retorted, taking a step back only when two men grabbed
his arms and hauled him that way. "He's been running mad
for days. Last night at a soiree he was practically frothing at
the mouth. I want him arrested."
"And who are you, sir?"
"Charlemagne Griffin," he answered promptly. "That's
Viscount DeLayne."
"The one with the Chinese swordsmen story?" someone
from outside the shop called. "I heard he'd been sent to
Bedlam."
The Runners released Shay as soon as he said his name.
"We'll take him to the Old Bailey, my lord," their captain
said. "I take it you're willing to press charges?"
"Absolutely."
With DeLayne still shouting his innocence, the Bow
Street Runners dragged him out of the shop. As soon as the
way to him was clear, Sarala rushed Shay. "You were shot?
Why didn't you say anything?" She yanked him around,
searching his shoulder. "You might have been killed!"
"So might you have been," he returned, wincing. "It's just
a graze. But we'll settle this in a moment." Shaking her off,
he walked to the corner of the shop where she finally no-
ticed the poor baker still cowering, a sack of flour in his
arms. "Will twenty quid pay for the damage?" he asked, still
breathing hard.
"Y . . . yes, my lord."
Nodding, Shay counted out the money and set it on the
counter. "My apologies, sir. And my thanks for helping to
catch an attempted murderer."
Shay took Sarala's hand as they picked their way through
the wreckage at the front of the shop. He staggered a little,
and her heart stopped. Good heavens, how badly had he
been hurt? "We have to get you to a physician," she said,
helping him to the coach.
"I'll be fine."
"You can barely stand."
"He kicked me in my damned knee. No physicians."
"Shay, you can't - "
"My home is right around the corner. Oswald can patch
me up."
She half shoved him into the coach, and followed behind
him. "To Gaston House," she ordered the driver, pulling the
door closed. "Now take off your coat. Jenny, help us."
The maid scooted forward to help Shay shrug out of his
dirty, torn coat. His left shoulder was bloody, and she
gasped. "Shay, why didn't you - "
"He might have shot you instead of me," Charlemagne
growled, pulling her forward and kissing her fiercely. "You
should have let me kill him."
"I just didn't want you to be hurt," she said, a tear running
down her face.
"Losing you would hurt much more than this." He backed
off a little, running a finger along her cheek. "Melbourne's
not going to be happy, though. I wrecked a bakery."
A laugh escaped her throat despite herself. "You paid for
the damage." She pulled out her handkerchief and wrapped
it tightly around his upper arm. "But how will you testify
against DeLayne? What if someone asks you about the Chi-
nese soldiers? They were real, you know."
"I don't think it'll come to that," he returned, wiping
blood from his cheek with the back of his hand. "I wanted
him locked away from us, but I think if I offer him the
choice between prison and a permanent residence in India,
he'll take the latter. I'm even willing to sweeten the pot, if
necessary, to keep him away from us."
"That's probably what he wanted."
"Then he's lucky you stopped me from killing him." He
said it lightly, but she heard the steel in his voice. He would
have killed DeLayne. She wondered if the viscount had any
idea just how lucky he had been.
Sooner than she expected, the coach rolled to a stop.
"Jenny, fetch Mr. Oswald," she instructed, unwilling to leave
Charlemagne's side.
Jenny bolted out the door, and a moment later a large,
broad butler in livery appeared in the coach doorway. "You've
taken hurt, my lord?" he rumbled.
"A scratch. But I've learned never to dissuade a woman
who wants to coddle me."
Despite the words, he staggered a little as she and Oswald
helped him to the ground and up to the door. For a brief
moment Sarala stopped on the front steps, looking up. Gas-
ton House resembled most of the wealthier town houses,
fairly narrow but at least three stories tall, two dozen win-
dows overlooking Piccadilly and the park beyond, the front
a freshly painted white.
"Where's your bedchamber?" she asked as they contin-
ued inside, pulling his wounded arm over her shoulder.
He hesitated. "The morning room's fine," he said, angling
them toward the nearest doorway.
"No. You need to lie down."
"It's upstairs, first door on the right, my lady," Oswald
contributed.
"Very good. Will you fetch some water and bandages?"
"Right away, my lady."
On the landing, Charlemagne pulled her into a close em-
brace. "You're rather wonderful, you know?" he murmured,
kissing her softly. "Jenny, wait downstairs."
The maid dipped a curtsy. "Very good, my lord."
As they climbed to the first floor, Sarala looked about
them. Scattered on the walls and on the tables along the up-
stairs hall she saw a sampling of some of Charlemagne's
antiques and artifacts. He had exquisite taste; she looked
forward to exploring.
The door Oswald had indicated was closed. She reached
out to push the latch, but Shay blocked her arm. "It's not
ready," he said abruptly.
"What? I don't care if your bed's unmade, Shay."
"No, it's not - "
She pushed open the door and walked inside. And stopped
dead.
Yellow and gold silk curtained the windows and great
swaths of the walls, with pillows and throws draped across
the bed and the floor. The bed itself was deep green and gold
silk shimmering with gold threads. All the furniture was
deep red-brown burnished mahogany, rich and gold-tinged
with age and care.
"Oh, Shay," she breathed.
"I still need a few more pieces. I wanted to surprise
you."
"I'm surprised," she said shakily. "It's lovely. You did this
for me?"
"Of course I did. I know you miss India, and I thought - "
She grabbed his waistcoat and yanked him forward, cov-
ering his mouth with hot, deep kisses. "I love you," she
murmured.
"I love you," he returned, reaching back behind him to
close the door. "I want you to be happy here."
Oswald scratched at the door. "My lord? The - "
Reluctantly Sarala broke free and opened the door, taking
the water bowl and cloths and then closing it again before
she set the things aside. Apparently she would see Shay na-
ked again sooner than she'd expected. Slowly she approached
him and pulled his shirt free from his breeches.
"Mai khush hu. Mai tum pyar karne," she said unsteadily,
as his hands slid around her waist and his mouth dipped to
her throat. "I am happy. I love you."

</text>
