<text id="P10" category="" words="2013" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Taken By Storm. HarperCollins Publishers Inc." Author="Donna Fletcher" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="/">

Chapter 1

Burke Longton grabbed hold of his chains and
scrambled to his feet as soon as the motley
crew of ive stormed his prison cell. He didn't know
for whom, out of the six in the cell, they had come,
but he intended to make sure he left with them. Two
weeks in this stinking hellhole had been enough.
He wanted out and he wanted home.
"There's little time," the tallest of the men said.
"Follow our orders and we'll get you out of here."
Burke had no problem with that. Whatever it took
to be free, he was ready, and it looked like the other
prisoners agreed. All had gotten to their feet, some
with dificulty, and held out chained wrists, eager
to be rid of the weighted metal cuffs that had rubbed
their lesh raw.
Their jailer suddenly stumbled into the room,
and Burke glared at him. He hated the sight of the
paunchy man. His entrance always heralded tor
ture, and his enjoyment of his job was obvious from
the constant smile he wore.
Only this time, the jailer looked fearful, his eyes
wide, sweat pouring down his reddened cheeks.
"The keys!"
Burke blinked twice. Had a lad stepped from be
hind the jailer? He shook his head, too many curves
in just the right places. It was a woman, a pint-sized
one garbed in men's clothing, and she handled the
sword that was almost her size with conidence. She
pushed the point right between the folds of his thick
neck.
"I'll not ask again," she warned.
Burke smirked when, with an effortless lick of
the blade, she nicked his skin and a rivulet of blood
cascaded down his chest to pool on his grimy shirt.
The man eagerly fumbled keys over to her.
"Tanin," she said, tossing the ring to the tallest
man.
The man reached out. The metal ring hooked on
one of his long ingers, he then worked fast freeing
everyone while two men trussed up the jailer like a
fat pig for roasting.
"He'll need help." The woman nodded toward a
man who was having trouble standing on his own.
Then she searched the room with wide, stormy blue
eyes. The color reminded Burke of a turbulent ocean
just before a gale force hit. For a brief moment, he
wondered if iery red curls lay beneath her knit cap
to match the squall surfacing in her eyes.
"I don't see him," she said, annoyed.
"This is where I was told he'd be." Tanin walked
over to her, and together they searched the dark
ened corners of the cell.
It was obvious they were looking for someone in
particular and Burke had the feeling he knew
whom. The guards had brought the young man in
only last night, but they acted as if they had cap
tured a rare prize. They had strutted and pranced
around him while gleefully detailing what they in
tended to do to him. His response hadn't been what
they'd expected.
"They took a young man out of here a short time
ago," Burke said now.
The woman approached him with conidence and
not an ounce of fear. It did not intimidate her a bit to
have to tilt her head back to gaze up at him, his
height close to six feet.
"Do you know where he was taken, and is he all
right?"
"He's a strong one for a skinny kid," Burke said.
"Though I think it was spitting in the jailer's face
that did him in."
The woman grinned. "That's Malcolm."
"I'm not sure where he is, but after he was dragged
out by several guards, I heard a door slam not far
off and the clink of a key in a lock."
"The cells at the end of the tunnel," Tanin said
and handed her the keys.
The woman eyed the prisoners ready to leave.
"There's no time to waste. Get them out of here."
Burke was shocked that the tall man turned and
did as he was told. How the hell could he leave the
small wisp of a woman on her own to free one of
their comrades?
I'll help you," Burke offered.
"No. You'll go with them."
She gave him a shove that he didn't appreciate,
and it only served to make him stand his ground.
"You'll need help," he insisted.
"Not likely," she said, sounding affronted. "It's
none of your concern. Now go."
She dismissed him with the turn of her back and
took off past the prisoners who were standing in a
single ile, eager to make their escape.
Tanin waved for him to take up the rear and he
did, though reluctantly. He just couldn't believe all
ive men would allow a single, peasized woman to
go off on her own to rescue a man. Where was their
common sense?
Burke reminded himself that Scotland was far dif
ferent from America. Sure there were strong women
in America, especially in the Dakota Territory, where
he came from, but a man protected a woman. He was
stronger and more capable, and it was a man's duty
to look after women. Hadn't his father taught him
that? And wasn't his deceased father the reason he
was here in this mess in the irst place?
He shook his head as they quietly made their way
down the passageway, a single torch guiding their
way.
A clang of steel had them freezing in their tracks,
and Tanin ordered everyone to hurry. Burke glanced
back and spotted where the passageway veered off
into a darkened tunnel.
He had only a moment to make his decision, but
it was an easy one. There was no way he'd leave that
woman on her own, whether she liked it or not.
Burke could barely make out where he was going.
His broad shoulders bumped into the narrow tun
nel walls now and again, and dust collected in his
nostrils from the dry dirt his boots kicked up.
He wondered why he hadn't collided with the
woman yet. She hadn't had that much of a head
start on him. And with it being so dark, she couldn't
possibly have traveled that fast.
The whining screech of rusty hinges stopped him
dead. A clang of chains, mufled voices, and then
suddenly hasty footfalls approached from the op
posite direction.
Burke readied himself, intending to take the per
son down and ind out his identity later. He waited
in the dark, listening, judging the distance, and
when the time was right . . .
His arm shot out and the man crumpled to the
ground, probably not knowing what had hit him.
In an instant, the woman was in his face, her blue
eyes the color of a gale storm that would put fear in
the staunchest of sailors.
"I gave you orders," she snapped.
Burke was good at giving orders, not taking
them, and certainly not from this wee wisp of a
woman.
"I thought you might need my help - and I was
right." He leaned down, grabbed the dirk in the
guard's waistband, and held it in front of her face.
"You thought wrong. I would have handled him."
She shoved him aside. "We need to get out of here
now."
The narrow passageway afforded little room, and
in stepping over the unconscious man, she all but
melded with Burke to brush past him. He felt her
sleek frame coil, tense, and move off, all in a split
second.
She once again issued orders.
"Malcolm, stay behind him. And you - " She
jabbed at Burke's chest. "Do as I say."
Malcolm leaned into him. "Do what Storm says.
Believe me, you don't want her mad at you."
Her name certainly it her, but then he had weath
ered enough storms in his life. This little tempest
wouldn't intimidate him.
"Make another mistake, stranger, and you're
dead," she warned as if making a casual remark.
"Let's go."
Malcolm nudged him this time. "Storm takes get
ting used to."
You could say that again, Burke thought. Sand
wiched between the pair, he easily kept pace with
them. He followed her sure-footed steps without
complaint since he had no idea how to get out of
there, and he didn't intend to be left behind.
They came upon a dimly lit passageway and
made their way to a light of steps, then up a circu
lar stone staircase and out into the dusky night.
Pungent pine and crisp autumn air greeted him,
and with a deep breath, he drank greedily of free
dom. He caught that breath when stung by the
warning in Storm's eyes for silence.
She signaled them to follow, reminding him once
again to be silent before she crept cautiously against
the stone wall of the prison.
Burke followed and as they came to the edge of the
corner, he caught sight of the last of the prisoners
disappearing into the woods a few feet away. Tanin
gave a signal, then merged with the thick trees.
Storm stepped forward, just as a guard came into
sight. While the young guard fumbled for his
sword, Burke reacted instinctively, pouncing on
him with a solid blow to his jaw that knocked him
out cold. He turned to grab Storm's arm and head
for the cover of the trees but she sidestepped him.
"Get him out of here, Malcolm, before I run my
blade through him," Storm said, pointing her sword
at Burke.
"Let's go," Malcolm said, grabbing his arm.
Burke yanked his arm free, and before he could
say a word, he felt the point of a blade at his neck.
"I'll not warn you again about following my or
ders. Go with Malcolm or feel my sword. The choice
is yours."
"You certainly don't respond well to a helping
hand."
She pressed the sword to his neck, not enough to
draw blood, but to warn that she meant business.
"Fine," Burke said through gritted teeth.
She withdrew the blade, and Burke, swearing be
neath his breath, followed Malcolm.

Chapter 2

Storm couldn't wait to get rid of the American.
He had done nothing but interfere with her
carefully laid plans. She could tell that he wasn't
used to following orders and that he could handle
himself in a dificult situation. However, this was
her command, her battle, her land.
Which was why, at the irst possible chance, she
would leave him somewhere safe enough, but she
wanted to be rid of him. She couldn't take the chance
of his messing things up any more than he already
had.
She did wonder why he had been imprisoned, but
then it didn't take much of an accusation to be in
carcerated. He had probably been in the wrong
place at the wrong time or he didn't have enough
money to pay the bribe on trumped-up charges. Ei
ther way, it was not her concern.
He glanced back at her from where he walked a
few feet ahead. He had done that from time to time,
almost as if he watched out for her. She needed no
one doing that. She was more than capable of look
ing after herself.
She did have to give him credit for keeping up the
tough pace she had set for the group throughout the
night. He looked sturdy enough, muscled arms and
thighs attested to his strength. His dark trousers were
torn at the knee and his white shirt ripped at the
shoulder. Dark brown eyes were set in a rugged face
marred by a few cuts and bruises and covered with
dirt and sweat. His unkempt brown hair brushed his
shoulders, and she had noticed that his hand had
drifted often to his side - a common gesture for a
man used to having a weapon strapped to his leg.
He looked back again and held her glance. There
was determination and annoyance in his brown
eyes, which suddenly widened as he rushed at her.
She mumbled an oath as her foot caught on an
exposed tree root and she tumbled forward.

</text>
