<text id="P12" category="" words="2017" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Her Office and Gentleman. HarperCollins Publishers Inc. " Author="Karen Hawkins" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="End" WebAddress="/">

The duke scowled, the old man's gaze slipping
to find his granddaughter, lying so quietly in
Christian's arms. Something in the old duke's
gaze softened and, after a long moment, he nod-
ded slowly.
"It is time for everything to be brought
into the open. I will welcome an inquiry."
"What will happen to Charlotte?" Beth asked,
turning to look at her grandfather.
"If we are permitted, I will ask that she be sent
away where she cannot hurt anyone again." The
duke's expression crumbled. "Beth, I'm so sorry - 
it's my damnable pride. I wanted to protect our
name. In the end, I didn't protect anyone."
"We all fight pride," Christian said. "I fear very
little else has been driving me." He brushed a
tear from Beth's cheek. "I am sorry about Lord
Bennington."
"He is fortunate to be alive. He was a fool to
think Charlotte would ever be well enough to re-
turn his regard."
Beth sighed. "He really did love her, didn't he?"
"Too well," Grandfather said.
Christian brushed the hair back from her fore-
head. "Beth, I am sorry."
Her brown eyes fixed on him. "For what?"
"I have been a fool. I thought the most impor-
tant thing in my life was finding who was respon-
sible for my mother's death. Now, I realize what is
really important is you."
Her breath caught in her throat. Beth blinked
up into the face of the man she loved more than
life itself. "You love me."
"Desperately. Madly. To distraction and back.
And when we are wed, I will love you even more."
"But . . . your mother - "
He sighed. "I know what happened to my
mother. Sadly, it does not change her fate. But
what I do know changes mine. I am through with
the past. You are my future. You and the love we
share and the children we will have. That is all I
want now. All I'll ever want."
Beth couldn't say a word. She simply reached
up and drew him to her, gulping a sob into the
crook of his neck as she held him tightly.
Behind them, Grandfather sniffed loudly.
"They make a lovely couple, my lord," Jame-
son said, fishing in his pocket for a clean hand-
kerchief. He found one and handed it to the
duke.
"Indeed they do," the duke said, blowing his
nose rather loudly. "They will be even lovelier
once they're properly married!"
Beth caught her breath and peeped up at Chris-
tian, wiping her eyes with a ragged sleeve. "I
need a bath."
He chuckled. "You smell of smoke, as do I."
The duke turned, leaning heavily on his cane.
"Jameson, open the carriage door. We shall return
to the house."
Beth smiled up at Christian. "Shall we adjourn
to the house to get some ointment for your hands
and a bath, my love?"
His eyes lit. "A bath?"
Grandfather snorted. "Someone send to Lon-
don for a special license! Now." He allowed the
butler to assist him into the coach and sent every-
one scurrying to find a blanket for Lady Elizabeth.
"Indeed," Christian said. "I would like to marry
tomorrow morning, if possible."
Beth blinked. "Tomorrow morning?"
"Is that too soon? How about tomorrow after-
noon, then? I shall send to London and have
Reeves bring the necessary clothing." He twin-
kled down at her. "I really must introduce you to
Reeves."
She paused. "Your butler?"
"The one and only." Christian stood, then
reached down and lifted his lady love in his arms,
silencing her protests with a hard kiss. "My father
sent him out to civilize the lost sons he'd ne-
glected, but damn me if all I've seen him do is
marry us off."
"Oh dear, how dreadful!"
Christian smiled down into Beth's eyes as he
carried her to the waiting carriage. "If this is
dreadful, then I want more of it." He gently set
her on the seat of the carriage. "Much, much
more!"

Epilogue

Ah, the joys of wash day! When all the dirt and
horror of the previous week is set to rights, all
with a tub of water and the fresh scent of soap!
A Compleat Guide for
Being a Most Proper Butler
by Richard Robert Reeves
"You requested more brandy, my lord?"
Christian turned from the desk. "Yes. The de-
canter is dry."
Reeves brought a new decanter and set it on the
table. "That is my fault, my lord. You don't empty
it as often as you used to and I am off schedule."
Christian laced his hands behind his head and
leaned back in his chair. "Well, Reeves. It has been
an adventure, has it not?"
"Quite, my lord. Are you satisfied with the out-
come of events?"
Christian grinned. "I am wed to the most beau-
tiful of women. What could I regret?"
"What will happen to Lady Charlotte now?"
"She has been assigned to Bedlam. The duke is
paying a fortune to keep her in comfort there, but
she is secure. She will harm no others."
"I am sorry your adventure was such a painful
experience."
"Me, too. But sometimes one must travel the
rough road to reach one's ultimate destination. I
found my mother's killer and brought her to jus-
tice of a sort. But more importantly, I learned that
my future - and Beth - are more important than
any past I might have had."
"Certainly, my lord," Reeves said. "That is a
very important lesson, indeed." He picked up the
old decanter and placed it on the tray. "Will there
be anything else?"
Christian sighed. "You aren't going to say any-
thing, are you?"
"My lord?"
Christian stood and held his arms out to his
sides. "My clothes."
Reeves looked Christian up and down. "Some-
thing is wrong, my lord."
"Wrong?"
"You aren't wearing black."
Christian grinned. He had donned a brightly
white cravat and shirt. His waistcoat was of deep
red damask. "Do you like it? I am wearing it for
my meeting with the trustees. They are to sign
over the fortune today."
"You look dapper, my lord. I must immediately
congratulate the viscountess on her excellent taste
in waistcoats. You are indeed a fortunate man. Not
only is she a lovely woman, with an amiable dis-
position and an exceptional share of intelligence,
but she dresses you far better than you ever dressed
yourself."
Christian sighed. "Must you do that? Steal all
the glory from my days?"
"Not for long, my lord," Reeves said, smiling.
"I regret to inform you that I must be leaving
soon."
Christian's smile faded. "But . . . why?"
"Between starching your cravats and assisting
you in discovering the errors of your ways, I have
been writing a book."
"A book? On what?"
"How to be a proper butler."
Christian sighed. "I was just a research project
to you, wasn't I?"
Reeves's lips twitched. "I shall dedicate the
book to you and your brother, my lord. I must say,
I have never served two more worthy men."
"Thank you. I am certain my brother will thank
you even more than I."
"Why don't you ask him yourself, my lord?"
Christian paused. "Tristan? He's - "
"The earl and countess are in the sitting room. I
saw their carriage as I was bringing you the de-
canter."
Christian was halfway out the door.
"My lord?" Reeves called after him. "Your
coat - "
But Christian didn't slow down a step. He raced
down the steps and burst into the sitting room.
Tristan stood leaning against the mantelpiece, a
cane in one hand. Tall and broad shouldered, as
blond as Christian was dark, Tristan's face bore the
imprint of the sea upon his tanned face.
His lovely wife, Prudence, sat beside Beth on a
settee.
Beth stood as Christian came to a halt in the
middle of the room. "There you are!" she said,
coming toward him. "I was just meeting your
brother and his countess!"
Christian slipped his arm about Beth. Dressed
in a lovely gown of wine red silk, her blonde hair
luminescent in the sunlight streaming from the
window, the sight of her warmed him head to toe.
"I didn't know we had visitors."
"Which must be why you arrived half dressed,"
his brother said. His deep voice, used to shouting
orders from the deck of a ship over the roar of the
ocean, rumbled noisily. "I never thought I'd see
the day when I'd outdress you, but here it is."
Christian grinned. "Here it is! What brings you
here, you old hellion?"
Tristan drew himself up to his full height. He
was far broader across the shoulders than Chris-
tian, of a heavier frame. "Chris, Prudence and I
came to visit for two reasons."
A delightful color brushed Prudence's cheeks.
"Mainly we came to meet your new bride."
"Yes," Tristan said, pride glowing on his face.
"We also came to inform you that you are about to
gain a new title. That of 'uncle.' "
"An uncle?" Christian looked from his brother,
to his sister-in-law. "But . . . how?"
Prudence laughed, Beth chiming in.
Tristan shook his head ruefully. "I will explain
it to you later."
"No, no! I didn't mean that! I just - when did
this happen? How long have you known?"
"We just discovered it," Prudence said. She sent
a loving glance at her husband. "I hope it is the
first of many."
Tristan reached over and took her hand in his,
pressing a kiss to the back of it. "We shall have an
entire ship full, should it please you, my love."
"One crew member at a time, please," Pru-
dence said archly, her soft brown eyes twinkling
up at her husband.
Christian released Beth long enough to cross to
his brother and envelop the scoundrel in a hearty
hug. "What a wonderful thing!"
Tristan hugged him back, pounding his back
solidly. "You have been married a week or two
now. When will you and your lovely viscountess
grace us with the same news?"
Children? Christian turned to look at Beth. "One
day, perhaps. But for now, I want my wife all to my-
self."
Beth's eyes twinkled at him. "You shall have
me, my love."
Tristan returned to the settee where Prudence
sat, and settled beside her, capturing her hand
and pressing a kiss to her fingers. "Christian, I am
happy to report that the House for Retired Sailors
has grown." He looked at Beth. "Your husband is
something of a philanthropist."
"Yes, he is," Prudence said, smiling sweetly.
"There are over seventy men housed there now."
"It would not be possible without you, Chris-
tian," Tristan said.
Christian shrugged. "All I do is send a bank
draft every quarter. You and Prudence do all of
the work."
Beth slipped an arm about Christian's waist,
leaning against him. "I had no idea you were a
philanthropist, my love."
"Lord Westerville." Everyone turned to find
Reeves standing in the doorway, a coat in his hand.
"You forgot a part of your raiment."
"Oh no," Beth said. "You have wounded Reeves's
sensibilities."
"Yes, my lady. My sensibilities are indeed
wounded." Reeves came forward and assisted
Christian into the coat. He gave the coat a final
smoothing across one shoulder, stood back, then
nodded. "Excellent. I feel better already. My lady,
you have had a very positive influence over Lord
Westerville. He has left the morbid world of Only
Black behind and now embraces other colors of
the spectrum."
Beth peeped up at Christian, a flash of a dimple
tempting him to drop a kiss on her forehead. "I
hope he is ready for my influence for many more
years," she murmured.
Christian held her closer. "You influence my
every breath, my love. And always will."
"Enough of that!" Tristan draped an arm around
his wife. "Reeves, you have performed magic."
Reeves smiled at both couples. "The old earl
would have been pleased."
Christian tilted Beth's face to his. Ever so gent-
ly, he placed a kiss on her soft lips. Magic was
what it was; the best kind of magic - true love.

</text>
