<text id="P15" category="" words="2006" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Angel In My Bed. HarperCollins Publishers Inc." Author="Melody Thomas" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="/">

Movement in the doorway turned his head. Pamela stood
next to the silk screen watching him. Her gown was a deep
crimson with a full sweeping skirt and low décolletage
trimmed with creamy lace. Tendrils of her blond hair curled
around her shoulders.
He felt the glide of her eyes, and if his reaction was any-
thing less than any other male's, she didn't appear shocked.
"Your dressing room door was open," she said.
David stepped out of the hip tub, sloshing water to the
floor. "The door wasn't open."
"It was unlocked." Her gaze shot back to his as he walked
toward her. "I had a key?" She dangled a metal object in her
hand.
"Convenient." David snatched the key from her hand.
"For your information I knocked," she said, as he reached
over her shoulder and yanked the robe he'd draped across the
screen. "You weren't answering the door. I was worried. Es-
pecially after everything that has happened. I wasn't expect-
ing you to be here."
David slid on his robe. "Where have you been since yes-
terday?"
"Is there a rule that requires me to spend the night here?"
"Don't even ask me to begin to understand that answer.
Ian was worried about you. I told him I would check in on
you."
"The local magistrate is here," she said, folding her arms.
"He's asking questions about you. I believe he is on his way
to London with the intent to find evidence that will declare
you a fraud. Especially after he was refused admittance to
Rose Briar an hour ago. Something about your orders?"
He belted the tie around his waist. "Is that all?"
"Do you want more?" Flashing him a smile that was part
coquette and part street doxy, she nodded to the tiny bite
mark on his neck. "Though I see someone has already been
inside your clothes."
His eyes hard, he trapped her gaze. Despite everything she
projected, he knew some of it was an act. He just never knew
for sure which part. "Do you fancy yourself the whore,
Pamela? Or are you so used to the part you play that you no
longer know the difference?"
David stepped past her into his room. She leaned a shoul-
der against the doorway as he passed. "Even after all of your
reassurances to Ian and me, you're still in love with her,
aren't you?"
His hand shaking slightly, he withdrew a crystal decanter
of whiskey from the sideboard, as if alcohol could burn away
his thoughts. "Love has nothing to do with what is between
Meg and me."
"Then you're in lust. For most men, I'd say there is no dif-
ference. But not you." She approached in a whisper of crim-
son silk. "Have you considered she's not the same woman
she used to be?"
"People don't change that much."
"You did." She flicked a long scarlet nail at his robe. "You
once had no qualms about killing a man in cold blood. From
what I understand, yours was the shot that took out the
treacherous grandson of the Prussian archduke in Munich.
How many years ago? Thirteen? Fourteen? What a scandal
you caused in the international community," she prodded
sweetly. "The identity of that assassin still remains a secret."
David didn't question how she would know that manner of
confidential information. "Obviously not."
"If there was any job dark and dirty to be done, they called
you. How old would you have been when you fired that shot?"
He'd been twenty-two when he'd pulled that trigger and
ended the conspiracy to assassinate the queen. Twenty-four
by the time his reputation made him one the most sought af-
ter agents in the service. Twenty-six when he met Margaret
Faraday.
He'd seen her the first time on a polo field at the British con-
sulate in Calcutta. The beginning of the end to his way of life.
His sin and his salvation.
His curse.
"I'll be away for a week or so." He sloshed whiskey into a
glass. "Maybe longer."
"Now? You're leaving now?"
"I have personal business to attend." Without offering her
a glass, David peered at her over the rim as he drank. "You're
our liaison with Kinley. While I'm gone, I want you to find
out where Faraday has been living for the past nine years,
who was paying the cost and how many of his former cronies
are still alive."
"Why?"
"Oh, I don't know, Pamela," he said facetiously, aware of
his sarcasm and the mood driving at him. He was impatient
to be on the road. "Maybe it has something to do with the fact
that someone may have tried to kill me and shot Faraday's
daughter instead."
"What makes you think you might have been the target?"
"She was wearing my cloak." David studied the bottom of
the glass. "Why would someone shoot the one person sus-
pected of knowing where a fortune in jewels and gold is hid-
den?" He set down the glass. "Even if shooting someone at
six hundred yards was Faraday's modus operandi, after nine
years in prison he would be fortunate if he could hit the
broadside of a barn at twenty feet."
"There are only a handful of men in England who could
make that shot." She smiled temperately. "Since your where-
abouts could be accounted for, maybe less than a handful."
David shut the cabinet door none too gently. It was never
easy to keep his patience with Pamela, and he sometimes won-
dered why she provoked him so, as if she always had something
to prove, especially when he was sharing the same assignment
with her husband. He walked to the bedroom door and swung it
wide. "I don't intend to be gone long," he drawled.
She stopped in the doorway. "You still haven't explained
why you are you leaving."
"I have a son, Pamela. Now" - ignoring the knot in his
stomach, he offered her an indulgent smile, inviting her to
leave - "for my safety, go."
"A son? I see," she said after a moment. "I'm sorry, David."
"For what? It isn't your fault that no one knew."
"What shall I tell Mr. Munro about you? He isn't happy that
you have seen fit to steal Rose Briar out from beneath him, and
now you have barred him from seeing Lady Munro. I warned
you when you came here that you needed to be careful of him."
"Usher Nellis out the door." He started to turn then hesi-
tated. "Then after you have finished contacting Kinley, do a
little background investigation on the magistrate while he is
in London. I want the history on Rose Briar and why he
wants that property so badly."

Chapter 13

"Good gracious, child." Esma met Victoria as she
entered the kitchen and put a hand to her cheek.
"You're still feverish. It's only been a week. What are you do-
ing out of bed?"
"Determined to remain on my feet." Victoria set Zeus on a
chair and watched the cat dart straight for the bowl of cream
on the floor. "Sir Henry isn't in his room."
"He is in the herbal, mum."
Victoria accepted a cup of hot tea. She disposed herself as
comfortably as possible on a stool and watched Esma begin
cutting carrots for supper. "Has Sir Henry spoken to you
since last night?"
Esma shook her head. "He has kept to himself since Lord
Chadwick left to fetch Nathanial."
Victoria hurt, and the ache had nothing to do with her in-
jury. David had sent no messages. Despite her want to push
him out of her head, his absence as much as her concern for
her son's welfare kept her awake when she'd needed to rest.
Sir Henry had continued to care for her wound, though he
had shut himself away from the deeper one in her heart.
She loved Sir Henry like the father she'd never had. He
was the only grandfather Nathanial would ever know. She
had no right to ask for his forgiveness, but he'd had a right to
know the truth no matter the cost to herself.
When he had come to change her dressing yesterday, she
could no longer bear the lie. She told him about her marriage
to David in Calcutta ten years ago, from whom she had been
running when she'd left India and met Scott Munro's widow.
She could find no words to express her sorrow for the hurt
she had caused.
Yesterday had been the first time since her mother had left
her that she opened herself so completely to another human
being. How much of that honesty Sir Henry would choose to
share with the world was up to him. It was enough that people
would learn that Nathanial was David's son.
This morning she had risen to change her own bandages.
Laughter outside diverted Victoria's attention to the win-
dow. Mr. Rockwell and Bethany were in the yard with the
mare Bethany had been nursing back to health, just as she
had been caring for Victoria.
Frowning, she set her teacup onto the saucer. Other than a
dimple on his cheek, Ian Rockwell, Foreign Service agent,
had nothing to recommend to a sunny seventeen-year-old.
"He has done nothing untoward, mum," Esma said, read-
ing her mind as if she had spoken her doubts aloud. "My
William told me Mr. Rockwell knows about horses, and that
girl loves that horse."
"Bethany should be with other young people her age."
She should have a new dress every once in a while and at-
tend teas and other social functions that allowed her to meet
nice boys.
"And when might that be, mum?" Esma scraped the car-
rots into a pan of water. "She hasn't said another word about
the Yule soirée this year. She knows we cannot afford fabric
for a new gown. But it's a shame you'd not ask Lord Chad-
wick to sponsor her."
"I can't do that, Esma."
"It's not my place to ask what has happened between you
and Sir Henry and His Lordship. Maybe Lord Chadwick's
coming here has not been such a good thing. It is a shame to
be sure. I like that young man." Her housekeeper changed the
topic. "But since he did open up the manor house, you should
speak to Lydia Gibson about returning to Rose Briar. The
household doesn't have anyone cooking for them."
"They did, until you insulted the cook yesterday."
Esma waggled the knife in her hands. "If you count boiled
chicken a meal. Those men up there need nourishment and I
can't be leaving here to feed them."
"Mrs. Gibson is caring for Mr. Doyle - "
"Mr. Doyle will be over the moon if you asked him to ready
the bulbs in the orangery for spring planting. There's many of
us what would be mighty beholdin' to His Lordship to see
Rose Briar come alive again like it used to be around here in
spring. It would do all of us good, including you, mum."
Except David's purchase of Rose Briar meant nothing to
him. Looking down at the cup in her hand, she absently
touched a chip on the once-flawless ivory porcelain. How
could she explain to Esma who David really was and his pur-
pose here? She could not even tell Esma if David planned to
return Nathanial or that she would not even be here come
spring. People should not ask impossible things of her.
Esma quit chopping and set both hands on the wooden
block. "None of us ever asked what ye were runnin' from all
those years ago, because some things don't need to be talked
about. But you've been here a long time, and we are family
now. If ye wish to talk, not a word of it will ever leave my lips."
"You and William have always been so good to me, Esma.
But I fear this is something I must figure out how to fix my-
self.

</text>
