<text id="P17" category="" words="2005" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Marriage Spell" Author="Mary Jo Putney" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="/">

The prospect of going up to town alone presented one small, cowardly instant of relief. Life would be
much simpler if he didn't have to explain a wizardly wife.
But much greater were his regret and shame. He liked having Abby nearby, even though he'd been
keeping his distance.
And in the midst of a serious discussion, he was having trouble not thinking about the night they had
shared in this bed, and how warm and sensually responsive she had been. If he leaned forward...
Focus. He needed to overcome his cowardice and talk to his wife. "I don't want to go to London by
myself. I want to go with you." He grimaced. "I've been behaving badly. The problem isn't you, it's me."
"Of course it's you," she said, unimpressed by his willingness to take the blame. "We were getting on
rather well, I thought, until you kissed me and sensed the energy flow around us. You have magic, but the
merest suggestion of that sent you running like a fox fleeing a pack of hounds. I don't know how long you
can hide from this side of your nature, but not much longer, I suspect."
"No!" You have magic. Just hearing the words made his stomach knot. "I'm no wizard. Once I had
some interest in such matters, as boys do. Perhaps I even have a little power, since you claim to have
used it during the healing. But I lost all interest in magic at school. I want nothing to do with it."
"Lost interest or were bespelled?" Her expression was grave and perhaps pitying. "Your reaction to
the thought of having power is so fierce, so different from your usual temperament, that I have to wonder
if a spell was cast to make you hate your magical nature. Did Stonebridge cast such spells to ensure that
its students would walk the path their parents chose for them?" She paused for emphasis. "If so, do you
want to live your life controlled by what others wanted for you?"
Panic washed through him, flooding his common sense. Panic so great that underneath, the small part
of him that was still rational wondered at its intensity. Abby had said nothing that should frighten him - 
unless she was right and someone had tied knots in his mind.
He managed to choke out, "You're only guessing that someone put a spell on me. You can't know for
sure. I bear the strongest anti-magic spell known on my own flesh."
Abby's dark brows arched. "There is no spell strong enough to block a wizard of my strength for long
if I truly wanted to break through, but I have not done so. It would be very bad manners."
And a betrayal so great as to end any chance they might have had at a real marriage. Thank God she
was wise enough to know this, or their marriage was already doomed.
But he wanted a real marriage, and despite his fear, he wondered if she might be right about the spell.
"If I were to grant you permission to explore my mind, how do I know that you won't plant a spell of
your own?"
Her full lips tightened. "You would have to trust me. I suppose that is asking too much, given that we
are still more strangers than not. But there is another way. You can explore your own mind. Now that I'
ve told you that you might be the victim of a suppression spell, you might be able to find it on your own."
He frowned. Though he would rather not have his mind invaded, he doubted that he would find
anything there that he hadn't noticed for the last twenty years. "Even if I could find evidence of a
suppression spell, what could I do about it?"
"It is an offense against nature for a spell to block a person's deepest self," she said slowly. "Even the
most powerful wizard has trouble creating a suppression spell that can last indefinitely. I doubt you could
have been controlled in that way if you hadn't been a boy when the spell was laid on you. You grew up
not realizing that a vital aspect of your spirit had been suppressed. Now you are a man. If you look
inward and find such an unnatural barrier, you might be able to break it down. Or if you give me
permission, I could help you do so."
He did trust Abby, he realized. More than he trusted Colonel Stark, who had wielded discipline at the
Stonebridge Academy with such unholy satisfaction. But..."I don't want someone else poking around
inside my mind. Even you."
"I understand." Her voice was gentle. "Are you sufficiently offended by what was done to you that you
will look for yourself?"
Even the thought of probing his mind for alien magic caused another spike of panic. Which meant, he
realized, that he had no choice but to look inward, no matter how painful the process. "More than
sufficiently offended. But how does one study one's own mind?"
"Imagine some kind of scene," she replied. "Perhaps a place you know and find comfortable. A
meadow, a familiar house, perhaps how you imagine life would be if you were a fish under the sea."
"A fish?" he asked, temporarily sidetracked.
She smiled. "What you choose is only a metaphor. Move through the scene in your imagination, and if
something feels wrong, look closer."
That seemed simple enough. What to imagine?
For some reason, his thoughts went to a beech wood on the estate of a friend he'd visited several
times in the Cotswold. Beeches didn't grow in Yorkshire, and he had been fascinated by the dense
canopy of leaves that blocked most sunlight. Because of the deep shade, few plants grew and the floor
beneath the beeches was layered with a thick, yielding carpet of fallen leaves.
The peace and mystery of the beech wood had made a lasting impression. Sometimes he'd dreamed
of it in Spain, on the eve of battle. Closing his eyes, he imagined himself among the massive trees. All was
as he remembered, at first. If the beech wood represented his mind, he was comfortable in it. And he
walked without pain, without crutches or canes.
Then he felt a tug of wrongness. Frowning, he followed the feeling. The majestic trees gave way to
crooked saplings that were jammed together unhealthily. The trunks were as close as fence railings - as if
they had been designed to conceal.
Wondering if a spell might be hidden in this dark corner of his beech wood, he forced his way
between the crooked saplings, shouldering trunks aside by sheer force when necessary. He would not
have been able to make his way through real trees, but his imaginary world had the qualities of a dream
even though he was awake.
The farther he penetrated into the rank, unhealthy woods, the colder the air, the harder it was to
breathe, and the greater his fear. By now it was clear that Abby was right. The fear was artificial, created
by something outside himself. That didn't mean that he didn't feel looming terror, but he refused to let
himself be affected by it.
Impatient at his lack of progress, he swung his arm and knocked all the trees in front of him to one
side. They fell with splintering crashes to reveal a pair of iron doors set into a steep hillside. The doors
were circular, as if concealing the mouth of a cave. He recognized deep wrongness. With sudden fierce
certainty, he knew that this portal was the source of the blind panic that throbbed through him like a
mortal injury, urging him to flee for the sake of his sanity.
Clenching his teeth against the panic, he studied the pattern embossed on the doors. The design was
elusive, an ever-shifting matrix of shadows and sinuous lines, mysterious and seductive.
Dizzily he recognized that the pattern was sucking him down like a whirlpool. As he fell into the design,
he sensed horrors waiting on the other side of the door.
Swearing, he shook his head and looked away, knowing that if he continued to look into the pattern he
would lose all will and determination.
Abby. The mere thought of her steadied him. As the vertigo faded, he realized that if he'd ever
accidentally found these doors, that sorcerous pattern would have pulled him down into paralysis.
Perhaps he had been here over and over, and each time the memories had been wiped from his mind.
But this time he had been warned, and he would not lose himself to a wizard's spell. Not here, not in
the middle of his own soul.
Eyes averted, he reached out and flattened his left palm on the iron door. The jangling energy was
deeply unpleasant, but he forced himself to maintain the contact while he analyzed what messages the
door held.
This door - this spell - had been cast at Stonebridge, he realized, and by none other than Colonel
Stark himself, with the assistance of his second in command. The old devil had set up a school to
suppress wizardry while being a wizard himself!
Deep in the metal, he felt an echo of the colonel's torment. Magically gifted, the man had grown up
loathing himself. Ironically, the one way he had been free to use his magic was as a tool to cripple the
power of the young boys placed in his care.
Jack could almost feel sorry for him. Almost, but not quite.
Are you sufficiently offended? Abby had sent him into the darkness of his own mind to seek
wrongness, and he had found it. Was she also right that he might be able to destroy the spell himself
because his magical nature yearned to be free? What would be strong enough to break down these iron
doors?
Anger. Deliberately he reached deep into himself to find rage.
He had learned early to let go of anger because it did him no good, but now he collected all the
suppressed furies of his life. He harvested the baffled misery of the times his father beat him for no
reason. The rage engraved on his soul by the cold menace of Stonebridge Academy, and the torments
inflicted by the most twisted of the prefects. The anguish of a small boy being punished unjustly, and his
towering rage when he'd cursed God for allowing good men to die meaninglessly.
When he had gathered his life's burden of fury and outrage, he laid both hands on the doors and let his
emotions blaze through his palms like Greek fire. The doors exploded, white-hot shards flying in all
directions.
He barely noticed the shattered fragments of the spell because they were trivial compared to the
energy that blasted loose from the bonds that had trapped it so long. He staggered back under the
cascading power, feeling as if his skin was being seared away.
His left shoulder burned like the fires of Hades, worse than the time a musket ball went through his
upper arm. He clawed at the pain frantically, yet pain was matched by wild exultation. A hole in his soul
he hadn't known existed was being filled.
He felt as if he were too close to an exploding shell. He was in the heart of a whirlwind, tumbling
frighteningly free, uncertain where he would land. Or how hard he would hit.
Ka-bang! He smashed into a hard surface with an impact that jarred his bones. Dizzily he wondered if
the fall was real or in his mind.
"Jack!" a voice called. "Jack!"
Abby's voice. He blinked his eyes open, and found himself flat on his back on the cold floor. His wife
knelt beside him, her expression shaken. "Abby?"
"Are you all right?" She began to skim her hands several inches above his body. "I felt your energy
shift. Then you began flailing about and fell off the bed.

</text>
