<text id="P25" category="" words="2014" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Dangerous Lover" Author="Maggie Shayne" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="/">

He licked his lips, tried again. "I prefer to feel like I'm pulling my weight. Doing my share."
"Good. I'll let you wait on me later."
"Couldn't we both just sort of - wait on ourselves?"
She blinked and tilted her head to one side, almost as if his words didn't compute. Then she shrugged. "I
was going to offer to shave you. Always wanted to try that. But um...you go ahead. Wait on yourself. Be
quick, though. I'll have breakfast on the table in five minutes."
"Okay." So much for not waiting on him. Hell. He wondered why it bothered him so much and decided it
probably was a clue to his personality. He must be an independent prick. Who else would be ungrateful
for this kind of attention from a woman who looked like this one?
He made quick work of washing up, ran the razor over his face, and brushed his teeth. Then he toweled
down, dressed and joined her in the kitchen, where she'd filled his plate and poured his coffee.
"Taste," she said, nodding at the cup.
He tasted, grimaced. "Needs cream."
Smiling, she leaned over him, breast brushing his shoulder, and poured creamer into his mug.
"Gas-powered fridge. Everything was just stocked last week, Tessa said, so - there, try it now."
He sipped again, nodded. "Good. Perfect." She was acting like a wife. A newly minted,
fresh-from-the-altar bride. And it was chafing him under the collar like an overly starched shirt.
His plate had three strips of bacon, two eggs over easy, some golden-brown buttered toast. He reached
for the salt shaker, and she beat him to it, grabbing it first and handing it to him.
Instead of taking it, he stared up at her. "Selene?"
"Yeah?"
"Sit down and eat your breakfast."
She blinked, then averted her eyes and looked a little sheepish. "Sorry," she said, sinking into her own
chair. "I'm the youngest in my family. Everyone tends to try to take care of me, you know? I guess the
opportunity to take care of someone else for a change is a little too much fun."
He thought there was more to it than that, but he didn't say so. "It's not that I don't appreciate it."
"No, I know that. You just need more time to get used to it."
The comment took him aback, but he chose to ignore it, and instead dug into the meal.
"Good?" she asked when his plate was half empty.
"Great. The bacon's a little...different."
"That's because it's not bacon. It's Fakin' Bacon. One hundred percent meat-free. Hard to tell the
difference, huh?"
He frowned at her, and took another bite of the food in question, chewed and swallowed. "That's not
meat?"
"Nope. Good isn't it? Tessa's a vegan. I figured there had to be a few vegan-friendly foods here."
"Does that mean she has pointy ears and no emotions?"
"No. It means she's a vegetarian like me, but one who not only doesn't eat meat, but any other animal
products. Like dairy and eggs and honey."
"Wow, that's extreme." He took another bite of the phony bacon. "It's pretty damn good. Better than I
would have expected."
"Even better when you consider that no animals had to die to provide us with it, and that it's only got a
tenth of the fat and calories, and no cholesterol at all."
"Healthy as hell, huh? So how come you're not eating any?"
"Because I prefer oatmeal." She nodded at own plate and bowl. The bowl held oatmeal, and the plate,
half a slice of toast. She was eating the other half, with jelly on it.
"So do you have a plan for the day?" he asked her.
"After breakfast, I need to drive to the nearest pay phone. The cell's got basically no signal. I have to let
my mother know where I am, or she'll worry herself sick."
"I'll go with you, if that's okay with you."
She glanced at him. "Of course it is." Then she studied him a moment, and tipped her head to one side.
"You don't trust me, even now, do you?"
"Who said I didn't trust you?"
"You did. Just now. Do you think I'm going to sneak off to meet with whoever's trying to kill you, or that
I'm going to call him and tell him where to find you?"
He licked his lips. "It crossed my mind." Though he realized he was more and more convinced she was
as innocent as she claimed to be. Still, telling her that would be a mistake. At least it gave him a viable
reason to keep her at arm's length.
"Damn. You're a tough nut to crack, aren't you? I wonder if you were always this cynical or if it's just a
side effect of the amnesia."
"Wish I knew."
She shrugged. "Guess time will tell, huh?"
He didn't want to say that he doubted there would be time. Not with her, at least. If he ever remembered
his past, his life, he was pretty sure he would want to get back to it. And she'd pretty much convinced
him that his former life wasn't here in Big Falls, Oklahoma.
He finished his breakfast, and tried not to watch her as she finished hers. But he couldn't help but watch
her. Every time those white teeth closed on a bit of the toast, every time that pink little tongue darted out
to lick the crumbs from her luscious lips, every time her throat moved when she swallowed, his attention
was riveted.
He wondered just how long he'd been without sex, and thought it must be a very long time, if watching a
woman eat toast could get him this hot.
Finally, she leaned back in her chair to sip her coffee. He took the opportunity to jump up and clear the
table. She started to get up, too, and he met her eyes, shook his head sternly. "No way. You sit there. It'
s my turn."
She sank back, smiling softly and watching him as he washed the dishes.
Cory could feel her eyes on him, watching his every move. He hated that he was starting to trust her.
Even to like her. Damn, if he couldn't keep some distance and perspective, he was liable to dig himself
into a hole too deep to get out again. And keeping his distance was going to be damn tough when he fully
intended to have intense, incredible, blood-boiling sex with her. Repeatedly.
Chapter 7
S elene got into the passenger side of her sister's new station wagon, just to see what Cory's reaction
would be. He glanced at her through the window, shrugged his incredible shoulders - Goddess, why
couldn't she stop noticing his body? - and got behind the wheel. Selene had the keys in the switch and
the engine running before he'd even closed his door. She didn't want him taking time to think about it.
And he didn't. He backed the wagon up, shifted into Drive, and eased the car onto the dirt track that
passed for a road, heading back the way they'd come. "You didn't feel like driving?"
She didn't answer right away, just watched him maneuver the car around a smattering of potholes, and
take a hairpin curve with long-practiced ease. "I just wanted to see if you had a license back in your old
life."
As soon as the words were out, he jerked the wheel and the car swerved.
"Knock it off," she said. "You know how to drive. You handle the car like a pro."
He glanced at her, got the vehicle under control with little more than that slight veering off course. "For a
second it hit me that I might not. That was kind of risky, wasn't it? What if I didn't know how to drive? I
could have put us into a ditch."
"If you didn't know how to drive, you would have got behind the wheel and felt awkward and confused.
You wouldn't have just started driving as if it were second nature."
"You sure about that?"
"No. But it seems logical. Besides, I cast a protective ball of energy around the car to keep us safe, just
in case."
He reacted to that remark with a slight raising of his eyebrows, and nothing more. "You're a little bit
impulsive, aren't you?"
She smiled in his direction. Did she dare take that question as a sign he was interested in getting to know
her? "You're just noticing that, huh?"
"It seems to be one of the patterns I see emerging."
"Yeah? You notice any other patterns?"
He nodded. "You're enthusiastic. You're optimistic. And friendly."
"Not bad for a one-night acquaintance."
"I wish I knew as much about me." He reached the bottom of the dirt track, where it spilled onto a
paved road. "Which way?"
"Left. Down to the main road, then right. There's a convenience store with a pay phone about three miles
down."
He took the turn, and drove a bit faster.
"And I think I do know as much about you, you know."
"Yeah? Hell, you've been batting a thousand so far. Go for it."
"Well, I guess I think you're a bit of a...a player."
"A player?" He sounded offended.
"I don't mean that in a bad way."
"I didn't know there was a good way."
She shook her head hard and started over. "Okay, maybe that's the wrong word. What I mean is, you
seem really interested in sex. But completely uninterested in...romance."
"If by romance you mean commitment, I think you might be right."
"I guess that's what I mean. I wonder if you've always been that way."
"I have no idea. But it seems to come pretty naturally."
"You'll get over it, though."
He lifted his brows and stared at her. "I will?"
"Sure. When a person meets his soul mate, all that resistance and fear just melts away."
"It does?"
"Sure it does. You'll see."
He frowned at her, taking his attention off the road.
"There's the store, right there. See the pay phone out front?"
He jerked his attention back to the task at hand and pulled into the store's parking lot, swerving close to
the phone booth. He put the car into Park and shut off the engine, but didn't open the door right away.
Instead he sat there for a minute, staring at his hands on the wheel.
"Something wrong, Cory?"
Lifting his head, he met her eyes, and his were narrow and probing. "Yeah. I just uh, was wondering - 
you seem to be implying that...um...I've met my soul mate. I mean, is that what you meant?"
"Yeah. That's what I meant." She couldn't help but smile, and damn, she knew she was probably scaring
the hell out of him, but she honestly didn't believe in beating around the bush. He might as well know the
truth. She'd grown so frustrated in trying to guess his feelings - if he even had any feelings - for her, that
she was no longer capable of keeping quiet about her own.
"So you think that you...and I..."
"We're destined for each other, Cory. It's as simple as that."
He puckered his lips and blew a sigh, and his eyes looked worried.
"Oh, come on, think about it," she said. "Do you know how big those woods around the falls are? It's a
thirty-thousand-acre forest, Cory. What are the odds you would find your way straight to me when you
could have gone a hundred other directions? What are the odds on that knife wound leaving you with just
enough strength to make it to my side before you collapsed? What are the odds against all of that
happening on the one night in the month when I was even out there?"
He gnawed his lip. "I take it you don't believe in coincidence?"
"Synchronicity. Not coincidence. I was asking the universe to be sure and send me a sign to tell me when
the man I was meant to love forever came into my life.

</text>
