<text id="R06" category="" words="1987" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Spoiled Rotten America: Outrages of Everyday Life' Harper-Collins pp. 144-150" Author="Larry Miller" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="-">

OKAY, I'M BACK. IT'S ALL OVER. I TOOK A POWDER AGAIN for a couple of weeks and went back to that farmhouse in Indiana. The wistful widow was remarried by this time to a stereopticon salesman from Wagon Gap named Chaney (no relation, different spelling). He was pretty amiable about the whole thing - consider- ing - and they put me up in the spare till the spell passed. (Turns out they both like puns well enough, but can't abide limericks.) We played cards together on the porch, of a night, and I stole a look or two, but what the hay. Still makes a heckuva cherry pie, she does. As for pitching woo, well, I couldn't - and wouldn't - say.
LET'S AWAY. IT TURNS OUT THERE REALLY IS A MOVIE called Debbie Does Dallas II, and let me just say I know that for a fact. How? And how. That is, here's how.
Like most things in life, pornography can be used to one extreme or another, and I don't believe either one is healthy. Five percent of American men have probably never seen naked pictures at all, not even once; another five percent probably do nothing but look at it twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. I think both of these groups are very likely an inch away from going on a three-state murder spree.
The rest of us are in the middle. One of the ways men respond to women is visually, in case you hadn't noticed, and that's, of course, what porn is.
So far as I can tell, the first thing people did when photography was invented was take a picture of Lincoln. The second thing, right behind it (so to speak), was to think, "Say, I wonder if Miss Brightenbecker over at the Cattlemen's Association would let me take a few shots of her without the bustle?" They probably wondered whether it would even print out on the paper, as if the chemicals might make a value judgment - the way some people used to think the sky would explode if a plane broke the sound barrier.
Well, Miss Brightenbecker had no objections, and the sky didn't explode, and here we are. Like all of us, though, every time I pass a Calvin Klein billboard with the kids in the car, I wonder if our cul- ture has gone too far. There are three possibilities: we haven't gone too far; everything's about the same; we've gone way, way too far.
My wife was talking about Internet porn at work with friends, and she said it made her angry, and that our kids were never going to have the Internet in their bedrooms. And one of the guys laughed and said, "Oh, you probably don't even want them to see Playboy." And she said, "No, that's exactly wrong. Playboy is fine with me. I expect them to see it. I want them to see it. In fact, I expect them to hide it. That's in the normal range. But the Internet is too much; it's constant, it's far more graphic, they can get into a bad habit, and, by the way, that's how predators find them."
I agreed with her so much when she told me, I turned it right off.
Kidding. But I'm actually glad I know almost nothing about the Internet. In case you think I'm lying, I sent the first three drafts of this book to the publisher by hand - hard copies made on a machine and FedExed at the Kinko's on Laurel Canyon and Ventura. I can write on the computer, but I use it like a typewriter, indenting and paging manually, without any interference from that snotty software. Each time I called the publisher in New York to say I was sending something, and that it should be there in a few days, Cal Morgan, my editor, gently said, "You know, Larry, it's also possible to e-mail it. Might be easier for both of us." After the first few long silences, he stopped asking.
But my wife and I agree completely on this one. It's one thing for a thirteen-year-old to have a tattered Playboy in his night table drawer under an old math workbook, and it'll make me smile when I find one and realize ours have gone from "Yuchhh" to "Oooh . . ." (I had one that Larry Fink lifted from his dad and gave to me when we were twelve; I wish I still had it today. You know, for old times' sake.) But the Internet is too much, too fast, and has no limits.
The point is, though, I've seen magazines plenty of times. I'm no prude - in fact, just the opposite. It's like fistfights at a hockey game. We think they're an outrage, and they are, but as soon as one breaks out we all leap up laughing and say, "Ooh, look, a fight!" If someone walked into the office right now with naked pictures of a woman, I would look at them like any other guy. In fact, let's just wait a second and see if that happens. All right, it didn't. One more minute. No. Huh. Typical: never around when you need 'em.
It's ironic that what's not shown about a woman is often sexier than what is shown. Especially so the wilder they get. Leno used to do a bit in his act about the more graphic ones: "A friend of mine is a gynecologist, and I showed him a picture from Hustler, and he looked at it and said, 'Gee, I have no idea what that is.' "
I suppose, like all things in life, it would be the images and light- ing and fashions of my youth I'd find most appealing in a centerfold. I guess I really do wish I had the one Larry Fink gave me.
The thing is, I could never buy one in public. Not then, not now. I could never just walk into a store and get one. Never.
Well, that's not completely true, because I did. Twice. Both times I was drenched with sweat, and not from the pictures.
THE FIRST TIME WAS FOURTEEN YEARS AGO. THIS WAS before I was married, although I'm not sure why I added that.
I had done an interview with Penthouse. Not one of the big interviews, but one of the single-page question-and-answer things they used to do with comics and actors and sports guys. I was on the road, in a hotel, and my agent called and said, "Hey, it just came out, and you're in it. It's great - go get one." I was all excited, so I went downstairs to the gift shop.
I went to the magazine section in the back. There they were, sev- eral bundles of the new issue still tied in their yellow plastic bands, and one stack, loose, just waiting for me. I'd been looking forward to this for a long time. So I picked up two copies - my folks were still alive, and I was going to get one for them - and turned to the counter.
And stopped dead. And thought, "Oh, no. How am I going to do this?" There was a Little Old Ladies with White Hair and Spectacles convention in the hotel - or at least it suddenly seemed that way, since five or six of them were milling around the gift shop like guards at a bingo tournament. Just as bad, or worse, the clerk at the register was a young woman. "Stop it," I thought. "Don't be an idiot. Everyone buys these things; it's no big deal. Besides, you have a fabulous reason. You're in it. You're in the magazine, and you want to see how it came out. Just walk up and buy it, and stop being stu- pid. There's nothing wrong with buying a Penthouse anyway."
All of this is true, but it didn't matter. I turned around, put them back on the stack, and walked out of the shop, head down, very, very fast.
Halfway through the lobby I stopped again. "Oh, you really are nuts," I thought. "You're in the magazine, for crying out loud. And even if you weren't, who cares? Just go get it."
But I tried again, couldn't, and walked back out. This time I stood at the entrance and waited for the other customers to leave. It took a while, and I couldn't have looked more suspicious if I were a drug dealer hanging around a junior high. The place finally cleared out and I went back inside, scratching the right side of my face as I passed the clerk, went to the back, picked it up again (just one this time; let my parents get their own), got to the counter, put it down, looked up, and immediately burst open like a pomegranate.
"I'm in it," I said. "I swear, I'm in it, they do interviews with comics, and I'm a comic, and I'm here working . . . not here, there's a club in town . . . well, not in town, it's more like on the perimeter. To be honest, I don't know where it is, they just pick me up, but I'm buying this to read the interview. You want to see it? I'm sorry, I don't know what page it is, and you don't need to see. I'll probably throw it out after the interview. If you want, I'll bring it back, and you can sell it again. Sorry, forget that. You know what? I don't need the change. You keep it, or give it away. Either way, I'll just be going now."
Naturally, at this point, she finally looked up for the first time and took a good, long look at me, because I was acting like a suicide bomber.
I still have that magazine in my dresser drawer at the house. I haven't looked at it in a while, but I might again. If I do, I don't think it'll be for the interview.
THE SECOND TIME WAS TWO YEARS AGO, AS I WAS ON MY way to work. I have an office for writing, and stopped off at a 7-Eleven on the way for a cup of coffee. I had just dropped the kids at school, and it was early. As I filled the cup and put the lid on, I noticed several things in the store at the same time, in the tiniest fraction of a second.
Two house painters had just bought a box of donuts for break- fast, and they were the only ones in the store. The clerk, a young girl, gave them their change and spoke to them in Spanish. When they left, the store was empty. Empty.
I walked up to the counter, put the coffee down, took out my wallet . . . and felt my heart starting to thump: There was a rack of Playboys behind the counter. (A rack of Playboys? What an etymo- logical coincidence. You might even say it was a rack of racks. I'm not saying you should, but you could. In fact, when the store was first being built, and they were putting those shelves in, before even one magazine was on display, you could've run inside and yelled, "Hey, nice rack.")
The point is, the store was empty, and a rack of Playboys was hanging there. I mean, stacked there. Sitting on - on top of -  pressed against - oh, forget it. They were there, okay? And the clerk had spoken Spanish. Empty store, Playboy, Spanish! What a parley! Who could pass this up? I looked around one more time, shrugged, and thought, "I'll never have a chance like this again." So as she tapped in the price of the coffee, I said as evenly as I could, "And do me a favor, please, let me have a copy of Playboy." She turned word- lessly, no reaction, picked one up, and placed it on the counter.
It worked. Unbelievable!

</text>
