Patients 'fleeced' by hospital ban on mobile phones
PATIENTS are being banned from using mobiles in hospitals to force them to pay for expensive bedside phones.
There are no safety reasons why mobile phones cannot be used, a leaked Department of Health report admits.
But it reveals that Health Service authorities have prohibited their use after signing deals with private telephone providers.
These firms, which have installed bedside entertainment systems under the Government's 'Patient Power' policy, have made millions by charging up to 75p a minute for incoming calls from mobiles and 49p from landlines.
Opposition MPs and campaigners last night attacked the 'immoral' practice and warned that patients and their families were being 'fleeced'.
The Department of Health guidance-written by the its Patient Power review group, admits that 'the use of modern mobile phones has little or no effect on modern clinical equipment unless operated within close proximity'.
The report adds that advances in technology mean there is no reason for a 'blanket ban'. But it warns: 'For those hospitals with a Patient Power installation, authorities should be aware that there may be undertakings in the concession agreement viz (namely), "The authority will prohibit the use of mobile phones within the Healthcare Premises in circumstances where it is lawful and there is proper reason to do so".' Tory MP Mike Penning, who uncovered the practice, said last night: 'To exclude people from using mobiles just so you can fleece them for more cash is immoral.
'I have never quite understood why private hospitals have been happy for patients to use mobiles, while the NHS has banned them.
'But it has now emerged that trusts have been encouraged to sign contracts with companies who are worried they will lose money if patients can use their own cheaper handsets.
'The whole thing is deeply suspicious and stinks. It has exposed the NHS as being about making money rather than giving patients choice.' Michael Summers, former chairman of the Patients' Association, added: 'I have spoken to doctors who are happy to use their mobile phones next to equipment.
'Meanwhile, patients and their families are being forced to spend a great deal of money on these bedside phones. This is about fleecing patients who are ill.' MPs on the Commons Health Select committee have demanded a review of the NHS's hidden charges such as bedside phones and car parks which they describe as a mess.
In a recent report, the committee said: 'Incoming calls are a source of anger and distress. They are charged at a very high rate.' The telecoms watchdog Ofcom has blamed Labour's privatisation of the NHS's hospital phone system in 2000 for the scandal. Last month, the British Medical Journal found the risks to patients from mobiles was 'mythical'.
The Health Department guidance also recommends hospitals designate areas where mobiles can be used. It adds: 'Patients have a right to, and a need for, a peaceful environment both at day and at night time, uninterrupted by a number of different ring tones, the noise of which is disrespectful of their privacy and dignity.' A Health Department spokesman said: 'We recognise that patients and staff should be able to use mobile phones more freely where it is appropriate to do so subject to medical and privacy considerations. Each trust should undertake its own local risk assessment and prepare their own guidelines on mobile phone use.' When asked about the contracts with private firms, the spokesman added: 'There are circumstances where it is not appropriate to use mobile phones.'

Pounds 106,000pa; 
What family doctors earn despite most refusing to work unsociable hours

BRITAIN'S family doctors are now among the highest paid in the world, a report shows.
It reveals that GP salaries have soared 30 per cent following the introduction of a lucrative contract in April 2004.
Their average annual earnings have reached Pounds 106,000 a level only bettered in the U.S.
At the same time, the pay deal has allowed many doctors to put in fewer hours. Most have stopped working unsociable shifts altogether, leaving patients under the care of contracted out-of-hours services.
Tax data for 2004/05 found that GPs who worked in practices without a dispensing service earned an average of Pounds 102,000 after expenses were paid.
The small minority of dispensing GPs earned an average of Pounds 128,000.
That meant the overall figure for the country's 34,000 family doctors was Pounds 106,000, according to the analysis by The Information Centre for health and social care.
The official body put the figure for 2003/4 the year before the contract was brought in at Pounds 77,000.
GPs' leaders claim the extra cash is rewarding family doctors for providing quality care and offering additional services. Practices can earn extra cash for running special treatment clinics and for hitting a series of clinical targets.
But the decline in after-hours care has led to claims that the NHS is getting little back for a massive pay hike which the Department of Health underestimated and underfunded.
John Appleby, of the King's Fund health think-tank, said: 'The Department of Health has admitted it under-budgeted for GPs and other groups of NHS workers when negotiating new contracts.
'A 30 per cent increase in pay is a hefty rise British GPs are now among the highest paid in the world and the question is what extra are we getting for the money?
'The contract is already being revisited by employers because there is no way the NHS can support this level of remuneration without seeing a rise in measured levels of output.
'This isn't the end of the story. It will raise the pressure on managers and GPs to justify the contract.' Health Minister Lord Warner said GPs should be investing more cash in developing their practices.
'We invested extra funding in GP services in good faith both to improve services and reward GPs,' he said. 'The money was not intended just to boost GPs' profits.' The British Medical Association, which negotiated the contract in 2004, claimed GPs had 'well and truly' earned their pay. Dr Hamish Meldrum, chairman of its GPs Committee, said: 'UK general practice offers unbeatable value for money.'

The great migrant riot farce

Illegal immigrants wreck their detention centre. . . They have to be moved but prisons are full 
So 150 OTHER illegal immigrants will be freed from their centres to make room

MORE than 150 illegal immigrants and failed asylum seekers will be freed from custody after a riot wrecked Britain's biggest detention centre.
John Reid was forced to release men on to the streets after a wave of fires and destruction lasting for more than 18 hours at the centre in Harmondsworth, West London.
The situation was blamed on Labour's failure to provide enough cells for the illegal immigrants and foreign criminals waiting to be deported from the UK.
Rioting began after guards turned off a television set. It was still not under full control late yesterday evening.
The disruption left large parts of the Pounds 70mila lion centre out of action. And as prisons and other detention centres are already full, the Home Secretary had nowhere to move the failed asylum seekers and overseas criminals being detained at Harmondsworth.
He ordered a clearout of 150 illegal immigrants all awaiting removal from the UK from other detention centres in London and the South-East to make room.
They were 'bailed' and told to report regularlyto the authorities despite fears that they will simply abscond.
In a further twist, it emerged that immigration staff have been told not to detain any new suspected illegals or failed asylum seekers for the next 48 hours. Officials say it would be pointless, as there is nowhere to put them.
Lin Homer, head of the Immigration and Nationality Directorate, described the riots which have already caused tens of thousands of pounds of damage as 'deliberate attempts at sabotage' by illegals hell-bent on remaining in the UK.
Tory immigration spokesman Damian Green said: 'This outbreak is a symptom of a system out of control.' The disruption began early on Tuesday evening when a series of fires were started by core of trouble- causing detainees, including Jamaican Yardies.
Insiders said they went wild after a guard switched off a TV news bulletin.
It was detailing a report, by the Chief Inspector of Prisons, which was critical of the regime at the 500-bed centre.
Sprinklers doused the flames but left corridors flooded. Detainees then went on a wrecking spree as more than 100 prison officers and police were drafted in to try to regain control.
Furniture, TV sets and computers were destroyed. Wash basins and urinals were ripped out.
The worst of the rioting was in B and C wings. There, a shop and administration office were trashed.
Many detainees were taken out of buildings into the courtyard, but saw it as a chance to mock the authorities.
About 50 were spotted huddled on the concrete, using blankets to spell out 'Help' and 'SOS' on the ground so they could be seen by TV news helicopters.
As staff and police were involved in a stand-off with those still inside, at least 11 prison security vans capable of holding about 100 were lined up outside the main entrance ready to evacuate detainees.
One of the drivers said: 'The place is completely uninhabitable, they have trashed everything, so there's no way any of them can stay there.' Dozens of police officers armed with batons, some with dogs, entered the facility. They had not gained complete control last night.
Half a dozen officers stood guard at the main entrance. Others patrolled the 15ft razor-wire-topped perimeter fence to prevent a repeat of the escapes which took place in a similar riot at Yarl's Wood detention centre in 2002.
In a statement, Mrs Homer said: 'The situation at Harmondsworth remains contained. The perimeter remains secure and no one has escaped.
'There has been no risk to the public.
No injuries to staff or detainees have been reported.
'Harmondsworth holds approximately 500 people. One third are foreign nationals who have been in prison, whom we are in the process of deporting.
'Two-thirds are immigration offenders whom we are in the process of removing.
'This appears to have been a deliberate attempt at sabotage in order to frustrate these processes.
'Detainees from Harmondsworth are either remaining there or being escorted elsewhere in the IND and Prison Service secure estates.
'It will prove necessary to bail about 150 immigration offenders from elsewhere in the estate on to reporting restrictions, in order to manage these movements.
'These are people who have been detained in order to better enforce their removal. Removal will still be pursued vigorously in all cases. We will prioritise the cases according to risk. No foreign national prisoners will be released.' Critics questioned whether the removals would actually happen.
Those freed have no incentive to remain in contact with the authorities but every reason to disappear.
The timing of the riot could not have been worse for Dr Reid. It came on the day the prison population officially reached 80,000 for the first time. There is no room in the country's jails and 152 convicts are being held in police cells under Operation Safeguard.
Immigration detention centres, which have about 2,500 places, are also full.
Beds are being taken by overseas convicts, who have been moved from prison after completing their sentences.
In the past, many would have been set free but are now held until the date of their removal following this summer's foreign prisoner early-release scandal.
Even police cells which can be used by the immigration service in emergencies are full.
Last night, Brian Caton, general secretary of the Prison Officers' Association, warned of the consequences of the riots.
He said: 'It is causing severe shortfalls of staff across the Prison Service in England and Wales and may well have a knock-on effect to the operation of the public-sector prison service. The riot is as a result of impoverished regimes, inadequate staffing levels and dangerous conditions.' Referring to a riot at the detention centre in 2004, Liberal Democrat Home Affairs spokesman Nick Clegg said: 'These are not the first disturbances at Harmondsworth. Why have lessons not been learned?' 

