Quiet singer songwriter is fast becoming a big noise

Kathryn Williams sings in a restrained, intimate voice. One of her heroes is Leonard Cohen, whose classic Hallelujah she brings new shadows to on her album Relations.
It is therefore quite a surprise to talk to her. She is down to earth with a gutsy laugh and warm northern tones which don't come across in the music.
She is conducting the interview from the back of a taxi crossing London, on her way to play at a tribute to the late folk singer Lal Waterson at the BBC's Electric Proms.
Soon she will be heading west to perform her personal brand of folk - called Americana by critics, although she doesn't label it as such herself. Westcountry fans can catch her at the Exeter Phoenix on Sunday evening, performing new material from her latest album Leave to Remain.
Since being nominated for the Mercury Music Prize for her second album Little Black Numbers, released on her own record label Caw, she has turned out a further four albums and has another in the pipeline, the result of a creative outpouring with musician Neill MacColl, son of the late folk legend Ewan.
"Neill is an amazing guitarist and he knows how to create lovely colours in the music. It is quite exciting," she says.
"There is quite a big buzz around it. A lot of people want to put it out and I'm quite looking forward to it."
With six albums under her belt, at the age of 33 she has come a long way for someone who spent her teenage years playing her guitar in her bedroom, but didn't let on to anyone "because I didn't know if I was any good at it".
"Six albums in eight years, I reckon that is all right," she says. "And I've had a baby and remembered to do the washing-up before I left home this morning."
Home is Newcastle and her son, Louis, is 18 months old.
"He's been on the road with us," she says. "My husband is my tour manager and runs the record label, so all we need now is to get Louis to set up a merchandising stand and we will be away."
Kathryn left her own band behind for this latest tour of America and Holland, where she's been experimenting musically.
"I never felt like I was a woman in music until I had a baby and I was pregnant and people automatically thought I was retiring and it was the end of my career," she says. In fact, having Louis has re-energised her.
"I want him to be proud of me and I have a new drive to do the best for him," she says. "Since having him I have been working a lot more. He has come on tour with us."
She is sceptical about the manufactured world of music where stars are created. As someone who has put in the graft she has deliberately steered clear of being taken over by the men in suits.
"I have worked my way up from playing in small bars and stuff. I think a lot of the time these days you are fed things as if they are all organic, but actually they have been to stage school or they have got the gig because they look a certain way."
For Kathryn it is all about the music. Her album of cover versions, Relations, came about because "I thought it was a perfect time to show people what a good record collection I've got".
Her latest album, Leave to Remain, was arranged by friend and fellow musician Kate St John, whose musical career includes a spell in Van Morrison's band.
They got together with producer Darius Kedros to add woodwind and string sounds to her music.
"It was going to be just the guitar, cello and piano but the more I thought about it, I wanted to add different colours to it and different textures," says Kathryn.
For her tour it will be just her, and one other musician, guitarist Dave Scott.
"Because I have been doing a lot of stuff solo abroad I want to experiment with that," she says. "Dave plays Amish guitar, and I have a loop sequencer I bring in with my feet, so it is going to be quite interesting."

Tax offices threatened with closure
A government plan to cut some or all of the tax offices in Cornwall would have a massive impact on the county's economy and signifies a withdrawal from the Westcountry, according to union officials.
The Government is due to start a consultation period in February with a view to "rationalising" the number of tax offices across the country.
But the Public and Commercial Services Union (PCSU), which represents staff in the offices, says that it is just a cost-cutting exercise with no regard to the interests of the people served by the offices.
Cornish MPs are throwing their weight behind the union's stance saying that the county cannot afford to lose jobs or the wealth that the employment brings to the local economy.
The PCSU fears that the Launceston and Penzance offices are under threat while the others in the county - at Redruth, Truro and St Austell - could be slimmed down.
A spokesman for PCSU said: "There are between 160 and 170 jobs at the Launceston and Penzance offices, and a further 100 at Redruth. The Cornish economy cannot afford to lose that number of jobs, or the money that those salaries put into the locality. Offices in Devon will be coming under scrutiny too.
"The Government says it needs fewer buildings and fewer staff, but we see this as a withdrawal from the Westcountry. There are no Labour MPs here and they have nothing to lose.
"Cornwall receives funds from one Government department in the form of convergence funding because of its poverty and poor housing, and at the same time you get another department thinking of taking jobs away. There is no joined-up thinking."
A spokesman for HM Revenue and Customs said a review of the offices would start in February. He said: "Two years ago the Inland Revenue merged with Customs and Excise, which left us with a number of offices in some locations, with some only half full. Instead of having several offices in one location, we need fewer buildings.
"However, we are well aware of the implications for remote offices in Devon and Cornwall and we will be seeking the views of the businesses they deal with."
North Cornwall's MP Dan Rogerson said: "Unfortunately this Government is moving to a call centre culture. It needs to look beyond bean counting.
"To take away jobs in a town like Launceston would be a huge blow."

'Despicable' heroin addict preyed on the elderly

A "despicable" heroin addict who preyed on the elderly, stealing money to pay for his drugs, has been jailed for six years.
Serial offender Edwin John Barnard, of Healy Place in Stoke, Plymouth, was said to specialise in distraction burglaries and has a string of convictions to his name.
At Plymouth Crown Court on Wednesday 40-year-old Barnard admitted conning and then burgling an elderly woman in her own home and asked for three similar offences to be taken into account.
Sentencing him, Judge Francis Gilbert QC said: "The reality is that you are a persistent offender against vulnerable victims.
"I have to protect the public, and the least sentence I can properly pass for these offences is six years in prison."
Plymouth's police commander, Chief Superintendent Jim Webster, said after the hearing: "This is a despicable crime, putting vulnerable people in fear in their own homes. This sentence means that the elderly and vulnerable will feel protected from this man for years to come."
The court heard that Barnard had a string of convictions dating back to 1983, when he was a juvenile.
In 2002, he was sentenced to a total of nine years in prison for two offences.
On one occasion, he told a 76-year-old woman he was a friend of her dead son before stealing her purse containing £15.
Sentencing him at the time, Judge Ian McKintosh said: "You cannot really get much lower than this. You con them to get money, whether for heroin or not."

Pupils win top award for helping the elderly

A group of 12 Westcountry pupils have won a national youth charity award - for helping their community.
The sixth-formers from Plymouth's Stoke Damerel Community College won a top Prince's Trust award for the South West after organising activities for elderly residents.
The pupils, who all face difficulties, including learning and social problems, scooped the NatWest Community Impact Award at the trust's Celebrate Success ceremony in Bristol.
They won the award for researching the needs of elderly residents, then producing newsletters, filming interviews and arranging activities.
Student Samantha Devlin said: "This is just amazing - we never thought we'd win and we're all over the moon. We all learnt so much from doing this project and it's made a massive difference to our lives."
A Prince's Trust spokesman said: "It was a life-changing experience for everybody involved - the students rose to the challenge while the older residents regained their voice and a better understanding of younger people."
Youngsters, volunteers and organisations from across the South West were lauded at the awards, which celebrate their achievements in countering the odds and having a positive effect on their communities.

'I didn't know that guns in my display were illegal'

A bus driver who had illegal guns displayed on the walls of his home said he would have been shocked if he had known they were prohibited weapons, a court was told.
Jeremy Couchman, 53, of Tor Church Road, Torquay, told police he thought the law was that if the weapons and ammunition were antiques, then he was not doing anything illegal, Exeter Crown Court was told.
He had purchased the guns and ammunition through an American website, he said. When he went on the Internet, he would make sure they were described as antiques as he thought it was safe to buy them.
Mr Couchman said he did not think they were dangerous weapons and he had just purchased them for display purposes. Regarding the 50 rounds of .410 rim fire ammunition which had been impounded by Customs and led to the raid on his home, he said he was not really interested in the ammunition. He just wanted the box to display alongside a Derringer pistol he had bought for £300 and which took that calibre of ammunition.
Mr Couchman said when he saw the advertisement on the website, the ammunition was described as antique and when it did not arrive, he thought it had never been sent.
He was just a collector with an interest in the American Civil War and the Wild West, which was why he also had a collection of swords and other weapons.
"There was no intentional malice - I was just trying to put a collection together," he said.
When asked if he was aware of the legislation about ammunition and guns, Mr Couchman said: "If I had appreciated it, I would have been shocked. I didn't realise it at the time - I thought it was just for display."
He has pleaded not guilty to 11 charges of possessing prohibited weapons, including a Smith and Wesson, a Derringer and an American Colt. He has also denied four charges of possessing replica guns without a certificate and one of possessing a double-barrelled 12-bore shotgun without a certificate. In addition, he has pleaded not guilty to purchasing or acquiring ammunition and the alternative charge of attempting to purchase or acquire it.
The trial continues.

