Euro 21bn bid to create 'super' exchange

BORSA ITALIANA chief executive Massimo Capuano has unveiled his ?21.5bn plan to merge three of the continent's largest stock exchanges. At a meeting in Rome on Monday with Euronext chief executive Jean-Francois Theodore, Mr Capuano set out a proposal to unite the two exchanges with Deutsche Börse to form a European super-exchange.
Under the Borsa plan, codenamed "Progetto Rinascimento'', Mr Capuano envisages a "super-holding'' main company that would bring together the three exchange groupings and their different activities such as derivatives and equities.
The plan, details of which have been leaked to The Daily Telegraph, envisages that Euronext shareholders would own 50pc of the top holding company, with the remaining 50pc owned by Deutsche Börse and Borsa Italiana.
The combined grouping would be a considerable threat to the London Stock Exchange, which is itself the subject of takeover speculation. The outline was put before Mr Theodore and Euronext managing board member Olivier Lefebvre.
The pair met Mr Capuano as part of a scheduled monthly meeting during which the trio discussed Euronext and Borsa Italiana's jointly-owned bond trading platform MTS.
It is not known what either of the Frenchmen made of the plans, although it is known that Euronext and its board are intent on merging with the New York Stock Exchange, and would like the Italian exchange to be a part of that. But Mr Capuano is keen to create a European champion to combat the strength of the leading US exchanges, and is thought likely to press ahead with a float of Borsa Italiana if the super-exchange plan does not come to fruition.
One insider quipped that there is already a European exchange in the shape of Euronext. Mr Capuano's plan suggests the three exchanges, were they to unite, should create two different companies - to be wholly owned by the top company - one for derivatives, and one for cash equities.
Technology would be managed by a third company, although this would have a lower ownership threshold, but would have to be at least 51pc owned by the top company.
As for post-trading, his plans appear to be less fixed, but Borsa envisages two different companies to be managed separately for clearing and for settlement, in which a minority of shares would be owned by the top company.
It is not known whether Deutsche Börse, which is being advised by Deutsche Bank and Hawkpoint, has worked on the plans with the Italians.
It is also unclear what Deutsche Börse chief executive Reto Francioni's reaction has been to suggestions regarding the ownership of the post-trading platforms, given its interest in the Eurex clearing and Clearstream settlement businesses.
Rival consolidator OMX yesterday sealed the latest deal in the sector by agreeing to acquire the Icelandic stock exchange, ICEX, for pounds 18m.


Protest may trigger Hungary currency crisis

VIOLENT protests against the Hungarian government could be the trigger for a fall of up to 20pc in the value of the forint, an economist has warned, describing the stresses in the country's economy and markets as ''an Asian crisis in the making''.
After a night of fighting on the streets of Budapest following the government's admission that it lied about the state of the economy before elections in April, Maya Bhandari at Lombard Street Research said ''swollen fiscal and current account deficits and large and rising levels of foreign currency debts make a dangerous cocktail, now spiked by politics''.
She said the forint could fall to 330 against the euro by the end of the year, in a worst case scenario, compared with 273.5 yesterday. The currency fell as much as 1.5pc during the day in response to unrest in the Hungarian capital, including the storming and looting of the state television station.
The Budapest stock market retreated 1.2pc and bonds fell across the region, sparking fears that problems in Hungary could trigger a domino effect similar to the market turmoil that swept through Asia's ''tiger economies'' in 1997. The International Monetary Fund is concerned about parallels between the situation in eastern Europe today and that facing Asia's fast-growing but over-stretched economies 10 years ago.
Hungary was plunged into crisis on Monday after the leak of a speech by prime minister Ferenc Gyurcsany to Socialist MPs in which he confessed to lying about a planned package of austerity measures designed to put the country's finances in order.
Since his re-election in April, Mr Gyurcsany has pushed through unpopular reforms to cut Hungary's budget deficit from 10.1pc of GDP to 3.2pc as part of the country's bid to join the euro. The government has pledged to raise taxes and cut public sector jobs after its central bank warned that the country was on an ''unsustainable'' path.
Others believe the government can ride the storm. Juliet Samson at HSBC said: ''The release of the full text of his speech might actually enhance Mr Gyurcsany's credibility with regard to the reform process. But markets are alive to the imbalances and risks and they are likely to be unforgiving if there's any backtracking.''


Sir Philip challenges students

RETAILER Sir Philip Green is to run an Apprentice-style competition to test the abilities of students at the Fashion Retail Academy.
The contest will see small teams of students run a High Street store for up to two weeks. The Arcadia owner unveiled his plans as he welcomed more than 200 students to the newly opened academy.
"We will see what you have really learned and whether you really have what it takes to become a retailer,'' Sir Philip told the students.
The students will be given a budget of around pounds 50,000 and will be able to buy product from the Academy's sponsors - Arcadia, Marks &amp; Spencer, Tesco, Gus or Next.
"The end game is: can they run a store? Can they create an environment? It is about what is in the till and what is left in the stockroom after two weeks,'' said Sir Philip.
Leading retailers have invested tens of millions of pounds into the academy. The 200-plus students will graduate with a diploma in fashion retailing, equivalent to an A-level.
The Government, which has also invested, hopes other industries will open similar academies.
Sir Philip was joined at the opening by Stuart Rose, chief executive of Marks &amp; Spencer, John Peace, chief executive of GUS, and Terry Green, chief executive of clothing at Tesco.

Yahoo suffers fall in ad spending

SEARCH giants Yahoo and Google saw their shares plummet after Yahoo warned it was seeing weakness in two of its biggest advertising segments.
Sliding revenues from car and financial services advertising meant third-quarter revenues would be at the bottom end of forecasts, said Susan Decker, the chief financial officer, sending Yahoo shares down as much as 15pc and close to their lowest level for more than two years.
"It's a new trend. It's been two to three weeks and we don't know yet if it's an indicator of a broader slowdown,'' said Miss Decker. "We're seeing it enough to say something. I don't want to overplay it either.'' In July, Yahoo forecast third-quarter revenue of $1.12bn ( pounds 596m) to $1.23bn, but yesterday admitted they would be "at the bottom half of the range''.
Her comments ignited concern for other Internet companies who rely heavily on advertising, including search leader Google. Google shares tumbled more than 5pc. Ebay and Amazon both slid around 3pc.
Car makers in particular have moved a large portion of their advertising to the Web in the last three years, but industry leaders like General Motors and Ford have been slashing billions of dollars in costs as they grapple with losses in the North American market.
Martin Pyykkonen, an analyst with Global Crown Capital, said: "It would be naive to say that advertisers would continue to pour ahead on online advertising and cut back only on traditional advertising in the face of economic weakness.''
The warning, which was similar to those given by newspaper groups in the past, reflects just how much advertising has poured from traditional media to the internet in recent years, giving web properties the same cyclical downturns as print and broadcast media once endured.
However, Yahoo's stock has slid more than 25pc so far this year, and suffered its biggest one-day drop ever in July when the company fell short on its second-quarter results.

Pound rises on house price figures

THE pound rose against the dollar after Kate Barker, a member of the committee that sets interest rates, admitted that the strength of house price inflation this year had taken the Bank of England by surprise.
In an interview with The Daily Telegraph, the Monetary Policy Committee member said: "The rate doesn't seem to be returning to anything like the stratospheric levels [of previous years]. But, on the other hand, house prices are rising faster than earnings, and I have to say that's a surprise.
"In the very long run, it is difficult to think of house price growth being perpetually above earnings, unless there's something else going on, like a constraint on supply.
"However, it doesn't seem to me that it's unsustainable over the [two-year] forecast horizon.''
Her comments on housing, which were published on telegraph.co.uk yesterday, helped push the pound higher against the dollar.
It rose higher still in the afternoon following news of more weakness in the US housing market, with housing starts and building permits much weaker than expected. Sterling rose a cent to $1.8868.
The pound was also lifted against the euro following a disappointing result from the German economic ZEW survey.
However, despite her concerns about house prices, Barker added she expected inflation to slow next year, since there was still capacity for the economy to grow without pushing up prices.


Grade joins Ocado as chairman

MICHAEL Grade, the chairman of the BBC, has moved into the grocery world by taking up the chairmanship of the internet supermarket Ocado. It is the first time that Ocado has hired a chairman, and the appointment of such a high-profile figure has immediately renewed speculation that the company is readying itself for a float. Only last week the company, which is 33pc owned by the John Lewis Partnership, stressed it was unlikely to float until 2008.
Finance director and co-founder Jason Gissing admitted yesterday that the company knew the appointment would raise eyebrows. "But we said 'should we not choose Michael Grade - who is liked, respected and with a distinguished career - just because it might lead to speculation?' No.''
He added: "Nothing has changed about our float plans. This is a logical next step for a growing business. Six years ago we were three people in a rented office in Victoria. We now have 2,500 people.'' He described Mr Grade as an "inspiring, charming and accomplished businessman''.
Mr Grade said he was "gobsmacked by the scale and efficiency of the business''. He added: "I've been around the block a few times. The founders are young, bright men, but the corporate governance, the stewardship needs to grow up.''

Shares down as Kazakhmys chief exec says he is leaving

Copper miner Kazakhmys unveiled record interim results boosted by soaring copper prices but warned that its long-serving chief executive YK Cha would be stepping down.
Kazakhmys' shares closed down over 4pc at pounds 12.10 amid concerns about the management change and fears that Mr Cha would sell his 15.6pc stake when his lock-up expires in October.
It is believed that Mr Cha wants to spend more time in his native Korea. Kazakhmys confirmed that he would continue to serve as a special adviser to the board after the end of the year. Revenues jumped by 90pc to $2.3bn ( pounds 1.2bn) on the back of an 82pc increase in the average price of copper, with pre-tax profits up 174pc to $985m ( pounds 524m). The rocketing copper price more than off-set a 6pc drop in production largely caused by bad weather. 

