SHARRON'S BABY JOY; 
STAR, 43, IS PREGNANT THROUGH IVF AFTER FOUR YEARS OF TRYING

TV GOLDEN girl Sharron Davies yesterday told of her joy at being three months pregnant following IVF treatment.
The 43-year-old former swimming star, who has had two miscarriages, revealed she is expecting her first child with British Airways pilot Tony Kingston - her third husband.
After four years of trying for a baby the couple's dreams have finally come true.
Sharron said: "We're very optimistic and happy but we're cautious, too, because of what we have been through." She admitted she was expecting while walking a mile for Sport Relief in Plymouth, Devon.
At 13, Sharron was the youngest member of Britain's swimming team at the 1976 Olympics. She won two golds, a silver and a bronze at the 1978 Commonwealth Games and went on to take silver at Moscow's 1980 Olympics.
Then she became a TV personality on shows such as Gladiator and The Big Breakfast before championing London's Olympic bid. She was briefly married to fitness guru John Crisp. Her second marriage to athlete Derek Redmond produced two children - Elliot, 12, and Grace, eight.
In 2002, Sharron married Tony. The family live in the Cotswolds.
She added: "Giving birth at 43 doesn't worry me. I'm in better shape than most women 15 years younger.
"So many women go through this as they leave it later to have babies."

WE FIND THE COLDEST SPOT IN THE LAND; 
..AND THE HOTTEST

YESTERDAY I found the coldest - and the hottest - places in Britain.
Inside the British Antarctic Survey laboratory in Cambridge I shivered at a teeth-chattering minus 25c. It was so cold that my skin turned blue.
Even as I chilled to the marrow in the Cold Room, where scientists carry out tests on blocks of ice from the Antarctic, the harsh conditions were apparently not cold enough for researcher Sue Foord.
Wandering into the room in just shorts and T-shirt, she took one look at me in my red padded jacket, woolly hat and gloves and snorted: "You may be a Scotsman, but Scott of the Antarctic would be ashamed of you."
But just 90 miles away and a two-hour drive later I was in the the town of Charlwood in Surrey - officially recorded as the hottest place in the country yesterday.
As the mercury touched 36.3C (97.3F) its 2,000 residents entered the record books.
Armed with a knotted hanky and an umbrella for shade, I joined them to find refuge from the baking heat. Elizabeth Tennant, 55, front desk manager of the Stan-hill Court Hotel believed she had found the ideal solution.
"There are a couple of cool spots like in the cellar, but it would be a bit drastic to take the front desk down there," she said.
But on balance, though, give me Charlwood's sunshine any day.

GRIL BRITAIN; 
HEAT IS A RECORD 97.3F 22,000 PACK ONE BEACH PARCHED GRASS FIRES RAGE

BRITAIN baked in our hottest July day on record yesterday.
The 97.3F (36.3C) reading topped the previous high set 95 years ago.
The record was registered just after 2.30pm in Charlwood, Surrey, near Gatwick Airport.
The town is just nine miles from where 1911's scorcher was logged at 96.8F (36C) in Epsom.
Front desk manager Elizabeth Tennant, 55, at Charlwood's Stanhill Court Hotel said staff and customers were "melting".
She added: "We are trying to keep cool with lots of drinks and have lots of fans going everywhere."
There will be some let up today as thundery showers move in. But temperatures will sizzle again over the weekend.
The Daily Mirror on this day in 1911 carried a report which read: "The holidaymaker, released from the common task, drank deep from 'joy's delicious springs'.
"To the children, the sea was an everlasting delight, and these photographs, taken at Brighton, show how they spent their time in the water."
And from Blackpool to Bournemouth yesterday thousands took to the beach, with 22,000 cramming on to Bournemouth alone.
Hundreds of schools closed and many adopted continental hours, allowing kids to go home at 1.30pm.
Sports days were also cancelled for fear of heat exhaustion.
Drivers caught in backs caused by accidents were handed water by emergency crews in Cambridge and on the M25.
Trucks blasted the roads with grit to prevent the Tarmac from melting.
Retailer Comet sold one fan every two seconds and a power cut alert was also issued by the National Grid because of a surge in demand for electricity from cooling systems.
Imports of energy, usually supplied through a cable under the Channel, have also dried up because France is using its full capacity.
Power firms were ordered to increase output to try prevent blackouts as electricity prices more than tripled yesterday from pounds 81 per megawatt hour to pounds 260.
Britain was boiling in temperatures that put some of the world's best-known hotspots in the shade. It was warmer here yesterday than in Rome, Madrid and Cairo - 93.2F (34C) or Cyprus, Bermuda, Hawaii and Miami - 87F (31C).
Even Kingston in Jamaica was cooler at 91.4 F (33C).
Britain's only polar bear took refuge from the heat in her pool at Edinburgh zoo.
Mercedes, more used to minus 34.6F (Minus 37C) was kept chilled with blocks of ice. And the heat meant one of the world's rarest birds hatched in captivity for the first time in the UK.
The four-inch high lesser flamingo chick emerged from its shell at the Wildfowl &amp; Wetlands Trust nature reserve in Slimbridge, Gloucs.
Trust spokesman Jane Waghorn said: "It's the most incredible news.
"Now, after over 40 years of trying, we have our very own little chick."
Later in the day firefighters were battling hundreds of blazes which broke out because woods and fields had become so dry.
Last night one massive fire covered FOUR hay fields.
More than 40 firefighters using 16 fire engines, special Land Rovers and water carriers were battling the flames near Guildford, Surrey.
Workers also struggled to stay cool. Judges removed their wigs inside court.
Reporters at the House of Commons were allowed to remove their jackets for the first time and guards at Buckingham Palace were allowed to stand in the shade.
But schoolboy Billy White, 13, was not so lucky.
He got hot under the collar over school uniform rules which ban shorts and force lads to sweat it out in long trousers.
He borrowed a skirt for lessons at Sheffield's Silverdale Comprehensive School.
He said: "I got a few taunts but it didn't bother me. They were just saying things jokingly.
"I'm planning to wear the skirt all week just to make a point.
"It was much better than wearing trousers because you get the air to your legs."

WHY KIDS ARE SAFER TODAY THAN 30YRS AGO

REMEMBER when kids could stay out late and enjoy summer evenings? When they could disappear for hours... climbing trees or camping out with friends?
How times have changed. Now, the threat of paedophiles, road accidents and drug-pushing yobs means that most parents are wary of giving kids any freedom.
But are things really that bad? New figures show that youngsters are actually safer today than 30 years ago - the problem is that we just don't realise it.
Take road accidents. Unlikely as it seems, there has actually been a 75 per cent reduction in the number of children killed on the roads in England and Wales, either in cars or as pedestrians.
The number of under-15s killed in 2004 (the most recent figure from the Department Of Transport) was 166, in 1976 it was 668.
The reasons are that cars and car seats now have better safety features and road design has improved.
And what of the beach, where so many of us have flocked over the past few days? This, too, is home to perceived perils.
Our own joyful childhoods of splashing around and dunking our friends have been replaced by paranoia.
Yet the statistics confirm that there is no need for this heightened worry.
The Royal Society For The Prevention Of Accidents reports that in 1985, 97 under-15s drowned. But in 2003 (the most recent figures) it was down to 24.
The main reasons for this is more and better trained lifeguards.
Another concern is the threat of a child murderer.
NO one can forget the deaths of 10-year-old friends Holly Wells and Jessica Chapman in Soham.
But statistically, your child isn't any more or less at risk than he or she would have been 30 years ago.
The number of child murders has stayed virtually the same.
On average, 79 have taken place each year in England and Wales since the 70s. Of these, just 11 are committed by a stranger.
And while abductions make the front pages, only five to seven actually occur a year. 
Yet although the statistics are encouraging, as a nation we're worrying more.
Studies repeatedly show that parents are more fearful for their children than in the 70s.
In 1971, eight out of 10 eight-year-olds were allowed to walk to school on their own. Now, it is fewer than one in 10.
And, sadly, it seems our fears will only get worse.
Professor Frank Furedi, a sociologist at the University of Kent and author of Paranoid Parenting, says: "I've been examining this culture of fear for seven years and every year the situation gets worse. Things that weren't a problem three years ago are today.
"Before, it was argued that it was unsafe for kids to play outdoors on their own. Then they were unsafe playing indoors, so kids were encouraged to sit at a computer. Now there is the risk of paedophiles lurking in chatrooms.
"Whatever kids do, there's a health warning. I passed a park play area recently and for every child on the swings or monkey bars, there were about two adults watching to make sure they didn't get hurt.
"There was no chance for the kids to play around and have an adventure because they were under constant surveillance.
"We no longer think of them as being robust - we now see them as vulnerable and at risk. We think there must be constant adult supervision. But youngsters also need to be taught to be self-sufficient."
So why are parents more fearful now?
Prof Furedi believes the major factor is that people are now waiting until later in life to have kids - and they have fewer than in the 70s. "For this reason they put more emotional investment in their child and can be more obsessed with safety.
"Parenting in itself has also become more complicated. We're now being told that bringing up children is difficult and that we need to read all these books and watch TV shows about it.
"So parents lose confidence in their own ability and are far less secure."
Ironically, this hyper-attentive-ness is actually having a damaging effect on our children.
Most of us can remember having the Green Cross Code drummed into us at primary school by Tufty the squirrel.
But too many kids are now starting secondary school having never walked to classes on their own.
For this reason, many 11 and 12-year-olds are believed to have the pedestrian skills of a six-year-old in the 70s.
RoSPA is now so concerned that it is supporting Learning About Safety Through Experiencing Rick (LASER), a scheme where 10-year-olds encounter various scenarios aimed at boosting road skills.
HEATHER Welford, a childcare expert and writer based in Newcastle, agrees that too many kids aren't able to look after themselves.
She says: "Parents do have to use their common sense when it comes to safety. But, generally, I don't think they're giving kids enough chance to be streetwise. They can't be streetwise unless they let them be independent.
"The first time your child walks to school on their own, walk 50 yards behind them or just part of the way. Then let them do it on their own.
"They have to learn to deal with minor crises - such as getting off the bus early or not having enough money on their mobile to call for a lift." Parents must work out their own safety boundaries for their youngsters. But Prof Furedi says that it's important to set your child free. "Otherwise, as a nation, we'll grow increasingly dependent on our parents.
"One interesting development is that more people in their late 20s are now living with their parents," he explains. "People are no longer learning to be independent."

