PAYBACK; 
EXCLUSIVE RECLAIM OUR STREETS WE'LL CUT CRIMINALS' BENEFITS TO COMPENSATE VICTIMS

CRIMINALS will have benefits cut and the cash sent direct to their victims, the Government revealed yesterday.
Victims Minister Fiona Mactaggart said: "It won't mean you will get a big cheque so you can buy yourself a Christmas present or the new DVD which was nicked. But it means you do get payback." 
Currently only six out of 10 offenders ordered by the courts pay compensation to victims.
But the new automatic payment system will mean that will rise to nearly 100 per cent.
And the victims will know exactly how much they are going to receive and when.
The courts will also be asked to increase the number of compensation orders handed out to muggers, burglars and thugs who escape jail.
The orders - on top of fines - will mean small amounts will go to victims of crime.
Ms Mactaggart said: "We need better payback.
"We have to put much more robust systems in place to make sure compensation is delivered.
"This system will mean there will be no uncertainty for victims.
"This is one of the things I find is most important when I talk to victims.
"Of course they want the money because they can't afford to replace an item which was stolen. "But they also want a practical sense these people are paying back for what they did."
She added: "The deductions may only be a fiver or a tenner a week. It will take a long time for victims to get the full compensation the court has decided.
"But they will get it - and that is really, really important."
Those hurt by yobs will still get cash from the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority's pounds 200million a year budget.
Victims of burglaries, theft and minor assaults will all be entitled to the automatic compensation.
The moves come after ministers were blasted over plans to cut compensation to victims of minor crimes from the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority and give it to those more badly hurt.
The proposed reforms will require a new law. Official consultation will end this month - feedback has so far been very positive.
The Government is determined to put the wronged person at the heart of the process of law carried out by police, then the Crown Prosecution Service and the courts in its "victims' revolution".
Under a Code of Practice, which becomes law in April, there will be new rights for innocent victims. They include:
THE police will give victims monthly updates on their investigation until someone is caught or the case closed.
THEY will tell victims within five days if someone is arrested and when and where the court case is.
POLICE officers or the CPS will explain why an offender received a particular sentence.
IF charges are dropped in serious cases like rape, child abuse, murder or dangerous driving, the victim or their family will be given a chance to meet the CPS to be told why.
Ms Mactaggart said: "There is a tradition in the British legal system that the prosecution is there for the state. The consequence is that the victims often feel there is no one there for them.
"Victims don't always feel their needs are central. This will create a much better deal for victims.
"It is the big change I am trying to make - and I am passionate about it."
OUR NEW RIGHTS
Monthly updates from the police on progress of an investigation until someone is caught or the case is closed.
Notice within five days if a suspect is arrested.
Details of when and where a court case is taking place.
Police or Crown Prosecution Service to explain sentences given to offenders.
Chance to meet the CPS if charges are dropped in serious cases such as rape, child abuse, murder or dangerous driving.


TAX RISES WITH BABY SHORTAGE

INCOME tax could rise nine pence in the pound by 2074 to pay for Britain's growing "baby crisis", a report claimed yesterday.
A Labour think-tank says as the population gets older the cost of pensions, the NHS and care will go up.
But the number of people paying tax will fall as fewer babies are born.
The report blames the costs to women's careers of having a baby while young.
There is already an annual 90,000 gap between the number of children women want and those born.
However the report rejects calls for family-friendly taxbreaks and instead wants four weeks of paternity leave and an increase in maternity leave and pay with free part-time childcare for all.
Nick Pearce, of the Institute for Public Policy Research, said: "A fall in fertility would have serious long-term consequences.
"Fertility patterns can take up to 40 years to change so politicians need to start taking action now."

NO CHANCE; 
FAMILIES GRIEVE FOR 3 PALS AS CAR PLUNGES 40FT UPSIDE DOWN IN RIVER

A DISTRAUGHT mum yesterday paid tribute to her daughter - one of three young friends who died when a car plunged 40ft landing upside down in an icy river.
Their bodies were hauled from the wreckage after a frantic rescue attempt by emergency services - including 25 firefighters.
Liz Carroll, 22, Richard Hornsby, 25, and James Robson, in his mid 20s, were trapped in the blue Renault Clio after it smashed through railings and somersaulted on to a weir.
Last night Liz's mum Elanear James said: "We were very close. I can't tell you how much we are all going to miss her."
Rescue crews using searchlights battled for an hour to free the trio following the horrific smash at 11.15pm on Saturday.
They slung a ladder five metres across the river to the weir and crawled across it to get to the car. Fire chief Rob Clow, who led the rescue effort, said: "All three emergency services worked together in very arduous conditions.
"It is very unfortunate that the incident had such a tragic outcome."
He said each of the victims had to be cut free before being slid back along the ladder.
He added: "The firefighters wore safety lines and life jackets as they got into the freezing river to guide the stretchers back.
"The water was flowing quite fast and the ladder stopped them from being swept downstream."
Police were last night appealing for witnesses to the accident at a bridge over the Tyne in Wylam, Northumberland.
The three victims - described as "great kids" - are believed to have been driving home to Wylam in Liz's car when it suddenly veered off the bridge.
Liz lived with mum Elanear, 43, stepfather Ed James, 57, and younger brother Matthew, 18, in a red brick semi in the affluent commuter village just 10 miles outside Newcastle. Mr and Mrs James are franchise holders for global courier firm Fastway and Liz worked for them as a saleswoman.
Mrs James said: "We talked about everything. She was a very confident, tall, opinionated, young lady who knew her own mind - exactly the kind of person I brought her up to be.
"We were very upset about the others. We knew Richie. He was a lovely boy. They'd been friends a long time."
Liz's friend and colleague Nick Turner, 39, said: "She was a lovely, bubbly girl and great fun.
"I sent her a text just after midnight and, very unusually, I didn't get one back. Now I know why. Her family are distraught. They are nice people."
The families of Richard and James were too upset to comment, but Lesley Duggan, 54, landlady of the local Ship Inn knew all three youngsters.
She said: "Richie worked for me as a barman on and off for the last five years and was like a son to me. He was one of the nicest lads I have ever met.
"All three of them were great kids. The whole village is devastated. A tragedy like this affects everybody."

THE RIOTERS WILL BE DEALT WITH .. BRUTALLY; 
EXCLUSIVE 2 SUSPECTS FACE IRAQI QUIZ ON 'MURDER BID'

TWO Iraqi rioters suspected of trying to kill British troops face a "brutal" grilling - from their own side.
The men were among four filmed being beaten by baton-wielding soldiers after home-made grenades were hurled into a UK military base.
Iraqi officials have vowed to prosecute them for attempted murder. If convicted, they face jail in appalling conditions.
A Whitehall source said yesterday: "Local police know exactly who they are and lifting them shouldn't be a problem.
"They'll be dealt with far more brutally by their own people than by our soldiers." Last night officers from the Iraqi Tactical Support Unit, the equivalent of Britain's CID, were preparing to swoop on the suspects and take them into custody.
The men, believed to be married with children, will be held behind bars before appearing before a judge in flashpoint al-Amarah in south Iraq.
Alarmed at growing civil unrest, Iraqi chiefs are keen to assert their power over the community. British soldiers will only take part in the operation if asked. 
An intelligence insider said: "This is a clear sign Iraqi security forces in this area are trying to get a grip on the situation.
"Troops involved in the alleged beatings were obviously trying to control a situation that was getting out of hand. The Iraqis are taking it seriously." Rioters were videoed being beaten during mob violence in al-Amarah in January, 2004.
But the beatings and grenade throwing incidents are being probed separately. 
Military Police arrested three men from the 1st Battalion, The Light Infantry, and interviewed the victims. Senior Iraqi police then pledged to nail the grenade-throwers. Our Whitehall source disclosed: "They will prosecute them for attempted murder."
Soon after the video pictures were made public eight days ago the British base, Camp Abu Naij, was hit by a record 20 rockets in two reprisal attacks. No one was injured.
The source said: "Six rockets hit at night. Later another 14 were fired. Soldiers know it is revenge." Defence Secretary John Reid will today call for critics of UK forces to be "slow to condemn and quick to defend".
Claiming that insurgents are using the media to undermine morale, he will urge more understanding of "the realities of modern combat and the people we send into it".

Blender HORROR

A YOUNG girl got her hair caught in an electric food mixer and had to be freed by firefighters in Paignton, Devon.


THIS MEAL MAY CONTAIN NUTS.. (AND BOLTS); 
EXCLUSIVE METAL IN TESCO LASAGNE

STUNNED Adam Derwin holds up the unhealthy additive he found in his "healthy" ready meal - a 3/4in steel bolt.
Student Adam, 17, was tucking into into a pack of Tesco's Healthy Living chicken lasagne when he bit into the metal piece.
Mum Deborah, 37, revealed yesterday: "He felt something hard as he chewed his dinner and spat it out straightaway.
"He thought it was bone, but we were all shocked when we saw it was a large silver bolt.
"He's lucky he didn't swallow - it could have blocked his windpipe and killed him.
"I'm just relieved it wasn't his 11-year-old brother Luke because he may not have spat it out. I dread to think what could have happened." Housewife Deborah, who got the 400g pack from a store in Sidcup, Kent, said she would never buy precooked dinners again.
The mum of two, of nearby Orpington, added: "It's not worth the risk. My boys could have been injured eating their dinner.
"It must have fallen off machinery in Tesco's factory. But it's very dangerous and they must make sure it never happens again."
The supermarket giant has since apologised and asked her to send back the bolt so it can investigate.
A spokesman said: "We take food safety very seriously. We're mystified as to how this happened."



