Bird flu sends chill through farmers
PANDEMIC: Free range hens under threat as devastating illness nears Britain

POULTRY farmers in Warwickshire say they fear for their livelihoods as deadly bird flu nears Britain.
The government has admitted an outbreak is significantly more likely after cases were confirmed in France.
Now free-range chicken farmers in the region are taking precautions but admit they will be helpless in the event of an outbreak.
Tom Everitt, of Everitt's Poultry Farm on the A5 just north of Atherstone, has 10,000 chickens.
He said: "We're trying to keep visitors away and are using strict hygiene measures, but there's not a lot you can do.
"We have four fishing lakes and we get birds coming in and out. Our birds are free range so we're holding our breath.
"If we were put into close proximity with an outbreak they would put down a perimeter and slaughter the area.
"It would be terribly difficult to carry on. We would be wiped out for three months."
Despite the danger the government has resisted calls for vaccination and to move flocks indoors as an overreaction.
Mr Everitt's son Tony, who is also a poultry farmer, thinks the government is limited in what they can do to prepare.
He said: "It's so new for everybody and they are still working on what is for the best.
"In October it was blown out of proportion. Now it's getting closer and is just across the Channel, it's a lot more concerning.
"Until it arrives you can worry yourself silly over something that might never happen. We are just going to live day to day at the moment."
Bird flu could devastate Coventry and Warwickshire's small- holding and prize chicken-breeding community, one breeder warns.
Experts warn that some rare and unusual breeds may even face extinction in the event of a major outbreak because vaccine supplies are being eaten up by major poultry producers.
Rupert Stephenson, a fishmonger at Coventry Market, breeds Old Dutch Bantams for competition at his Radford home. 
He said: "So far I haven't been able to find anywhere that can supply me with vaccinations for six birds, they have to be for large groups of 1,000 or more.
"I'm concerned rarer and endangered breeds would suffer by not being vaccinated."

Pub bosses seek dining area go-ahead

OWNERS of a pub want to erect a timber decking area for outdoor dining.
Punch Taverns, which owns the Bucksford pub in Whittleford Road, Stockingford, has applied to Nuneaton and Bedworth Borough Council for planning permission.
Borough councillors are also being asked to approve a grassed play area, a pergola above the main entrance, and elevational changes.
Among other plans submitted to the council for approval are:
75-77 Queens Road, Nuneaton, conversion of building to 12 flats (Alan Holmes)'
115 Gadsby Street, Nuneaton, change of use of garage to day care centre (PAK Trust)'
Rear of 139-145 Lutterworth Road, Nuneaton, demolition of 141 Lutterworth Road to provide access road for apartments (Springbourne Homes)'
Bridge Street, Chilvers Coton, Nuneaton, two storey extension to side, bricking up first-floor windows, provision of fire doors (Coton Conservative Club)'
Asda Superstore, Newtown Road, Nuneaton, installation of new roof plant, roof access stairs, and roof edge barrier (Asda Stores Ltd)'
135 Weddington Road, Nuneaton, single storey extension to front, first floor extension to side, porch and dormer roof/window to front (J. Cunningham)'
Freeway Centre, Park Avenue, Nuneaton, access ramps to front and side of building (Warwickshire County Council).

City's council tax bills to rise by 3.5 per cent;

TORIES set a council tax rise in Coventry of 3.5 per cent last night in a budget they hailed as "robust, realistic and responsible".
Deputy council leader Tony O'Neill outlined plans to concentrate on basic services such as repairing roads and helping children and vulnerable adults.
They're creating 40 jobs -mostly street cleaners and bin-men - and cutting eight administrative and managerial posts and will use pounds 5.5million from reserves.
He said: "We want Coventry to be a city where people choose to live, choose to work, choose to be educated and where businesses choose to invest."
Tories, Liberal Democrats and Independents voted against an alternative Labour budget pinning the council tax rise close to inflation at 2.5 per cent. The Tory budget was passed with support from Independents.
Tories were accused of hypocrisy by Labour leader John Mutton for increasing charges above inflation for hundreds of city's most vulnerable people.
They're putting meals on wheels up by 2 0p a meal this year and 2 0p plus inflation for the next five years. Charges for minibuses to day centres will also rise well above inflation.
And hundreds of people who need care assistants at home will have to pay more for the help they receive under a series of rule changes.
Cllr Mutton said: "It's absolute hypocrisy. Each year when Tories were in opposition they urged Labour to set a nil increase in council tax, or at the very least a level below inflation.
"What do they do when they're in control? Do they do what they said? No." He went on: "How do we see them treating elderly, sick, infirm and most vulnerable people? Do we see Tories charging these people a level below inflation? Do we heck." 
Socialist leader Dave Nellist said: "Put your hand on your heart and tell me honestly if any single service user or carer agreed with the rises in fees and charges. Frankly, I think it's unlikely." The final bills for council tax will include precepts for West Midlands Police and West Midlands fire authority and will go up by 3.62 per cent overall. 
That will take an average Band D property up from pounds 1,258.08 last year to pounds 1,303.62 this year.
People living in Keresley and Allesley will pay slightly extra for their parish councils.

Health service shake-up gets a public airing

PLANS for the future of the NHS in Coventry have been laid out by health chiefs at a public meeting.
Managers from departments throughout the NHS outlined proposals for a massive shake-up of medical services in the city and throughout Warwickshire.
The bodies that govern ambulances, mental health and drug addiction services, hospitals and GPs could all face mergers with other health bodies in the West Midlands if the proposals go ahead.
The plans have come from the Department of Health, which is keen to reduce costs. It claims the shake-up would improve the quality of care for patients by slashing costly management structures and redirecting the cash into front-line services across the country.
Charles Goody, chairman of the West Midlands South Strategic Health Authority, outlined the potential benefits of the changes at a public consultation meeting held at the Methodist Central Hall, in Warwick Row, city centre, on Monday night.
He said: "This is an organisational change, not a change in services.
We want to bring down waiting lists and improve quality of care."
But some health professionals who attended the meeting raised concerns about the scale of the proposals.
They fear local services would suffer and health bosses would become less accountable to the public.
In particular, Malcolm Hazell, chief executive of the Coventry and Warwickshire NHS Ambulance Trust, said he was worried the high standards the Coventry and Warwickshire Ambulance Trust had achieved could be lost.
Mr Goody said the proposals would not result in a drop in the level of healthcare -and in any case may not go ahead.
He said: "It's not a done deal. Here, and across the country, we are getting strong reac-Charles Goody said the ing down waiting lists
tions, but we have to balance the opinions of all organisations like the voluntary sector, local authorities, and the public."
He added that any job losses that might occur would not be in frontline services.
People in Coventry and Warwickshire are being asked to send their opinions on the proposed changes to: West Midlands Consultation Office, PO Box 2675, Stafford, ST16 9BW.

I could cry, but it's time for me to sell up

SYRUP FIRM: It's no fun any more, says woman in sad loss

BUSINESSWOMAN Sue Osbourne, who ran an acclaimed syrup firm single-handed following the sudden death of her husband, has made the agonising decision to sell up.
Sue and Richard Osbourne ran Pinks Farm Fruit Syrups, in Mows Hill, Henley-in-Arden, for six successful years, winning numerous awards and supplying 90 shops nationwide.
But the dream turned into a nightmare last May when Richard died from a heart attack at the age of just 55.
The keen marathon runner went to the gym three times a week, but had fought high blood pressure for years.
Sue, aged 57, said: "It was such a shock to lose Richard when we did. He and I were such a great team and no-one can fill the gap.
"Our children have been exceptionally supportive and proactive but they all have their own lives and careers and the business needs full-time commitment.
"This is why I have reluctantly come to the decision to sell."
Sue has a grown-up son and daughter from her first marriage, and a son with Richard.
The sale of the business includes the "secret formula" to the six syrups, including damson, summer fruits, muscat and elderberry and cloves, as well as all associated equipment, the brand name and existing contracts.
Sue said selling the firm had been one of the toughest decisions of her life. "It has always been a profitable business but we have limited our growth because I simply can't handle the extra work.
"In the last six weeks that Richard spent pushing the sales side, considerable interest was shown in the product and, if circumstances had been different, things would have really taken off for us.
"I just hope when I sit down and sign the piece of paper I will not start blubbing.
"At times it feels like I am selling my life, but it has lost the fun element."
Pinks Farm Fruit Syrups are free from artificial colours, flavours or preservatives.
Sue said: "Our syrups are used a lot by professional chefs.
"Aside from making great dessert toppings, they work extremely well in sauces for meat, poultry and game, marinades and vinaigrettes and in both soft and alcoholic drinks and cocktails.
"Although the range has been sold into Waitrose stores and does very well at food fairs, in farm shops and delis, there are so many untapped markets yet to explore.
"I really hope we can find someone with the amount of passion Richard and I shared for this product, to take it on to new heights."
For more information, visit www. enterprise-consortium.co.uk/syrups

Return to Midsomer Murders

COVENTRY teacher-turned-actress Elizabeth Spriggs has become the first guest star to return from the dead in ITV drama Midsomer Murders.
She will be appearing alongside John Nettles in the new series on Sunday, playing Ursula Gooding . . . nine years after being murdered in the crime series.
The 76-year-old actress appeared in the very first episode of the international hit based on the bestselling books by writer Caroline Graham, who hails from Nuneaton.
Elizabeth, who grew up on a farm in Fillongley, said: "To come back to the show was marvellous because the first time around I just loved it. I remember feeling sorry when the first film finished - it was a pilot and they didn't know then if it was going to work.
"Little did we know."
Elizabeth was killed off when she first appeared in Midsomer Murders but is returning as the sister of the original character. She will be the first guest star to appear a second time in the show.
Elizabeth, who taught at Coventry Technical College before turning to acting, said: "The script is wonderful, subtly contrived and it works perfectly."
She added: "John Nettles is so down to earth and makes everyone so welcome."
Elizabeth recently filmed The Queen of Sheba's Pearls, in Sweden, with Peter Vaughan and her acting credits include Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, Sense and Sensibility, Nice Guy Eddie, Playing the Field and Poirot.

