Riding on the crest of a Manx new wave

FROM faded Victorian splendour to economic powerhouse the Isle of Man has reinvented itself to become a leading player in the 21st Century.
Exciting new industries have been attracted to the island, helped by a dynamic government and a tax system that allows companies and individuals to enjoy the rewards of their hard work. Now it just needs someone to improve the weather.
A coastline of yachts, financiers discussing real estate, bank balances that notch up eight figures and an extremely benign tax regime.
If it wasn't for the rain, you might mistake this for the Caymans, or even Bermuda.
But it wasn't always like this for the Isle of Man.
Two decades ago, with 15 per cent unemployment, a stagnant one-trick-pony economy and a government in disarray, it was relegated to being just another windswept Victorian seaside holiday destination.
Now the 33-mile long island, a self-governing Crown dependency, has a booming economy, with hedge funds, insurance, e-gaming, a film industry and even a space programme.
So forget tail-less cats, kippers and even the famous TT motorbike race.
These days, the Irish Sea island is peppered with celebrities and multi millionaires.
And just in case you miss Johnny Depp or various Hollywood stars while you are there, the government has spent the past year putting together a Pounds 500,000 branding campaign to spread the word.
'It is not just the radical new zero per cent corporate tax that is creating converts the world over,' says Brian Donegan, head of the government's finance arm and one of the latest recruits to the Manx way of life.
'It is taking off in all areas of industry with a support system that includes a world-class telecoms infrastructure, the right financial regulation, professional expertise and a government that can do joined-up thinking.' Donegan says of the island's 78,000 inhabitants: 'Everyone is pulling for Isle of Man plc. But the speed of growth has created a gap between reality and the public perception.' But there is no denying that with one of Europe's fastestgrowing economies, driven by 21 years of unbroken growth and unemployment below 1.5 per cent, the island is an economic powerhouse that is blowing its rivals out of the water.
In the past ten years, annual growth has averaged six per cent compared with the European Union average of only 2.4 per cent.
Gross domestic product of Pounds 1.1 billion translates to Pounds 17,309 per head. Not only does this outstrip the UK figure in relative terms, but because the standard rate of income tax is only ten per cent (the higher band is 18 per cent) and there is a Pounds 20,000 personal allowance, people are taking home a lot more than their counterparts on the mainland Chris Corlett, chief executive of the Isle of Man's department of trade and industry, says that the government took a decision in the early Eighties to do everything to turn round the island's fortunes.
Now there is a long and peculiar list of companies on the island, including CVD Diamond, a synthetic diamond producer that creates coating for the windows of rockets going to Mars.
And then there is Gibbs Technologies, which makes the astonishing Aquada car. Simply press a button and it takes to the water. The US military is buying a Jeep version.
Corlett, a former Accenture management consultant, says: 'It only takes ten new primary sector jobs to create a knock-on effect of 60 opportunities.'
The government's economic strategy is to avoid overdependency on one sector.
Financial services, the backbone and longest-standing success story of the economy, accounts for nearly 38 per cent of its output.
But its growth is slowing and Corlett hopes that sectors such as e-gaming will start to step in and make a difference. This has meant going out and winning not only fresh businesses but whole new industries.
Nevertheless, propelled by the 2006 zero corporate tax bill, which included the relaxation of company reporting requirements, the tide has turned for the Isle of Man.
Donegan points to the diversification within sectors, such as the rise of hedge funds under the financial services umbrella.
'Future growth within the financial sector is likely to be the funds sector, which has jumped to $30 billion (Pounds 16 billion) under management,' he says.
There is also a shift from retail banking to corporate banking and niche services for wealthy individuals.
Nick Boon, also from the island's finance team, looks after winning over a new breed of rich individuals.
'Because of having no capital gains tax or inheritance tax, we have always had a fair share of wealthy people wanting to come here in some cases with the sole purpose of dying unharnessed by the Chancellor,' says Boon.
In April, the government also introduced a cap of Pounds 100,000 of income tax per person each year in an attempt to attract entrepreneurs who they believe will stimulate the economy.
'It is part of an initiative bringing a younger generation to the Isle of Man,' says Boon.
VAT and other indirect taxes, such as duties on alcohol, tobacco and petrol, pull in 71 per cent of the government's income.
But this is not just a playboy island, says Corlett. 'The money is being spent on improving the standard of living.' Last year, public spending rose by eight per cent to Pounds 522 million, with a reserve of Pounds 1 billion. Over half went on health, social security, social services and education including a pledge to pay all Manx students' university fees, plus a Pounds 70 million state-ofthe-art hospital.
'Life here is good,' says Donegan. 'And it is just going to get better.'


Fergie joy as United hammer out a title message

CHELSEA have muscular efficiency, Arsenal pace and panache. As he enters his 21st year as Manchester United manager, Sir Alex Ferguson is building a team that combine elements of both. They might just give him the key to the door for his ninth Premiership title, four years after United's last championship.
An unadventurous Portsmouth, who came to Old Trafford with fine away and defensive records, were ruthlessly brushed aside by a rampant United,who moved three points clear of Chelsea to leave the champions playing catch-up at Tottenham today.
The pot is bubbling, the plot thickening ahead of a potentially epic meeting between United and Chelsea at Old Trafford in three weeks.
As they had been in winning 4-0 at Bolton last weekend,United were irresistible, their football for the most part as fluent and expansive as in the Cantona years of a decade ago. Paul Scholes, Fergie's carrot-topped pocket Eric,was the orchestrator from midfield but all around he found willing allies and runners.
A goal within two minutes, from the penalty spot, by Louis Saha set them on their way, Cristiano Ronaldo soon adding a stunning second from a free-kick.
In the end, Portsmouth, with David James again outstanding, were fortunate to limit the damage to just one more goal, scored by the Serbia defender Nemanja Vidic.
And yet, pre-match, Portsmouth might for once have been fancying their chances on this ground.United may have made a good start to the season, may be threatening to contest to the finish Chelsea's attempt on a third consecutive title,but they were coming off a surprising and draining Champions League defeat in Copenhagen.
In addition, Pompey had made a fine start themselves, going into the game in a heady fourth place,buoyed by a convincing home win over Reading and having had a week to prepare properly. The problem lay in the team news, however.
United had Gary Neville, leading scorer Saha and, most significantly, Ryan Giggs,who has been inspirational thus far, back in their line-up.
By contrast, Portsmouth were undermined by the absence of three of their usual back four, meaning that their splendid record of six clean sheets, three away from home, was always going to come under threat.
Sol Campbell had not travelled after picking up a stomach bug while Glen Johnson and Linvoy Primus were injured. The sight of Giggs going up against Noe Pamarot, who had struggled against Arjen Robben at Chelsea fortnight earlier, was one to have Portsmouth fans covering their eyes.
Pompey manager Harry Redknapp sought to stem the red tide by sending out a five-man midfield - and curiously leaving out the Premiership's top scorer Nwankwo Kanu - hoping to contain and counterattack, or sneak a goal from a set-play. The game-plan lasted less than three minutes.
Rooney, back with a bang last weekend with a hat-trick at The Reebok, immediately got in behind the Porstmouth defence, only to be brought down by captain Dejan Stefanovic. Saha stepped up and duly converted the penalty for his seventh goal of the season.
It prompted a vibrant,intense passage of United play as the passes fizzed around,Portsmouth left chasing shadows despite their numbers behind the ball.
Scholes was spraying accurate
But for the former England No 1, though, Portsmouth would have been seriously embarrassed before the game was even a quarter old.
Neville was rampaging forward from right-back as of yore and twice found himself in good shooting positions,the second from an exquisite through-ball by Rooney, only for the goalkeeper to save well both times. James also got long balls,Rooney linking play cleverly and Ronaldo tormenting Matt Taylor.
It was the Portuguese who scored a breathtaking second with less than 10 minutes gone when Andy O'Brien went in too high on Saha some 30 yards out.
Ronaldo unleashed a wicked, swerving free-kick that left James in the Portsmouth goal groping thin air.
down to turn aside Rio Ferdinand's header.
Somehow Portsmouth survived to the interval without further damage, even getting their first shot on goal just before halftime when Taylor struck a 30-yard attempt that the underemployed Edwin van der Sar punched away.
Pompey readjusted for the second half, Andrew Cole replacing Manuel Fernandes and supporting Benjani Mwaruwari up front. You thought it might just be an exercise in rearranging the deckchairs on the Titanic, but for a while they entertained hopes of getting back into the game. They should have done it, too, Taylor's cross only half-cleared to Nico Kranjcar on the edge of the penalty area. With a clear sight of goal, the Croat blazed wide, however.
It was the turning point and Pompey were soon made to pay for their wastefulness.
Giggs played a short corner to Neville and from his cross Vidic, shamefully unmarked, rose to head home the third.
Now United were flowing again, their slack period over. James again denied Neville from close range and turned away Saha's low drive. It had almost become a turkey shoot but United were sated. Taylor wasted the chance for consolation when he rolled a shot wide of a gaping goal.
Rooney and Ronaldo were withdrawn to give Darren Fletcher and John O'Shea some pitch-time and the win bonus. Ferguson, you suspect, will carry on into a third decade until that title - and perhaps another European Cup - is back at Old Trafford.
MANCHESTER UTD (4-4-2):Van der Sar; Neville, Ferdinand, Vidic, Evra; Ronaldo (Fletcher 75), Carrick (Silvestre Scholes, Giggs; Rooney (O'Shea 76), Saha.
Subs (not used): Kuszcak, Brown.
PORTSMOUTH(4-5-1): James; Pamarot, O'Brien, Stefanovic, Taylor; O'Neil, Davis, Mendes, Fernandes (Cole 46), Krancjar (Hughes 84); Benjani (LuaLua 66). Subs (not used): Kiely, Kanu. Booked: Davis.
Referee: M Dean (Wirral).

UK Coal's land goldmine

INVESTORS in UK Coal, the remnants of the British mining industry, will be given a boost on Tuesday when the company explains plans for its 50,000-acre property portfolio.
The company has the land on its books at Pounds 274 million, but property director Jon Lloyd is expected to tell analysts that it could be worth double that.
Lloyd is expected to say that achieving planning permission to build houses or light industrial/retail schemes on parts of the portfolio is a distinct possibility.
However, UK Coal, which is expected to start applying for planning permissions, cannot revalue the land in its books until approvals are granted.
One City source said: 'Agricultural land is worth between Pounds 5,000 and Pounds 6,000 an acre, but land with consent for housing changes hands for Pounds 1 million an acre.'

