US looks at Britain's Bloody Sunday to learn lessons of army disorder

When soldiers kill unarmed civilians the fallout can last for decades. It is the message of the film Bloody Sunday, and the American military has been learning the lesson the hard way in Iraq.
At the US army's staff college at Fort Leavenworth, in Kansas, Paul Greengrass's 2002 docudrama on the killings in Northern Ireland has become essential viewing for officers being trained in counter-insurgency techniques.
They are hoping that new outrages can be prevented by studying the past.
Shot in jerky, handheld style by the director of United 93, Bloody Sunday chronicles the confusion and chaos that led panicky British soldiers to fire on a crowd of civil rights marchers in Londonderry in 1972, causing 14 deaths. The mindset of politicians and army officers is brutally dissected as well as the actions of the troops.
"It's a very tough movie," said a senior US army officer. "It highlights the critical importance of making sure that what you do at the highest levels is understood all the way down at the squad level."
The massacre at Haditha and the prisoner abuse scandal at Abu Ghraib have driven that point home. Whatever the culpability at the top, it is the actions of the lower ranks that sparked the horror. Every soldier, no matter how powerful or powerless, can affect the course of the war.
One of Bloody Sunday's greatest admirers is Lieutenant General David Petraeus, head of Fort Leavenworth, who recommends it to the officers under his command.
Petraeus, who led the 101st airborne division, the "Screaming Eagles", into northern Iraq at the start of the war, has been drawing up the American army's new counter-insurgency doctrine, its first for 20 years.
The model of a modern general, the Ivy League-educated Petraeus was chosen for the task because of his success in winning the confidence of Iraqis in his area. He went on to train the Iraqi security forces before returning to America.
The manual will be presented for approval this month to General Peter Schoomaker, the US army chief of staff, before it is published later this summer.
"One of the paradoxes of counter-insurgency is that there are times when less force is more productive than more force," a senior army officer said.
"The idea is that you end the day with fewer enemies than you started. If a tactical action nabs one really bad guy but creates 25 more bad guys because of the way it is conducted, it is not useful."
Phrases that would have once been dismissed as politically correct by soldiers, such as fostering "cultural awareness" and creating "stakeholders" in society - among the Sunnis, for example -are in vogue. Petraeus has been telling his men not to "cordon and search" houses in trouble spots but to "cordon and knock", ie, ask permission to enter. It is advice that could have prevented the horror at Haditha.
The efforts of the British to recover from the experience of Bloody Sunday are also being studied. "Over time, some very thoughtful and impressive approaches were adopted," one army lecturer said, citing the gradual reform of the army, police and judiciary.
It is not an entirely useful model. "Historically, insurgencies have taken a long time," the lecturer reflected. "How long have the British been dealing with Northern Ireland?"

'Black mass mastermind' behind Monster of Florence murders

OVER nearly two decades a serial murderer branded the "Monster of Florence" shot eight courting couples in the Tuscan countryside, invariably at full moon, and sexually mutilated their bodies.
The Monster's last victims, two French tourists, were slain near the picturesque village of San Casciano in 1985. Now the killings, which began in 1968, have returned to haunt the tranquil haven.
Prosecutors claim they have at last identified the mastermind behind the murders.
They have accused Francesco Calamandrei, a respected former pharmacist who lives in the village, of ordering the deaths of the last five couples.
Calamandrei, a bespectacled, overweight 65-year-old, was the first to learn of the allegations on Thursday when Florentine prosecutors, as they are obliged to do under Italian law, notified him of the outcome of their latest investigation into the murders.
In their notification letter, the prosecutors allege that Calamandrei gave his orders to the three men convicted of carrying out the murders -Pietro Pacciani, Mario Vanni and Giancarlo Lotti -and paid Pacciani, a semi-literate farmer, for pieces of the female victims' bodies.
Pacciani's 1994 trial in Florence was attended by Thomas Harris, the author of The Silence of the Lambs, who set part of his sequel, Hannibal, in the Renaissance city.
After he was sentenced, Pacciani shouted that he was "as innocent as Christ on the cross". In his last interview before his death in 1998, Pacciani said: "The real monster must be a person of the highest intelligence, not a poor ignorant soul like me."
Investigators now allege that Pacciani and the other two convicts were only pawns in the hands of Calamandrei.
In one search warrant, prosecutors wrote that "a group of people who celebrated black masses and magical rites put the weapons in their hands".
A lawyer, an entrepreneur, an artist and a former university medical professor were all suspects for a time.
But only Calamandrei remains accused. Among his victims, the magistrates claim, were Stefano Baldi and Susanna Campi, killed at a beauty spot northwest of Florence in September 1981.
As posters went up on trees in the Tuscan hills warning people about the Monster, Calamandrei allegedly struck four more times. German tourists Horst Meyer and Uwe Rusch Sens were killed as they slept in their camper van in September 1983.
The magistrates allege that Calamandrei not only ordered the murders but was also present at the last of the rituals, the slaying of the French tourists Nadine Mauriot and her husband Jean-Michel Kraveicvili as they camped in the countryside.
The following day, a small plastic bag containing a cube of flesh from Mauriot's left breast arrived at the office of the public prosecutor. Calamandrei is accused of playing a part in the mutilation of Mauriot.
Michele Giuttari, the former head of the Florence flying squad, who has investigated the murders for more than 10 years, has argued that the masterminds behind the Monster were "respectable citizens above suspicion" who formed a "satanic sect".
Vine branches were left inserted in the sexual organs of the female victims. A French private detective brought in to investigate the last victims found that they had travelled to Italy to take part in satanic rituals.
Calamandrei was first linked to the Monster of Florence when his divorced first wife came forward to accuse him. Her testimony prompted magistrates to reopen their inquiries in early 2004. In April 2004, police raided his home and, during a 12-hour search, seized 10 boxes of pornographic videos as well as books and documents.
Calamandrei has denied wrongdoing. His lawyer Gabriele Zanobini has said the allegation that his client was involved was "completely absurd". Magistrates in Florence are due to request this summer that he stand trial.
In a separate probe in Perugia, a prosecutor has accused Calamandrei of ordering yet another murder, that of Francesco Narducci, a doctor whose body was found floating on Lake Trasimeno after he had been strangled.
Calamandrei allegedly commissioned two Sicilian brothers to carry out the killing in 1985 because Narducci knew too much about the Monster's crimes.
In San Casciano, the retired chemist is known to all but now shunned by most. He may find some relief in painting, the hobby he has dedicated himself to since his retirement seven years ago. According to Father Renzo Polidori, the local parish priest, Calamandrei's works are "strange, dark drawings, full of suffering".

Vodka from Varrington faces a real downer

DRINKERS with refined palates sometimes struggle to distinguish cheap British vodka from paint stripper.
Soon, if Finland has its way, the similarity will be official, writes Nicola Smith.
The Nordic vodka superpower is planning to use its six-month presidency of the European Union to try to ban some British-made brands from using the "vodka" appellation, forcing them to be labelled as "spirit drink" or even "white spirit drink".
The Finns, who take the helm of the EU next month, are convinced that only vodka made from potatoes or grain is worthy of the name and want to amend EU law. Up to one-third of British-produced vodka will have to be re-labelled if the amended EU law is passed in the autumn.
"We want to promote this traditional approach to the definition of vodka," said Pekka Pesonen, the Finnish secretary for agriculture. "This is something we really feel strongly about."
Under the proposal, British brands such as Ciroc, Moskova, Red Square and Kirov, as well as many supermarket and pub-chain vodkas, would have to be reclassified because they are not made from potatoes or grains.
Diageo, the global drinks producer, said its Ciroc brand, made from French grapes and aimed at affluent young professionals, would be hard hit. "I can't envisage any British people going into a bar and proudly asking for a white spirit-martini," said Alan Butler, its director of EU corporate relations.
Britain is not alone in the battle for the spirit of Europe. The continent is split along a faultline pitting "vodka liberalisers" -such as Britain, Hungary and the Czech Republic, which refine vodka from molasses, grapes and sugar beet - against "vodka purists".
Finland can count on support from Germany, Poland and the "vodka belt" of Nordic and Baltic states.
"Vodka has a heritage," said Alexander Stubb, a Finnish MEP. "You can't treat it like a second-class spirit. It's like telling a Scotsman that you can produce whisky from whatever you want to."
Struan Stevenson, a British Conservative MEP, accuses the Nordics of "waging a European vodka war".
Last week Stevenson staged a blind vodka challenge in the European parliament and found only one in 10 MEPs and Eurocrats could tell the difference between 12 grape and potato-based vodkas.

Single ticket wins £ 18m superdraw jackpot

Last night's winning Lotto numbers 4 6 7 9 28 39 Bonus:20
Last night's lottery produced one jackpot-winning ticket worth £ 18m. Seventeen tickets matched five balls and the bonus to receive £ 84,643 and 824
with five numbers collect £ 1,091 each. Four balls are worth £ 40. A single ticket won the Thunderball jackpot.
Thunderball 3 9 14 16 34 Thunderball:4
Lotto Extra 3 6 20 21 27 43
Daily Play 2 11 14 21 22 23 26

Girl of 16 charged with murder

A GIRL of 16 has appeared in court charged with the murder of a mother of two who was stabbed. 
The girl is accused of murdering Ann Meade, 39, from South Norwood, south London, who died on Wednesday evening. She appeared at Croydon magistrates' court but has not been named. A Scotland Yard spokesman said a man aged 19 had also been arrested. He was released on bail.

Blair orders TV satire for Christmas

THE prime minister's office has requested a copy of The Thick of It, a political satire about a hapless minister harassed by No 10's spin doctor, for Christmas. It has been described by those in the know as too close for comfort. The show's creator, Armando Iannucci, said that he found it depressing that Downing Street had requested a set of recordings of the series.

Man attempts to kidnap eight-year-old

POLICE are hunting a man who attempted to abduct a girl of eight as she played on a climbing frame in a park at Blackwater, Hampshire. 
The girl was approached by the man as she played with her 12-year-old sister. She told police that the man asked her to go with him and when she refused he grabbed her wrists. He ran off when the older sister shouted at him.

