Catwalk kindness

A Glamorous night is in store for guests at a charity fashion show.
The fundraising event at the Country Park Inn, Hessle, in aid of Dove House Hospice, will feature "normal" women modelling clothes.
It is the third time Nicky Walgate, owner of Crave boutique in Prestongate, Hessle, has joined forces with the venue to raise funds for the charity.
She said: "It is going to be a fashion-packed night, with plenty of glamour.
"But at the same time we will be raising important funds for Dove House.
"Zebra will be providing funky music and there will be a disco with all the golden oldies later on. If you are interested in fashion, this is a night you shouldn't miss out on."
The night kicks off at 7.30pm with a fashion show, featuring men's and ladies' designer clothing.
Following a three-course meal, Crave will show ladies' fashions in two categories - "day to night" and "party on".
Louise Willingham, Crave trainee manager, said: "All our models are friends and family, ranging in age from 15 to 55. We like to use women of normal shapes and sizes.
"There will be a complete range of clothes on show on Saturday, from London brands to one-off pieces. We will have everything from club pieces to more formal wear."
Gill Shaw, Dove House Hospice fundraising director, will speak before the disco and dancing at the end of the night.
Zebra will provide a free minibus for people to go from the venue to its club in Witham, east Hull, after the event.
Mrs Walgate explained why she wanted to help the east Hull hospice.
"Three of our models have had relatives cared for by Dove House," she said. "It is a nice place to be if you need care; it's peaceful and calm. The staff work really hard to make it as homely as possible."
Sally Ward, fundraising assistant at Dove House, said: "Crave Boutique and the Country Park Inn are big supporters of the hospice and we are delighted to be benefiting from such a great event.
"It is going to be a fun and fabulous night of fashion so we urge people to book tickets as soon as possible so they don't miss out."
Everyone attending Saturday's event will be given a goody bag on arrival, with the programme for the night and vouchers from all businesses taking part.
Dove House Hospice in Chamberlain Road has 20 beds to care for patients with terminal illnesses. It also offers day-patient and therapy sessions.
A few tables are still available, costing £22.50 a head or £200 for a table of 10. Call the Country Park Inn on (01482) 640526.

Child rapist given two life sentences

A "dangerous" career criminal who abducted and raped a nine-year-old girl then threatened to kill her if she raised the alarm has been given a double life sentence.
Robert Douglas Zipfel watched the young girl playing in her garden in Bridlington before abducting her on April 2 this year.
The 30-year-old then took her to a cemetery in the resort and indecently assaulted and raped her.
He threatened her with a knife and told her he would kill her and she would never see her parents again if she made any noise.
The honorary Recorder of Hull and the East Riding Judge Michael Mettyear said: "Your conduct towards this little girl was horrific.
"You abducted her from her own garden, you threatened her in a terrifying way and raped her.
"You physically damaged her and you have mentally scarred her, perhaps for life.
"The sympathy of the court and all decent people goes out to her and her family.
"You are in effect a career criminal. You have hardly done a day's work in your life.
"You are a very dangerous man."
Zipfel committed the abduction and rape just two months after being released 21 months early from a 36-month sentence for burglary.
The girl's mother, who cannot be identified for legal reasons, said Zipfel had "ruined" her daughter's life and she had been significantly traumatised.
Zipfel was caught after his DNA was found on the girl's clothing.
Zipfel, of Bempton Crescent, Bridlington, pleaded guilty to her abduction, rape and serious sexual assault at Hull Crown Court.
He was given two life sentences for abduction and rape and a concurrent sentence of four years for abduction.
He will serve a minimum of six years before he can apply to be considered for parole.
However, Judge Mettyear said he was "a very dangerous man".
He had been drinking all day after he was sacked from his job as a bricklayer within an hour of starting that morning.
After 7pm he was seen walking up and down the girl's street before abducting her.
He snatched the youngster as she rode her bike and told her he was 13 years old.
He took her to the cemetery and despite her repeatedly telling him she was nine years old he continued his attack until he was interrupted and ran off.
The girl was able to get help from a friend of her parents who immediately called the police.
He had taken her to the cemetery and threatened her as he sexually assaulted her.
The victim's mother said: "I just hate him. I don't care if he drops dead.
"I feel strongly that I don't want to see him ever get out."
She said she is hoping the family will now be able to move on with their lives.
She said: "I think it will help my daughter to move on. She's not doing too badly now, she's coming on.
"But because of everything that's happened, you are very protective. I want her to tell me where she is and what she's doing all the time.
"It never goes away."
Zipfel, a heroin addict, had 25 previous convictions, two for robbery and many for burglary.
Links
Crown Prosecution Service
www.cps.gov.uk/local/yorks_humberside/humberside
Humberside Police
www.humberside.police.uk

Walk this way . . .

The scheme is just one innovation that is part of the school's travel plan, which was launched earlier this year.
Tailor-made by the school, with expert help from the road safety team at East Riding Council, the plan aims to reduce the number of car journeys to and from school.
Since in 2004, the Government has asked all schools in the country to have a plan in place by 2010.
In the East Riding, the road safety team needs to get through 175 schools, but is making good progress, with 95 already completed.
The team began working with schools that had child casualty records and have met the first target, by completing 40 per cent by April 2006.
Once the individual school and the road safety team are happy with the plan, it is submitted to East Riding Council and signed off by Sue Lockwood, director of corporate resources and Andrew Williams, director of children, family and adult services.
The plans are then sent to the Department for Education and Skills (Dfes), at which point the school is eligible to apply for a Government grant of up to £5,000.
Sproatley school's plan was approved in April.
Sue Fallows, who has been instrumental in setting up the Sproatley School travel plan, said: "It's not just about trying to get the cars off the roads, it's also about encouraging children to take the healthy option.
"We already had a walking bus but as part of the plan, we have introduced another two.
"They work really well because it gets children into walking again, keeping them healthy and also reduces the amount of traffic going to and from school.
"The parents have been fabulous, we have parent volunteers who assist with the walking buses and they work really well.
"They are already having an impact on the amount of traffic at the school at peak times.
"Even though the plan has been approved, we keep improving it and adding to it and we hope to spend our grant money on installing new cycle shelters so the children can bike to school."
Paul McConnon, senior engineer within the East Riding road safety team, said he is pleased with the progress being made by the schools.
He said: "The aim is to encourage more people not to take their cars to work and to take the more healthy option of either walking or cycling.
"This then helps reduce childhood obesity, has a good impact on the environment and also improves road safety.
"We are very lucky in the East Riding as all the schools we have worked with so far have been very active and wanted to participate, which makes our job easier.
"The schools know what they want to do but don't always have the expertise, which is where we come in.
"So far every travel plan we have submitted has been approved, which is great.
"We started at schools where there was a child casualty record, we thought this would be the fairest way to do it, and are gradually working our way around more and more schools."
Mr McConnon is convinced the plans are having an impact at the schools where they have already been put in place.
He added: "Before Skidby school launched its plan, none of the children were cycling to school.
"As part of the plan, the school introduced cycle shelters and now there are already about 12 per cent of children cycling to school.
"The headteacher said the only mistake we made there was possibly not getting enough cycle provision because it took off so well.
"It's a fantastic scheme that gives schools an opportunity to have an impact on the social problems that we face in today's society including childhood obesity, global warming and road safety.
"It's also a really good chance for parents, teachers and pupils to work together to make improvements that affect everyone."

'Complex should attract business to city'

It Is a view of the city few people get to see.
But Hull's newest hotel, the Express by Holiday Inn, will offer panoramic views across the city when it opens next month.
About 60 contractors are working around the clock to ensure the hotel in Ferensway, city centre, hits its November 16 deadline.
The hotel, part of the £200m St Stephen's complex, will have 128 bedrooms across seven floors.
General manager Luc Perquin said the city has been waiting for a new city-centre hotel for a long time.
He said: "The occupancy in Hull has always been very high for the simple reason that there are not enough bedrooms.
"There's a huge demand for bedrooms, but not enough quality.
"The Village Hotel in Priory Park filled a gap in the market, but there's still more demand.
"The whole St Stephen's development is something Hull should be very proud of because it will, hopefully, attract more business into the city."
The hotel includes a terrace and bar overlooking Ferensway and four conference rooms with capacity for up to 65 delegates.
Express hotels, which are either owned or franchised by InterContinental Hotels Group, aim to use an efficient management structure.
Housekeeping is contracted out and a skeleton team of 11 staff will run and manage the bar, administration and maintenance.
All the rooms are identically designed and priced at £79.50 per night, including breakfast.
Mr Perquin said: "The mid-market priced hotels will be more suitable for Hull than a four-star property.
"This hotel will suit the market. With Express hotels, people already know what the product is."
Mr Perquin said there has already been "unbelievable demand" for rooms.
"Judging by the amount of inquiries that we have already had, I'm sure that we're going to be very successful," he said.
Mr Perquin will have three weeks to train staff before opening.
Contractors are working down from the top of the hotel, decorating and fitting out rooms and are close to completing the seventh floor.
Mr Perquin, who has worked in the hotel industry for 11 years, said the hotel was on schedule to open in November.
He said: "It's very challenging in every single way. But we make progress every day."

