1 IN 5 BRIT TOTS ARE FOREIGNERS

BRITAIN'S immigration crisis is being fuelled by a huge rise in foreigners having babies.
One in five children born in the UK now has a mum from abroad and immigrants are putting the biggest strain on public services by having larger families.
The shock figures published yesterday showed birth rates are soaring among mothers from Eastern Europe as well as countries like India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
About 150,000 babies delivered last year had foreign-born mums. A Statistics Commission report predicted these number will continue to spiral, with immigrants giving birth to 10million more babies by 2031.
Women from overseas outstrip British mums in the fertility stakes, with UK-born women averaging up to 1.7 births since 2002 compared with 2.5 among foreign mums.
The report also confirmed two out of three jobs created under Labour have gone to migrants.
It found that 1.4m of 2.1m new jobs created since 1997 were taken by people born overseas - despite Gordon Brown's famous "British jobs for British workers" pledge.
Labour MP Frank Field, said: "We are even further from seeing British workers getting British jobs."

WE WANT RHYDIAN FOR SEX; 
Fans lust over blond virgin

SCREAMING women fans have been begging to take the virginity of X Factor hunk Rhydian Roberts.
A flurry of females cannot resist shouting to the self-confessed virgin: "We want your babies!"
Rhydian, 24, got a string of offers from fans as he returned home to Wales for a one-off show.
Office worker Shelly Settle, 24, said: "He's very sexy. I would love to show him what sex is all about."
She joined dozens of fans who mobbed Rhydian at the Millennium Centre in Cardiff Bay.
One girl who asked the singer to marry her was awestruck when he replied: "Maybe".
But Rhydian, who has always said he does not believe in sex before marriage, still left the gig alone.
He said: "The girls here have been very kind and I'm totally amazed at my reception."
Meanwhile, pop babe Kylie Minogue, 39, will feature in Saturday's final when she sings with 36year-old sister Dannii's other act Leon Jackson, 18.
And sibling group Same Difference will be joined for a song by Kylie's exlover Jason Donovan, 39.

I'M NO LOVE RAT! I JUST FELL FOR SOMEBODY ELSE; 
Jungle star Marc tells of his passion for Cerys

LUST-STRUCK I'm A Celebrity star Marc Bannerman insisted last night: "I'm not a love rat - I just fell in love with someone else."
And his new girl Cerys Matthews admitted: "I feel guilty, but we never meant to hurt anyone."
The pair fell for each other in the heat of the jungle show last month. Their flirting led to Marc's split from his girlfriend, actress Sarah Matravers, 33.
Now loved-up Marc and Cerys have finally broken their silence about their romance in an exclusive interview with OK! magazine at their Welsh hideaway.
Former EastEnders star Marc, 34, said: "Some pretty nasty things have been written about me being a love rat.
"In some ways I understand why I got that label, but I never cheated on anyone. I just fell in love with someone else."
Former Catatonia singer Cerys, 38, said: "Yes, I felt guilty, but we didn't intend for it to happen.
"We even tried to stop it happening in order not to hurt anyone."
Marc said he felt sorry for Sarah, despite the fact she has branded him a cheat and a liar.
He said: "I'm shocked she's doing everything so publicly. I don't blame her for being angry - but if you love someone you don't do this to them.
"If our roles were reversed, I'd be happy for her."
He also denied claims that he was fighting a drink problem, saying: "I just like a pint of Guinness or two."
The pair plan to spend Christmas together - but Cerys claimed it was too early for them to think about wedding bells.
Full interview in OK ! magazine, out now.

MY ODD JOB LOVER WAS MR CANOE; 
'Dead' hubby serviced widow

NEIGHBOURS mistook backfrom-the-dead canoeist John Darwin for a randy handyman, it was revealed last night.
He spent so much time at their home rumours spread his "widow" was having a fling with her oddjob man.
But after police released a photo of him with a scruffy beard locals realised Anne Darwin's lover was really her ex-prison guard husband.
One said: "Everyone thought there was something going on between her and the oddjob man. He was always round there.
"I just thought he'd landed on his feet with a wealthy widow."
Anne, 55, introduced the 57-year-old to electrician Craig Caygill after calling him in to rewire their home in Seaton Carew, Teesside, three years ago.
Darwin had supposedly died two years earlier on a North Sea canoe trip.
But Mr Caygill said of the handyman: "We never saw him go out and he never arrived in a car."
Anne has since admitted Darwin faked his death and was living with her.
She said when relatives called he would nip through a secret passage to the terrace next door. In March 2006 - under his alias John Jones - Darwin even objected to a planning application by a neighbour.
Hotelier John Beddows, 55, said: "I just can't believe he had the cheek."
Darwin turned himself in at a London police station last week. On Monday he was remanded to Durham jail charged with dishonestly obtaining GBP 25,000 and making an untrue statement to obtain a passport.
Yesterday Anne faced Hartlepool magistrate s accused of obtaining a GBP 25,000 life insurance payout and a GBP 137,000 policy. She was remanded in custody.
She later made a plea to see sons Mark, 32, and Anthony, 29, who have cut ties with their parents.

SEXY WAGS GET THE RED CARD; 
Hardman Fab to wield axe

ENGLAND'S likely boss Fabio Capello will ban WAGs from being around the players in the run-up to crucial matches.
The no-nonsense coach is expected to make the move if he is confirmed as manager of the national team.
It will mean the red card for the sort of boozy antics the girls got involved in during the last World Cup.
Last night the Italian was the red-hot favourite to land the job with Ladbrokes slashing his odds to 2-5.
And Capello's adviser son Pierfilippo admitted that his dad was enthusiastic about the opportunity.
He said: "The England job is really special. When the FA wants to speak to you, you have to listen."
If all goes smoothly with Capello's appointment one of his first moves will be axing the WAGs.
He believes players should be totally focused on their performance and is known to regard sexy women as a distraction - even if they are just being looked at.
At Juventus he even banned female staff from wearing short skirts and low-cut tops to stop them "distracting" players.
Many of England's critics said the presence of the WAGs in Germany during the World Cup was a major factor in the team's poor performance.
Among the boozy WAG crowd were Carly Zucker, 23, the girlfriend of Chelsea's Joe Cole, 26, Elen Rives, 29, wife of Frank Lampard, 29, and 22-year-old Manchester United ace Wayne Rooney's fiancee Coleen McLoughlin, 21.
But last night a source close to Capello said: "Fabio won't stand for that sort of thing.
"Other people don't take their wives to work, so why should footballers?"
Capello's management style has earned him the nickname Sergente di Ferro -
The Iron Sergeant - and he is expected to begin talks with FA chiefs in the next 48 hours after Jose Mourinho, 44, pulled out.
Yesterday punters were pouring money on the 61-year-old taking over. His desire for the job does not seem in question as, even before it became available, he said:
"England is my dream, something which I have always had inside me."
And his record as a boss cannot fail to impress the FA after winning the league at every club he has managed -
AC Milan, Real Madrid, Roma and Juventus.
As a tough midfielder, he won 32 caps for Italy and as a manager he is famous for falling out with players.
He once told ex-West Ham striker Paolo Di Canio, 39:
"You are an ugly c*** and you face looks like a penis."
He has also fallen out with David Beckham, 32, Alessandro del Piero, 33, and Edgar Davids, 34.
In 2005 he was voted more stylish than Beckham. He dotes on his wife, Laura, and they have two grownup children.

The screw in the canoe-

JOHN Darwin has now been charged with fraudulently obtaining GBP 25,000 from an insurance company and making statements that were known to be untrue to obtain a passport.
But at no point has anyone been charged with the biggest crime surrounding this story. The crime of falsely calling someone a canoeist.
"Canoe man", "the Disappearing Canoeist", "the Tyne Tees Canoeist" -
these labels are being flung all over the place. But John Darwin WASN'T a canoeist. He was a prison officer! But nobody calls him "The Disappearing Prison Officer".
Instead he's become the most famous canoeist the world has ever known - and we don't even know if he did it more than once.
And the first attempt wasn't exactly a roaring success, was it?
I bet there are canoeists out there who have been paddling for years who would love a fraction of John Darwin's exposure.
People who are on the fringe of the Olympic team, who are desperate for some Lottery money funding but have no doubt been told in the past that their sport is "not high profile enough". It is now! Probably about the only other thing I can legally comment on is with regards to his wife's name: Anne Darwin.
Is it just me or does anyone else think that every time her name is read out in the news that they're talking about Anne DIAMOND?
But back to the main star of the piece, John Darwin.
Or "John Jones" as the police now claim that he called himself while he was missing.
Did you see that photo of him in yesterday's paper? With a beard?
Well I say "a beard", but I should really say THE beard.
Because it is a belter. It's absolutely enormous. It's actually bigger than his whole face. It looks as if someone has turned Amy Winehouse's entire head upside down.
If he really wanted to disappear, why didn't he just climb inside that beard and hide in there?
One final thing. Imagine for a second what it would be like to have had the kind of amnesia John Darwin is claiming.
Just think - not to remember anything since 2000.
You'd still believe that England had a great football team.

Disabled man is beaten to death

A DISABLED man has died after he was savagely beaten and then left lying in agony for nine hours.
Ian Thomson was brutally attacked in his own home - but his injuries and chronic lung disease meant he couldn't cry out for help.
He was only discovered the following afternoon when a friend found him lying on the floor.
An incident room was set up at Livingston police station, and cops launched a murder inquiry after Mr Thomson died from his injuries three days later.
Detectives say the 56-year-old was attacked in the early hours of December 5 at his flat in Fauldhouse, West Lothian.
They don't know what the motive was, although they say nothing seems to have been taken from the house.
They will not say whether weapons were found or how many attackers there were.
Detective Chief Inspector Allan Jones said: "This is a particularly violent and callous attack on someone who was defenceless.
"For someone in his condition to have been subjected to this type of attack is despicable."

