Housing affordability at worst level for 15 years

Housing affordability has fallen to its worst level in more than 15 years the Council of Mortgage Lenders said yesterday, with buyers struggling with high interest rates, sluggish earnings growth and soaring house prices.
The CML said a typical first-time buyer paid 20.6% of their income to service their mortgage in October, up from 20.4% in September, while for those moving house it rose to 17.6% from 17.5%. The figures are the highest recorded since 1991 and 1992.
Large mortgages granted to borrowers who have little ability to repay them is creating a British version of the US sub-prime crisis, according to a separate report from Citizens Advice (CAB) yesterday. Advisers at 360 of its bureaux across Britain reported that UK sub-prime lenders are up to 10 times more likely to press ahead with repossessions than mainstream lenders.
The CAB said its advisers dealt with more than 57,000 problems about mortgage and secured loan arrears, an 11% increase on the previous year, and estimates that as many as 770,000 people have missed at least one mortgage or secured loan payment in the previous 12 months. It also reported that court action for repossession has risen steeply and is now at a similar level to that seen during the repossessions crisis of the 1990s.
Among the worst examples found by the CAB were a 68-year-old man who took out a £75,000 sub-prime loan to buy his council home even though the payments took £455 of his monthly £520 pension.
CAB chief executive David Harker said: "The cavalier behaviour of some brokers and sub-prime lenders is seriously undermining home ownership and hitting the most vulnerable borrowers hardest. Many sub-prime lenders are flouting the rules on responsible lending by granting loans when it's clear the borrower will not be able to afford to repay it."
But the CML dubbed the report as "too simplistic" and based on a "very skewed" sample of borrowers. CML director general Michael Coogan said: "It should come as no surprise that those lenders specialising in lending to borrowers with past credit problems have a higher experience of default among their borrowers, and that they are pro-active in seeking to deal with arrears as soon as they arise. But the allegation that they default too quickly to court action is an assertion that is not borne out by the typical practices and processes of specialist lenders."
But growing fears of a housing crash are pushing the issue to the front of the political agenda. Yesterday Conservative party leader, David Cameron, urged mortgage lenders to be more lenient on homeowners struggling to meet repayments to prevent a boom in mortgage repossessions.
Some 1.4 million people are coming off their fixed-rate mortgages next year and will be faced with payments of about £200 a month more to meet the cost of servicing their home loans.
Acting Liberal Democrat leader, Vince Cable, called on the government to protect people from a property crash after signs of falling house prices. "Ministers can no longer ignore the possibility that millions of people could face the misery of negative equity and repossessions if the housing market turns," he said.
Meanwhile, the level of borrowers taking out fixed rate loans dipped below 70% for the first time this year as households anticipate that the Bank of England will lower borrowing costs to soften the impact of the global credit crunch.
The CML expects interest rates to fall to 5% by the end of next year.
The proportion of income first-time buyers paid on mortgage repayments in October, up from the month before 20.6%.

Cadbury Schweppes beats targets as sales of chocolate recover: Revenue growth to exceed expectations by 4%-6%: Drumming gorilla reverses effect of salmonella recall

Cadbury Schweppes expects to beat sales and margin targets this year after the business was boosted by continued strong recovery in UK chocolate sales and growing signs that it is winning chewing gum share from market leader Wrigley's in several key markets.
Chief executive Todd Stitzer said revenue growth for 2007 would be "above the 4%-to-6% target" and there would be "a modest increase in confectionery margins", which had been expected to remain unchanged at 10.1%.
In the UK, chocolate sales were boosted by the success of a surreal television advert for Dairy Milk featuring a gorilla playing the drums along to Phil Collins's In the Air Tonight. Meanwhile, the return of the Wispa, after a four-year absence, led to more than 20m bars being sold in eight weeks. Yesterday Stitzer said the gorilla advert would be followed by "equally creative and motivating" publicity.
Double-digit UK chocolate sales growth in the second half of 2007 is in marked contrast to the same period last year, when sales were hit by a salmonella-linked product recall and a long period of summer weather.
Finance director Ken Hanna said sales gains had not been at the expense of margin. "We didn't chase low-price sales vol umes at Easter and we are not chasing low-price seasonal volumes (at Christmas)."
The prospects for chocolate in 2008 remain less certain, however, as Cadbury indicated it would have to raise prices by 5% to cover increases in dairy, vegetable oil and cocoa prices.
Asked if he expected costs to ease next year, Stitzer said: "With billions of people becoming more western in their consumption habits it is going to be a longer-term effect on raw material (prices)." Cadbury is budgeting for a 5%-to-6% increase in milk and oil costs next year.
Strong performance from UK chocolate sales were last night seized upon by the Unite union, which has been critical of the group's decision to close a factory in Keynsham, near Bristol, with the loss of 500 jobs. In June Cadbury revealed plans to cut 7,800 jobs worldwide.
Cadbury is also finishing the year with a strong performance in its Adams chewing gum business, best known for the Trident brand, which it acquired five years ago. Since then it has steadily reversed declines in US market share, taking sales from Wrigley's. Share in the US has grown from 27% to almost 35% under Cadbury ownership.
For the year so far, the group's gum share in the US has risen three percentage points despite a 10% increase in prices introduced in April. Stitzer described the performance as "exceptional". He said Trident's relatively new introduction to the UK was also performing well, with revenues up 50% and market share reaching 10% at the expense of Wrigley's.
The group continues to pursue plans to demerge its American soft drinks business, yesterday revealing the spun-off division will be renamed Dr Pepper Snapple Group. The division will take in £30m losses from the ill-fated launch of a new sports drink called Accelerade.
Stitzer declined to comment on confirmation earlier in the week that activist investor Nelson Peltz's Trian investment vehicle had developed a joint investment strategy for Cadbury with a Qatari sovereign wealth fund.

Algiers bombs: Twin explosions: Fears of al-Qaida link as blasts kill up to 67: Two rush hour explosions, one a suicide bomber Speculation that UN mission was target

Two car bomb blasts, one a suicide bombing, killed dozens of people in Algiers yesterday, fuelling fears of a north Africa-wide al-Qaida front targeting national and international interests.
The near simultaneous attacks at the end of the morning rush hour were believed to be Algeria's deadliest, with as many as 67 people killed.
Although the exact number of deaths was not clear, if that toll is confirmed the bombings would be outstrip the Casablanca bombings in neighbouring Morocco in 2004 in which 45 people died.
The targets were Algeria's constitutional court in the Ben Aknoun district of the capital, and the office of the UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, in the Hydra area, home to western companies, government buildings and embassies.
"There was a massive blast," a UN worker wrote in an anonymous item for a BBC website. "Everything shattered. Everything fell. I hid under a piece of furniture so I wouldn't be hit by the debris . . . One of my colleagues had a big wound in her neck, she was bleeding severely."
Al-Qaida's self-styled North African branch last night claimed responsibility on a website, saying two suicide bombers attacked the buildings with trucks each carrying 800 kg (1,760lb) of explosives. It described the UN offices as "the headquarters of the international infidels' den".
"This is another successful conquest . . . carried out by the Knights of the Faith with their blood in defence of the wounded nation of Islam," said the statement, which claimed that 110 people had been killed.
Until recently, most violence in Algeria was attributed to the GSPC, the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat, which generally targets the regime and its symbols, and not foreign interests: thus the intense focus last night on whether the bombers had intended to hit the UN.
"We are sure that the GSPC is behind it," the interior minister, Noureddine Yazid Zerhouni, told reporters.
Ten UN staffers were confirmed killed and others were missing. If all the missing are dead, it would be the highest toll for the UN since a 2003 attack on its headquarters in Baghdad killed the UN envoy Sergio Vieira de Mello and 21 others.
The Algerian government gave an overall confirmed death toll of 22 with 177 wounded, but hospitals and rescue officials put the fatalities much higher, with one hospital source saying 67 had died.
"I have no doubt that the UN was targeted," said the high commissioner for refugees, Antonio Guterres, adding that the blast occurred in a street separating the main UN office from the UNHCR compound. "If that is so, it's an al-Qaida operation and therefore an absolutely quantum leap," one western diplomat said.
There was also speculation that the date - December 11 - indicated an al-Qaida link, because of the echo of the attacks of September 11 2001. The April attacks were also on the 11th of the month. But December 11 was also a key date in Algeria's struggle for independence from France - marked by mass protests against a visit by President Charles de Gaulle in 1960.
Algerian media said many of the victims in the first blast were on a bus carrying students. Video footage showed a shallow crater in the road. In Ben Aknoun, people ran through the streets crying in panic and the wail of police sirens filled the air. A body lay on the road covered with a white blanket, two buses were burning and debris from damaged cars was strewn across pavements.
Algeria has invested heavily in supplying special forces soldiers withhi-tech equipment in search-and-destroy offensives against the rebels. Four civilians and two insurgents were killed in November, down from 60 people killed in October.
But yesterday's attacks undermined security forces' hopes that they had crushed the insurgency after the killing by the army of the ringleaders of April's Algiers attacks, which hit the prime minister's office and a police station.
The French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, condemned the bombings as "barbarian acts", during a telephone call to his Algerian counterpart, Abdelaziz Bouteflika.
In Washington, the White House called the perpetrators "enemies of humanity" and said the US would continue counter-terrorism collaboration with Algeria.
Algeria's gas reserves have generated massive foreign investment, especially from France, but poverty is extensive and unemployment 70% in some areas.

India: Boy shoots classmate dead with father's gun

A schoolboy shot and killed a classmate yesterday in a private school in a suburb of New Delhi, police said. The victim, identified by local news channels as Abhishek Tyagi, was shot four times at the Euro International school in Gurgaon. The boy died on the way to hospital. Two pupils from the same year had been detained in connection with the shooting. Reports said all the boys were aged 15. "Probably once or twice they had a fight with each other," a senior police officer told NDTV news. "And so now they decided to settle the score and he got his father's revolver and fired at him."


