Politics, a private life and the public right to know

DAVID BLUNKETT is fighting to keep his job as Home Secretary. The BBC and the Press have suddenly become obsessed with his survival. 
Could he be forced to resign? The media are concerned with little else.
And yet the same media were last week barely interested in the saga of Mr Blunkett and his former lover, Kimberly Quinn.


They could not summon up a flicker of interest as to whether Mr Blunkett was the father of Mrs Quinn's young son and of the baby whom she is expecting in January. The BBC was clear that Mr Blunkett's love life was absolutely his own affair. It was left to this newspaper, with the intermittent support of one or two others, to plough a lonely furrow. 
Now everything has suddenly changed. 'Friends' of Mrs Quinn - possibly Mrs Quinn herself have made damaging allegations to the Sunday Telegraph.
Of these, the most serious is the suggestion that Mr Blunkett helped Mrs Quinn to obtain a visa for her Filipina nanny to allow her to stay in Britain indefinitely. If this is true, Mr Blunkett would be guilty of having abused his powers.
Improperly The first point is that had one or two newspapers not shown an interest in the bitter accusations being swopped between Mr Blunkett and Mrs Quinn, we would never have heard the allegations of wrongdoing. Of course, they may be wholly untrue. But if Mr Blunkett has behaved improperly, we can safely say that we will only know because some newspapers have thought it permissible to take an interest in his private life.
There is a great gulf in thinking here. The BBC and much of the media now take the position that what a politician does in his or her private life is not the business of the rest of us, so long as it is legal. On the face of it this seems a reasonable proposition. Politicians are obviously entitled to some privacy. They must have some protection against the prurient interest of newspapers with an eye for a salacious story.
But the idea that a politician's private life is no business at all of the media is equally mistaken.
It rests on a false premise - that the private and the public self are two disconnected halves with little or nothing to do with each other.
This is untrue. No one can build a wall between his public and his private self. Private experience may influence public action. Because we live in a democracy, we have an interest in knowing if it has.
When Mr Blunkett's three-year affair with Mrs Quinn, a married woman, became known several months ago, most people were inclined to take a tolerant attitude. No newspaper called for his resignation. The general feeling was that, although in an ideal world it would be better if home secretaries did not have affairs with married women, Mr Blunkett had done nothing that called into question his fitness to be a senior minister.
The plot thickened not because any section of the media wanted his scalp but as a result of Mr Blunkett's own actions. He was, and is, anxious to establish his paternity of Mrs Quinn's son and her unborn baby through DNA tests. Some people will think this attempt misguided since it is very likely to bring distress to Mrs Quinn and her family. Others will say that a man has the right to know whether he is the father of a child - as well as the duty to provide for it if paternity is established.
We should not rush into judgment on this point. But a picture of an obsessive Mr Blunkett does emerge - as does a rather unfeeling Mrs Quinn who, only months after their affair has ended, resists any attempt by Mr Blunkett to establish his rights in respect of those who may be his children, and then sets about blackening his name in the Press.
Infatuation Unpleasant though this may be, it is useless to pretend that Mrs Quinn's allegations do not raise questions about Mr Blunkett's judgment.
I repeat that the allegations may be baseless. But if they are true, they show a Home Secretary who has thrown caution to the wind in the course of his infatuation, and broken several minor rules and - if he did intervene over the visa - one major rule, all of which would call his judgment into question.
Here is a minister responsible for some of the most draconian legislation this country has ever seen. Most people are probably inclined to accept these authoritarian measures - the new ID card unveiled yesterday by Mr Blunkett is only the latest example - on the basis that they trust his assessment of the threat posed by terrorism. My own willingness to trust him is undermined by the picture of a lovelorn Home Secretary bending rules in Mrs Quinn's favour, as well as the way in which he has attempted to establish, without, it seems, much consideration for their welfare, that he is the father of her children.
Sir Alan Budd has been appointed to investigate the charges that Mr Blunkett has abused his position. If he exonerates the Home Secretary, Mrs Quinn and her loquacious 'friends' will have some explaining to do. Even so, will Sir Alan be able to dispel doubts surrounding Mr Blunkett's judgment?
Effrontery Whatever happens, I hope that journalists who unthinkingly repeat the mantra that a politician's private life is absolutely his own business will think again. Sexuality is only a part of what may interest us.
It would be absurd to say that Mr Blunkett's blindness has not helped to form his character.
Are we not justified in trying to work out how it may have affected him? I want to know as much as possible about the foibles, hobbies and preferences of our leading politicians since they may well have some bearing on the laws which they pass, and the things they make us do.
Those who mourn the past, when deferential newspapers did not have the effrontery to pry, or cite the example of France, where thanks to a draconian privacy law they still do not, are in effect saying that we should not delve into the motives and interests of politicians who seek to rule us. If they had their way, we would have no knowledge of the allegations against Mr Blunkett, or the disquieting issues which they raise.
Let him take Mrs Quinn as his lover. That is not a cause for resignation.
It is the actions resulting from this obsessive (on his part) love affair that may be. Whatever Mr Blunkett got up to with Mrs Quinn is not our business, and most of us would prefer to keep it that way.
But the Home Secretary's judgment and possible misdemeanours are very much our business, and we only know about them because we have been told about this affair.

These cannot have been easy days for Sadie too many meetings, too few walkies

BLUNKETT, Blunkett, everywhere. The Home Secretary's bad behaviour was the talk of Westminster yesterday. 
There was just one exception: the Commons itself, where MPs were restricted by debating rules and so paralysed by convention that they dared not raise the matter.
In the bars and caffs, in the queue for the palace Post Office, at the entrance near the Tube station, and even at the Prime Minister's monthly news conference, Mr Blunkett's dalliance with Kimberly Quinn caused a hot buzz.


Each scandalous detail was inspected and met with amazement and some disgust. Had Blunkett gone mad? Could the Home Secretary, keeper of so many national security secrets, holder of what we used to call one of the Great Offices of State, really survive in his job after bedding this foreign woman? 
Tony Blair's lips parted in a heyguys smile the moment he entered the state room at 10 Downing Street where we alley-dogs of the press had gathered. The Prime Minister was wearing a sparkly white tie. 'The gangster look,' murmured one of my neighbours.
Mr Blair tried to make a few pleasantries about the Government's ID cards legislation but he knew it was pointless. 'It's possible you'll want to ask me about one or two other things,' he chuckled.
He deployed his pretty-boy, public-school voice, the one that joshes and, shucks, makes you think he's a regular kinda charmer.
But his eyes did not dart. His neck moved stiffly.
His eyebrows, with every repeated mention of l'affaire Blunkett, formed little circumflexes of superior dismay. Behind all the worldliness and tolerance he was tense.
Mr Blair hinted that we inky varlets were low to bang on about the minister's 'private life'. Mr Blunkett would 'continue to do his job', said the PM. 'I have absolutely every confidence in him,' he said, without much energy.
He was asked if he thought the Home Secretary's behaviour had been 'wise or appropriate'. He snapped at the ITN man who asked this question and refused to answer it. Brittle. Interesting.
Reporters repeatedly reminded him of the old 'purer than pure' approach he promised New Labour would take in government.
How was the Blunkett thing different from Tory sleaze?
A normally level-mannered sage from the Telegraph became impressively vexed, asking how all this stuff about free train tickets and privilege for Mr Blunkett's 'clandestine lover' fitted with Mr Blair's 1997 attack on an elitist system that gave 'breaks to the few'.
Mr Blair wafted all this aside. He insisted he had 'not looked at every detail of this'. There was no real argument in his response, though.
Free train tickets? Pah! 'Raise it with the appropriate authorities,' said the Prime Minister with a shrug.
Mr Blunkett himself appeared in the Commons around teatime to debate the Home Office's legislative programme. He arrived on the arm of a woman. What?
Relax. It was Caroline Flint, a ministerial colleague. Also in attendance was that twitching mother goose Hazel Blears, another minister, pulling on her lapels, brushing the lint off her bosom, her eyes blinking, a smile flashing on and off her busy-busy face. Give that woman a dose of Imodium!
Sadie, Mr Blunkett's guide dog, wandered. These cannot have been an easy few days too many meetings, too few walkies. Sadie had to be stopped from leaving the Chamber by one of the Whips. THE only person who alluded to the Kimberly business was Derek Conway (Old Bexley &amp; Sidcup) who said 'very few people' would wish Mr Blunkett anything other than well.
Was this not a surprising thing for a Tory to say? Let me explain. Mr Conway wants to be the next Speaker. He is a stodgy ally of Establishment and wants to impress Labour MPs, whose votes he will need if he is to attain the Chair.
It is reported that Mr Blunkett believes that 'dark forces' are 'out to get him'. Surely not. But darkhaired forces? That's more like it.

