STOP WHINGEING AND GET ON YOUR BIKE, MR WALSH

JOHN WALSH wrote, a couple of editions ago, that he had had "a letter from the Bill tells me that court proceedings will start shortly, and I should Do Nothing until summoned. So, here I sit, waiting to appear in court and be told that I'm banned from driving for six months or a year. I cannot bear it. I am practically married to my car. Everyday things - the school run, the trip to Waitrose, the drive to work - suddenly seem touched with an elegiac glow, now that I am about to lose them". 
Oh come on, Mr Walsh, and the hundreds of middle-aged, unhappy men like you who are about to lose their licences because they simply failed to observe those brightly painted cameras and huge white chevrons in the middle of the road.


Treat not having a car less as a threat to your manhood, but more a heaven- sent opportunity to change your life. Forget all that motor manufacturers' rubbish about the car you drive defining the person you are. Think of the benefit of not being thought of as a sad poseur when you say goodbye to that soft-top Chrysler PT Cruiser. 
And please stop considering yourself as a victim - it is not attractive. No one I know admits that the speed camera caught them doing more than a few miles an hour over the limit. Now what can you do? I know that for someone who considers themselves to be married to a car that this may sound ridiculous, but there is a simple answer: Get a bike. Before you go dismiss the idea without a second thought, let's have a look what the bike can do for you, a typical, fashion-conscious urban sophisticate.
Firstly the image, which is crucial for acceptance in the media world you inhabit. No problem here. Cycling, particularly in London, has none of the old stereotypes of working men in cloth caps. It is the transport of choice for everyone from judges to comedians, students to television presenters. Even newspapers journalists have been known to cycle to work. For the style obsessed, you can spend hours picking a bike in the wide range from macho full-suspension mountain bikes to the European functional cycles, much favoured by the cultured classes of Berlin and Amsterdam.
You admit your daily journeys are short and local. Ideal for the bike, which will be quicker and stress-free. No problem either for the journey to work. Transport for London has invested in some excellent cross-London cycle routes, including one to the centre of Canary Wharf. Contact the London Cycling Campaign - www.lcc.org.uk - which will give you free cycle maps, show you where to get training if you need an adult refresher course, and generally be about as helpful and friendly as you could wish. Mix in a few parks, canal towpaths, and riverside cycle routes and your journey will not only be faster than by car, but a lot more pleasant. Regular journeys will keep you fit without having to go to the gym. The exercise will make you feel better, your shrinking waistline and firmer muscles will boost your vanity.
You will now have time to stop at all those shops you never had chance to before as you were in too much or a rush, or couldn't find a parking place. Attractions will become more and more accessible. Eventually, when the time comes to get that licence back you will have another choice. Do you go back to the transport equivalent of the couch potato, or do you continue with something a little more varied and interesting?
Mr Walsh could always ask the personal assistant he mentions, Ms Xanthe Fellatio - or any of your female friends - which is the more attractive? A slightly podgy and pasty bloke whining and whingeing about speed cameras, or a man with colour in his cheeks and a trim little bum who enthuses about the signs of spring he sees on the way to work.

THIS KILLING MUST NOT BE ALLOWED TO UNLEASH CONFLICT ACROSS THE REGION

THE MASSIVE explosion which killed Lebanon's former prime minister, Rafik Hariri, was by far the most destructive attack since the formal end of the civil war 15 years ago. It shattered not only the armoured convoy of Mr Hariri and his entourage, but a peace that had grown increasingly uneasy in a wider region where peace is all too rare. 
A billionaire businessman who had served as prime minister for a total of 10 years, Mr Hariri was seen as a possible unifying figure in a still- fractured country. His political experience, his personal wealth, and his position outside Lebanon's main political and military groupings made him unique. Inevitably, he also made enemies. The manner of his killing, however, suggests that he was the victim less of an individual vendetta than an assassination designed to eliminate the opposition he increasingly represented.


One, hitherto unknown, Islamic group claimed responsibility last night in a video broadcast by al-Jazeera. A more obvious culprit, however, would be Syria - and specifically that strand of Syrian power represented by its secret service in Lebanon. The essential question, however, is less who killed Mr Hariri than whose interests are served by his death. And here it is hard not to agree with Syria's president, Bashar Assad, who described it as a terrorist attack intended to destabilise Lebanon. 
Destabilisation, though, can take many forms in the Lebanon of today. A general election is scheduled for April or May, but the rules have yet to be finalised. Last autumn a UN Security Council resolution called for a speedy withdrawal of foreign forces - by which it meant the Syrians - to allow a return to sovereignty and self-government. The scene was set for an election that could have turned on the continued presence of Syria - and might do still. Disorder, it could be argued, would furnish a pretext for the Syrians to remain.
The murder of the one politician who might have been able to bring moderate, nationally-minded Lebanese together, who might have been able to negotiate with Syria about troop withdrawal and who was well-connected abroad, leaves a dangerous vacuum. It also risks unleashing forces that even Syria might not be able to control. Renewed violence in Lebanon, even a return to civil war, could have much wider repercussions.
The extent of President Assad's authority inside Syria is far from certain. Damascus is coming under ever stronger pressure both from the US and Israel: the US which regards it as a base for terrorists and does not trust it to have "learnt the lesson" from Iraq, and Israel, which needs security on its northern border as it plans its withdrawal from Gaza. Instability in Lebanon is one thing; instability in Syria would be quite another. The US has complained about militants infiltrating Iraq from Syria across a porous border; it is not impossible to conceive of circumstances in which they might move in the opposite direction.
Israel may be settling in for serious talks with the new Palestinian government, but this is one of the few hopeful developments in the region. The Iraqi elections seem to have posed almost as many dilemmas as they have resolved. The Sunni boycott leaves the former power-holders and a large part of the country effectively without political representation. The violence continues, allowing Iraq's neighbours and allies of all stripes to jockey for advantage amid instability on all sides.
Iran, accused - like Syria - of harbouring terrorists, is the recipient of barely disguised US threats over its nuclear programme. It, too, faces elections this year and has that perilous mix of a young population, potentially rebellious students, and an ageing clerical regime. Even relatively quiet Egypt may face difficulties over its own leadership succession before long. Amid such volatility, it would be all too easy for an event, such as yesterday's assassination, to light a fuse that would ignite conflicts far beyond Beirut. This is a time for cool heads and wise words, not hasty conclusions, least of all any rush to arms.


THIS UNJUST BAN ON HUNTING WILL NOT STAND FOR LONG

Sir: How refreshing to read such an honest letter as A J Griffiths' (11 February), devoid of "pretentious rubbish" about foxhunting. He recalls a heyday in the early 1920s when the "most ill-mannered, arrogant assembly of humans" hunted and presumably annoyed people like Mr Griffiths. And there was I, thinking this Act was something to do with animal welfare. 

How on earth does he think in a new millennium any hunt can ride roughshod over the farming community when the pressures farmers are under are so much greater and any feudal obedience they might feel to "them in the hall" is long gone? Hunting is accepted only when it fits in with rural life and livelihood and the explosion in its popularity in the last few years is testament to the fact that it does. Farmers accept or reject the hunt for a variety of reasons, but it is their choice. 
The campaign against hunting is nothing to do with animal welfare: Mr Griffiths gleefully recalls the sly grins when a fox turned up full of shotgun pellets. The Middle Way group has just published data on wounding and it does not make pleasant reading.
The campaign is, as Mr Griffiths so clearly illustrates, about prejudice. The hunting community, unique among minorities in this country, is reviled like some witch in the Middle Ages. Forget about a fair trial, inquiries, consultations, principle and evidence - such people deserve extermination. Like witches, hunting must be erased from new Labour's vision of the country it rules. Suspected terrorists held in Belmarsh may benefit from deep- rooted liberal principles - but not hunters. Crude majoritarianism, driven by the odd £1m bung from the animal rights industry, is what delivered this Act. Along with the hunting community, fairness, inclusiveness and tolerance are its victims.
We will all have to live with the consequences until this Act is overturned. So devoid of moral force, so bereft of reason and so transparently unjust is the Act that in time it surely will be.

SWAP YOUR VOTE

Sir: I note your correspondents' comments about swing voters and the capriciousness of first-past-the-post(letters, 11 February). Fear not - there is a way around it. 

At the last election a number of "vote-exchange" websites were set up. These enabled, for example, a Lib Dem voter in a Con/Lab seat to pair off with a Labour voter in a Con/LD seat, and agree each to vote for the other's party. Thereby they would each have the knowledge that a vote was added to their party's column, but that vote was used effectively to unseat a Tory MP rather than pile up uselessly. There is no reason why this concept should be confined to Lab/LD tactical voting, and an internet search will find a number of tactical voting sites with different aims. 
With the penetration of the internet into many homes via the spread of broadband, the scope for using internet "vote exchanges" as a form of DIY PR is already much greater than in 2001. I predict it will have an effect in this election, but will really take off in 2009/10, when it might be important enough to force the issue.

ROYAL MYSTERIES

Sir, From Spain I hear (report, 14 February) that a prestigious edifice called "Windsor" suffered serious damage over the last few days and is now in danger of collapse. Do they know something we don't?
