Army needs more money, more men, more equipment

TONY BLAIR and Gordon Brown warn we face the biggest threat to national security since the Second World War.
Army chief Sir Richard Dannatt claims our troops risk being "broken" in Iraq.
And MI5 boss Eliza Manningham-Buller predicts a war against Islamic terror lasting 25 years.
So why did the word "defence" not appear once in last week's Queen's Speech?
Is the defence of the realm on standby until Prime Minister Brown starts swinging his "big clunking fist"?
This issue won't wait.
Decision-making has shifted from urgent to critical as we and the US begin the retreat from Basra and Baghdad.
That presents big challenges for Mr Brown as he faces up to General Dannatt's unprecedented public cry for reinforcements.
As Chancellor, Mr Brown showed little sympathy for the Armed Forces and would have slashed their budget but for Mr Blair.
Now, as he shapes up to become PM, priorities have dramatically changed.
The Army needs more cash, more equipment - especially helicopters and armour - and more men. But would you enlist in an army where squaddies are paid just £ 14,000 - less than a traffic warden - to dodge bullets and bombs in Iraq or Afghanistan?
And while you're fighting for Queen and country far from home, your loved ones are living in what one senior military figure describes as "slums"?
Soldiers risk their lives in the heat and dust while ministers and bureaucrats count the pennies - and squander billions on kit designed for a different war.
Our Boys - and increasingly Our Girls - may shout through crackling and inadequate radios for air cover as they duck under Taliban fire, but it often fails to come.
Idle
Yet rows of costly new helicopters stand idle at home because they have the wrong kit and no trained pilots.
This is life in the modern Army. A life which, despite night-vision binoculars and satellite-guided weapons, has changed little since the days of Rudyard's Kipling's Trooper Tommy Atkins.
A century ago, soldiers were treated as secondclass citizens - until the guns began to fire.
Kipling touched a nerve when he wrote: "O it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' 'Tommy, go away.'
But it's 'Thank you, Mister Atkins,' when the band begins to play."
Now, as the Poppy Day bugles fade, so does our gratitude to our fighting men.
A senior military figure tells me: "The Armed Forces are under-strength, undertrained and with two major battlefields to defend at once, dangerously overstretched."
In his unprecedented public outburst, Gen Dannatt contrasted the 5p in the £ spent on defence with the 29p devoted to welfare.
While the Army gets by with 100,000 men and women u 10,000 below strength - the lumbering NHS employs more than a million.
Gordon Brown was so embarrassed last month by the way we treat frontline forces that he handed them a £ 2,240 tax-free bonus.
He will offer another small boost in the next pay round, but a private will still earn less than a trainee waiter on the minimum wage plus tips.
Meanwhile, as proof of Britain's EU credentials, we have ordered 232 Eurofighters which are £ 6billion overbudget, ten years late and designed for a Soviet threat which no longer exists.
Tony Blair rightly hails our Armed Forces as the world's best.
But the military is paying a price for getting the job done on a shoestring.
Vital training is axed.
Recruitment is down, fewer soldiers are signing on for a second term and key officers are leaving just as they are needed most.
At the very moment we need more boots on the ground, we may find Kipling's words ringing as true as they did in 1892.
"An' it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' anything you please, "But Tommy ain't a bloomin' fool - you bet that Tommy sees!"


Disgrace cop

PAEDOPHILES are the lowest of the low.
Any police chief who disagrees should be stripped of their badge and sent packing.
We are astonished at the naivety of Chief Constable Terry Grange.
He says that sex with children between the ages of 13 and 16 is a "grey area".
There is nothing grey about this area. Sex with anyone under the age of 16 is illegal.
Grange says his remarks were aimed at 16-year-old boys having sex with their 15-year-old girlfriends.
But anyone in such a position of authority should know better.
His comments are not only ridiculous - they are downright dangerous.
Paedophiles are sick people.
They crave justification for the evil they do.
Many teenagers are at their most vulnerable precisely from perverts who exploit that "grey area" described by the Chief Constable.
The law should be there to protect the young from those who would prey on them.
There is no excusing Grange's outrageous and irresponsible remarks.
They play right into the hands of the manipulative scum who abuse our children for their sick pleasure.
He doesn't just carry out the law of the land - he IS the law of the land.
HE should be sacked this morning.


Robbing us all

HOW daft does the Government think we are?
Prisoners are getting state handouts before they've even done their time.
Those doing daily jobs on the outside as they prepare for release are pocketing Working Tax Credit.
It's not illegal.
But it damned well should be.
These lags can't believe their luck.
A jail sentence is meant to be a punishment.
It represents recompense to society for crimes committed against it.
Yet taxpayers are lining prisoners' pockets at society's expense.
Ministers must stop this nonsense immediately.
Otherwise the criminals really will be having the last laugh.

Dear Sun

FEMALE referees are great. The whingeing, screaming and rolling around on the ground that we see now may end as women bring a much-needed dose of masculinity to the game.


Dear Sun

READER Graham Triming asks who can disagree with BNP leader Nick Griffin that Islam is a wicked faith when alleged terrorists happen to be Muslim. Islam does not promote violence of any sort. If people use it to pursue their own needs, don't blame the religion.
A lot of my friends have faced racism from white people but we don't think all white people are racist.


Dear Sun
IT'S about time modelling agencies were made responsible for the health of their models after the deaths of waif-like Luisel Ramos and Ana Carolina Reston.

Dear Sun
FURTHER to your article A Smear Campaign, I would like to highlight that the NHS Cervical Screening Programme is on track to ensure that all cervical screening tests use Liquid Based Cytology (LBC) by 2008 -in line with NICE recommendations.
I would like to assure all women currently receiving the traditional smear test that this test remains highly effective and is proven to save 5,000 lives per year in the UK alone.

Dear Sun
IF Richard Cartridge and Peter White are sacked, and old-sounding people discouraged from phoning Radio Solent, the loony who sent the memo should be "relieved of her duties". The BBC should look after us oldies. We are the listeners.

Dear Sun
SO what if David Gest demanded zebra's milk at a hotel? If I was paying £ 10,000 a night for a hotel room, I would demand that the zebra personally poured it for me.

Dear Sun
THE best entrance to the jungle came from Dean Gaffney, left, who battled to win nine stars for the camp. "Wellard" Dean put wimp Scott Henshall to shame.

Dear Sun
DANIEL CRAIG lacks Sean Connery's arrogance, Roger Moore's syrupy charm and Pierce Brosnan's sophistication -thank goodness. We have a real Bond at last.

Dear Sun
I KNOW BBC stars joke about the canteen food but I am shocked Barbara Windsor broke her wrist and sprained her ankle rather than having to eat the grub.

Dear Sun
WELL done Sarah Harding for finally speaking out about Victoria Beckham. Victoria is a terrible role model for young girls. Sarah, right, IS all woman.

IMMIGRATION officers are to become Britain's border police as they get new powers of arrest. Blair's plan is to get them seizing illegal immigrants, drug smugglers and people traffickers. He also wants them to detain suspicious characters at ports and airfields -but his words failed to impress Sun readers.
£ 30 LETTER - BORDER police? Tony Blair is having a laugh. It's like closing the stable door after the horse has bolted.
Immigrants have come in though the back door and are living on benefits while our pensioners have to keep working to make ends meets.
JEAN TAYLOR. Guildford, Surrey
NEW measures to give immigration officers the power to arrest illegal immigrants, people-traffickers and drug-smugglers are welcome.
Unfortunately these plans are too late as the immigration crisis in Britain is already out of control.
RORY MacRAE. Inverness
THE immigration officer idea sounds great. But what about the Human Rights Act? It is not going to work.
LAJOS KOZAK. Norwich
BLAIR'S idea would have been welcomed at the start of his ten-year period in office but coming just as he's about to leave it almost sounds like it is calculated to stir things up for his successor.
NICOLA SHAW. Portsmouth, Hants
AFTER ten years of chaotic rule where convicted criminals get compensation as a result of his Human Rights Act, terrorists are free to roam and anti-social behaviour is out of control, does he really expect us all to believe that this latest legislation will create a safer, sustainable country?
DEBBIE LANE. Orpington, Kent
WHAT total tosh. This is another one of Baldrick's cunning plans that won't work.
For ten years we have listened to the rubbish spewing out of this man's mouth. We do not believe you any more.
ROBERT BLACKMORE. Bristol
BY the time this Government has finished talking about introducing tougher measures to halt illegal immigrants there will be so many sneaking into the country it will be impossible to catch them.
PETER THORPE. Pickering, N Yorks
SURELY Tony Blair getting tough on immigration now is too little, too late.
Our services are already being overwhelmed. The national insurance stamp we have paid counts for nothing.
NIKKI ROSE. Solihull, W Mids
NOW Tony Blair is on wind-down he is going to tighten borders. He has had nine years to achieve this, so what happened?
BARRY THOMAS. Redruth, Cornwall
HERE we are again. There have been heaps of new legislative measures since they came to power, many on crime and security.
Yet crime is at its highest for years and we live in fear of terror.
STEWART TOMAN. March, Cambs
ANOTHER set of Blair promises, as he heads towards his unlamented departure as PM -tighter border controls to combat illegal immigrants, drug smugglers, asylum seekers, and other countries' criminal garbage.
Naturally, it won't happen but this time it won't matter, as he doesn't need anyone's vote.
EDWARD RUMFITT. Upton Park, E London

Dear Sun

GLOBAL warming is the greatest tax cow in history and abused by Labour to take more of our hard-earned money off us.

Dear Sun

I AM appalled by Young's decision 2 ship prawns overseas for de-shelling just 2 have them come back again to sell. Aren't we meant 2 b saving the planet?

Dear Sun

IF evil-doing junkies can get compensation, then so should the victims of MRSA.

Dear Sun

WHAT bums the Philpott family are. The wife and mistress have no respect for themselves and I'm sure they'll only accept Buckingham Palace from the council.

Dear Sun

GOOD on Mike Newell for saying what he feels about women officials. It's a bit harsh to berate him for his personal views.

Dear Sun

THERE would be no need for the Human Rights Act if common sense was used instead.


