Save the planet? Let's ban Bonfire Night

IT MUST be the most bizarre request yet in the battle to go green.
After calls to tax gas-guzzling cars, budget airlines and even light bulbs, a senior Labour MP has asked Tony Blair to ban Bonfire Night.
Barry Sheerman, chairman of the Commons Education and Skills Committee, suggested the controversial move to the Prime Minister after the publication of the Stern Review last week, which predicted disastrous consequences from global warming.
He said yesterday: 'Here we are in the week that the Stern Report on climate change was published having bonfires in gardens and polluting the atmosphere with carbon.' He said that the traditional celebrations led to more dioxins harmful pollutants given off by burning treated wood and rubbish being released into the air.
Mr Sheerman admitted that his request to the Prime Minister was 'slightly tongue in cheek' and designed to prompt people to think about global warming.
Speaking on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Mr Sheerman insisted he did not really want to ban the celebrations, explaining: 'It is much better if people go to a community bonfire or just have fireworks and scale down the amount of damage they do to the environment.' He admitted he had no idea how much bonfire celebrations actually contributed to global warming, but said: 'Friends of the Earth and all those other campaigning groups tell me it is an enormous amount.' He said that discussing the effects of Guy Fawkes Night with children would be 'a very good tool' to use in debates about the environment. 'I go to schools three or four times a week.
We must talk to children properly about what is happening to our planet and the dangers of climate change.' Mr Sheerman said the celebration of the death of the Catholic plotters who tried to destroy parliament in 1605 set a bad example at a time when religious tolerance had become a major issue.
He said: 'We are still burning a Guy at a time when we are trying to promote living peaceably between faiths. It is savage, isn't it?' But Mr Sheerman revealed that Mr Blair had given him a concise response to his request. He told him: 'Don't you want to be in a Labour Party that wants to win elections?' Why every one should light a bonfire tonight.

Pensions debacle is a sign of dictatorship

Today I will be marching with many of the people who have lost the works pensions they were led to believe were guaranteed.
It's not the first time I've marched with them, and it probably won't be the last.
Yet again, these poor people will be travelling to London from all over the country to highlight their plight and beg Downing Street for justice.
This time, they will be accompanied by their loved ones, children and grandchildren, who are suffering too after witnessing the distress and hardship endured by the loss of pensions that were supposed to be 'safe' and 'protected by law'.
Among them will be Danielle and John Benson who were featured in Financial Mail last week. They are making the long journey from Cardiff and seven-year-old Danielle will be handing in a letter to Gordon Brown, pleading with the Chancellor to restore the Pounds 11,000 a year pension that her grandfather John has lost through no fault of his own. It has been a momentous year so far for those 100,000 victims caught up in the pension scheme windup scandal.
In March, celebrations seemed imminent as the Parliamentary Ombudsman's independent inquiry exposed the Government's incompetent oversight of our final salary pension system, its callous and careless disregard for members' security and its shameful treatment of people who have seen their pensions snatched away from them by official rules that were supposed to protect them.
The recommendation of full compensation to be organised by Government, but not necessarily funded entirely by taxpayers was widely welcomed.
Who could have believed then, after such a damning, detailed report, that the Government would simply use half-truths and untruths to claim it had done absolutely nothing wrong.
Outraged lawyers advised asking the High Court to review the Government's behaviour. In June, this action was launched.
Meanwhile, the Public Administration Select Committee, dominated by Labour MPs, conducted its own investigation and in July it upheld the Ombudsman's verdict, saying the Government was guilty and should organise proper compensation.
Surely, a victory for justice and democracy?
Sadly, not. Last Thursday, Ministers brazenly rejected the PASC report, too.
Yet the Government has admitted that its official 'rescue' scheme has failed.
Though thousands of people are already past retirement age, struggling without their pensions, and many more have already died leaving widows without financial provision, the Government's Financial Assistance Scheme, set up two years ago, has paid out to only a few hundred.
So much for getting help to those in most urgent need.
This is now about more than just pensions. It's about our democracy.
Saga, a longstanding campaigner for the elderly, has added its weight and a crossparty group of MPs has signed an Early Day Motion calling for compensation.
If Ministers can, with impunity, override all the safeguards that are supposed to protect ordinary people from being harmed by the Government, we are on a slope to dictatorship.
So, today, we are protesting against these attempts to undermine Parliament. Guy Fawkes used gunpowder.
At present, Parliament is being attacked from within by subtler, silent weapons that could actually have a more explosive effect on our Parliamentary system.
Every one should be outraged at what is being done to these people.
I do hope this campaign will soon have a successful outcome, so that these people and their families can get on with their lives, and that this country can get on with trying to restore some confidence in pensions.
Please ask your MP to sign EDM 2886 and vote against the Government in any Parliamentary debates on the issue of compensation for victims of failed pension schemes. You could also sign the Saga petition at saga.co.uk/magazine.
Ros Altmann is a former adviser to Tony Blair and a current adviser to the pensions industry. She is a governor of the London School of Economics.

Met must act over these timeshare sales conmen

H. T. T. writes: After your article about timeshare resale company T-One (UK) Limited. I wanted to let you know of a problem I face with them. We paid Pounds 495 after T-One notified us that it had a buyer for our timeshare.
The sale did not go through and T-One guaranteed a full refund if it could not find a buyer within 12 months. So, after a year, I wrote to the company, but despite this and subsequent phone calls, I received no refund, just an invitation to attend a roadshow in Wakefield, West Yorkshire, organised by a company called Mediterranean Leisure (UK) Limited.
YOUR experience is typical. In May 2005, T-One said it had found a buyer to pay Pounds 4,500 for your two-week timeshare in Tenerife. You were asked for Pounds 495 in fees, with the promise of a refund if the deal fell through.
Last January, T-One told you: 'Unfortunately, and due to circumstances beyond our control, the purchaser was not able to complete the transaction.'
Then, instead of your refund you received the roadshow invite and were told that if no deal was agreed there, you would be given your travel costs, Pounds 300 in cash, and airline vouchers said to be worth 300 euros (Pounds 200). There was no mention of your Pounds 495.
You are not alone. Mrs F from West Sussex met Mediterranean Leisure (UK) Limited. She says it offered membership of its own holiday scheme if she signed over her timeshare plus a further Pounds 995. She refused.
Mr K from Paisley was told a buyer had offered Pounds 3,750 for his timeshare in Portugal. Once he handed over T-One's Pounds 495 fee, the buyer vanished and since then he has been passed from person to person whenever he calls to demand his refund.
An odd feature of almost all these deals was that the Pounds 495 fees were not cashed by T-One, but by Mediterranean Leisure or another company, Yacht Trading (UK) Limited.
The sole director of both companies is Stephen John Lawrence, 46, a business associate of Toni Muldoon, a wellknown Spanish-based timeshare shark.
And surprise, surprise, until July 14 this year, Lawrence was also a director of T-One. But the man left holding the parcel when the music stopped was Richard Mathers of Keighley, West Yorkshire. Three months ago, he took a job as company secretary of T-One.
Last Tuesday, I informed him he had also been registered as a director. He said this had been done without his knowledge or consent.
I asked Mathers a number of questions.
Why did T-One charge VAT, but show no VAT number? Why were payments made to other companies and not T-One itself? Where is T-One really located, since I found no trace of it at its advertised address in Kilburn, north-west London? And what about the refunds? Answers to all my questions would be provided on Thursday, Mathers told me.
Well, Thursday arrived, but the answers did not.
Instead, Mathers announced: 'I have nothing to do with T-One. As a result of our conversation on Tuesday, I resigned as company secretary.' Trading standards officials in the London Borough of Brent, where T-One pretends to be based, are aware of the business. Choosing his words carefully, a spokesman told me: 'It is important that people do not forward payment in advance for services such as this. Fees are usually paid when a property deal is completed.' Let me go further. There are enough question marks here to justify a police investigation. Lodge a complaint with your local police station, which will pass it on to the Metropolitan Police in London. And anyone who paid T-One's fees by credit card should ask their card company for their money back. If the card company resists, let me know.
No tea or sympathy from friend's bank
D.W. writes: My friend died recently with no living relatives. I had agreed to be executor of his will, but I am now in dispute with my late friend's bank, Barclays, over funeral hospitality costs. I live on my pension and paid for basic hospitality from my own pocket. However, Barclays' response to my attempts to recoup the costs from my friend's estate was to suggest that I should have sought a mandate from all the beneficiaries of his will. However, the bulk of his estate goes to numerous charities and balloting them all would have delayed the funeral by weeks.
WHAT you have run up against is the borderline between the letter of the law and plain, old fashioned common sense.
As executor, you were responsible for arranging the funeral, paying the bill from your friend's account and then sharing out the balance between the beneficiaries named in his will.
But your friend had asked you in a letter to make sure that anyone attending his funeral was offered 'a good drink'.
You did not interpret this literally, and we are not talking about vintage champagne at the Savoy, just tea and cakes for a small number.
But when you tried to reclaim the modest cost from his account, Barclays told you: 'As far as catering is concerned, this does not form part of the costs of a funeral.' If the bank met the bill from your friend's funds, you were told, 'beneficiaries could issue a claim against the bank'.
Confusingly, Barclays then did a U-turn. After you had decided to contact me, but before I had the chance to speak to the bank's head office, Barclays apologised for appearing insensitive, and while it still insisted it was still legally right, the bank said it would dip into your friend's account after all and repay the cost of the funeral tea.
Common sense won in the end, but it does look as though front line staff need guidance on how to tackle a simple issue faced by people who have recently been bereaved.


