MR BROWN, EUROPE AND AN EXQUISITE EXAMPLE OF HAVING ONE'S CAKE AND NOT EATING IT



GORDON BROWN has told us innumerable times that the new European Treaty, which will be signed today, is 'good for Britain'. He has brushed aside the judgment of almost every European leader that the treaty is pretty well indistinguishable from the European Constitution on which this Government promised us a referendum. Giscard d'Estaing, one of authors of the original constitution rejected by the French and the Dutch, has made the same point, and been ignored by the Prime Minister.
Evidently they are all wrong, and Mr Brown is right. The treaty according to him is very different from the constitution. On October 19, after a European Union summit in Lisbon, Mr Brown declared that Britain's 'red lines' on justice and home affairs, defence and foreign policy, social security and a fundamental human rights charter had been protected.
Never mind that many independently minded experts have seriously questioned whether this is the case. After that Lisbon summit, and on many subsequent occasions, Mr Brown has been absolutely clear that everything is ticketyboo. 'The red lines have been protected,' he boasted. 'The British national interest had been protected.'
So he should be very proud. He may be mistaken in his analysis -- I am sure that he is -- but from his point of view, today's signing of the European Treaty should be a moment for self-congratulation. Thanks to his and Tony Blair's brilliant negotiating tactics, Britain has an agreement to celebrate.
And yet, alone among the 27 leaders of the EU countries, Mr Brown will be absent from today's ceremony in Lisbon. He has been pressed to attend by Angela Merkel, Chancellor of Germany, which holds the rotating presidency of the EU. Jose Manuel Barroso, President of the European Commission, has also implored him to attend. But, alas, Mr Brown has a very important prior engagement which he cannot cancel. This morning he must attend his first session in front of the Commons liaison committee, when he will be questioned by the chairmen of various select committees.
AN ABSOLUTELY crucial meeting, no doubt, but might it not have been postponed? Is the meeting of the Commons liaison committee really more important than the signing of the European Treaty, which marks the culmination of many years of negotiation, and countless summits? Seemingly it is. Mr Brown has, however, generously agreed, after having his arm twisted by European leaders, to turn up for a late lunch, when he will sign the treaty on his own. He will miss the official signing ceremony and the historic photograph.
Of course, no one is going to be fooled by this. Mr Brown is trying to make a point. He wants to place some distance between himself and the treaty. Not for him the razzmatazz that will accompany its signing. He intends to be conspicuous by his absence. In short, he is trying to communicate something to the British people, of whom the great majority are Euro-sceptic, and opposed to this treaty. His message, if I hear him aright, is that, unlike the other 26 leaders of the EU, he does not regard the signing of the treaty as a joyous occasion.
The trouble is that this is completely at variance with his previous assurances. It can't at the same time be a treaty that is 'good for Britain' and secures everything we want, and yet not be worth celebrating. This is as good an example as one will ever find in politics of having one's cake and not eating it.
I really can't improve on the observations of a senior EU diplomat, who rightly says that Mr Brown will end up with the worst of all worlds. 'To anti-Europeans he's simply run away and accepted the signing of the treaty,' says the diplomat. 'To pro-Europeans he has simply refused to stand his ground and fight.' Neither side will think better of Mr Brown for shunning the ceremony. He appears evasive, shifty and uncertain.
If he does have reservations about the treaty -- and what other interpretation could one possibly draw? -- there is one obvious way out, which is to call the referendum the Government promised us in respect of a European Constitution that is virtually indistinguishable from this treaty. Actually, whatever small differences there may have been are already being watered down. By way of a symbolic concession, the treaty jettisoned the European flag and the European anthem that had been part of the constitution, but 16 of the 27 EU states will sign a declaration pledging their continuing loyalty to these symbols. 
MANY will say that it is altogether impractical for Mr Brown to change his mind and call a referendum. They believe that, weakened as he is by recent events, he could not easily survive the humiliation of losing a referendum on the treaty, which would undoubtedly be the outcome. If he had announced a referendum when he took over as Prime Minister in June, he would have seemed honest and forthright, and could have cheerfully ridden out the setback of a defeat. But not now.
Maybe this view of things is correct. But our principal concern should not be the ups and downs of Mr Brown's prime ministership. If a government promises a referendum on the European Constitution, it is morally obliged to offer the electorate the same means of expressing its approval or disapproval about another treaty that amounts to the same thing. Almost everyone, apart from Mr Brown and the Cabinet, can see this is the case. It is a question of integrity.
My prediction is that the Prime Minister's refusal to give us the promised referendum will dog him over the coming months, and further undermine his crumbling authority. The Tory Party will pick apart the European Treaty line by line during the three months of parliamentary time that have been set aside to consider it. During this process it will gradually dawn on a so far somewhat somnolent British people that significant chunks of sovereignty are being handed over to Brussels, and Mr Brown's breaking of a promise will serve to undermine an already weak position.
Then he may rue the day that he set his face against a referendum, just as he will surely regret postponing a General Election when he appeared to have the country at his feet. Perhaps he was just being characteristically over-cautious, rather than acting in bad faith, in refusing a referendum, but over the coming months the issue will be seen as one of trustworthiness.
Is it too late to save himself by calling a referendum? I don't know. What can be said with certainty is that by partially disowning a treaty which he has described as being good for Britain, Gordon Brown makes himself himself look ridiculous. Even Euro-sceptics would have respected him if he had had the courage of his convictions, and attended today's signing of the European Treaty in Lisbon.

WHAT SHOULD BE ON DISPLAY IN A MUSEUM OF BRITISHNESS (BUT UNDOUBTEDLY WON'T)

WELCOME to this audio guide to the Museum of Britishness. We hope you will enjoy your tour of Britain as it was, not in dim, distant history but a matter of only 40-odd years ago.
Please bear in mind that everything you see and hear is 100 per cent factual and can safely be used as the basis for school and college essays.
Some of our younger visitors, in particular, have accused us of peddling pure make-believe, but be assured: Britishness really was like this.
As you clear security and pass through the entrance hall, you'll see our main exhibit: a working model of Britain as it was as late as the Sixties. We call it a working model because just about everything -- and everyone -- in the country in those days actually worked.
There was almost full employment; public services and utilities generally did what they were supposed to do; and you did not open the newspaper each morning to read yet another example of mindboggling incompetence or neglect.
In Gallery One, you will find a series of tableaux representing institutions which once underpinned the sense of being British, but which over recent decades have been relentlessly, indeed systematically, undermined and destroyed.
On your left is an educational system whose first priority was learning and whose teaching of humanities would have made a 'museum of history' redundant.
Spare a glance for the lifelike model of a school teacher disciplining an unruly pupil without fear of prosecution for assault or physical violence from a parent, and the child sitting an exam in which spelling and grammar are of paramount importance.
YOUR right is a National Health Service which people trusted utterly, confident they would not be left for days on trolleys in A&amp;E departments, put into humiliating mixed- sex wards, subjected to filth, squalor and lethal hospital-bred superbugs or treated in so- called care homes with a cruelty that even the Dickensian age hardly knew.
In the glass case a few yards on is a figure many younger visitors may not have seen before.
This used to be known as a beat bobby, a uniformed police officer who patrolled the streets, day and night, dealing with smallscale crime with a mixture of firmness and common sense, deterring a significant proportion of it by his very presence.
Compare his low-key rig with the machine-gun-equipped paramilitaries who arrested pathetic Anne Darwin at the airport the other day, and you have the whole story.
In the Gordon Brown Atrium is a nationalised railway system that had its faults and industrial troubles, but was infinitely preferable to a gaggle of rip-'em-off private companies and a fare structure even Socrates couldn't understand. 
Over here is a phone service which made do with a single, free directory inquiry service instead of half-a-dozen costly private ones.
And also a postal service that was the envy of the world. At this time of year would come the familiar story of how a letter addressed only to 'Bill Bloggs, London' was delivered.
Moving on to the Transport Room, we find one of our most popular slice- of-life displays. This is a working model of Heathrow Airport in the days when flying was regarded as a pleasure and plane travel seemed to be improving all the time in speed and comfort.
The most-visited section shows passengers simply walking to the aircraft, without queuing for two hours at a security barrier, removing their coats and shoes, putting their cosmetics in transparent bags and having their bottled water confiscated.
So effective is this particular display that it has been known to reduce some of our older visitors to tears. The views of British streets 40- odd years ago can have the same poignant effect, with graffiti-free walls and buildings, and absence of intrusive signs and speed bumps.
Particularly affecting is the film footage of city centres on Friday and Saturday nights without a single teenage girl to be seen vomiting into the gutter.
On to the Duchess of Cornwall Annex, in which you will find exhibits on broadcasting.
Note the abundance of highquality, high-cost drama, documentary and comedy in the slots nowadays monopolised by cheapo makeover shows.
Note also the far more relaxed pace, uncluttered by dumbeddown over- explanation and melodramatic theme music, and craftily inserted extra adverts.
You will see a section devoted to the BBC in the era when it created a collective culture for the nation instead of pandering to multi-culturalism or merely chasing ratings.
There are also extracts from Japanese reality shows of the early Eighties, where people would torture and humiliate themselves by eating insects or bungee-jumping out of aircraft in exchange for five minutes of fame.
How we used to mock them, before our present age of TV dross, confident that such human freak shows could never be broadcast here.

