THE TUESDAY BOOK: THE STRANGE, SLOW DEATH OF THE TORY PARTY
MAGGIE: HER FATAL LEGACY JOHN SERGEANT MACMILLAN, £20/£18

THE DUST-JACKET is appalling: a large picture of the author holding a small Spitting Image model of Mrs Thatcher, as if to suggest that the reporter is far more important than the former Prime Minister. Macmillan has packaged John Sergeant's book as part of the tiresome genre of smirking journalists who treat politicians as mere butts for their own cleverness. It is a relief to find the content much more serious than the cover. 

True, the style is resolutely light - Sergeant apologises every time he has to explain parliamentary tactics, election results or anything he thinks might bore the reader. He also falls into the reporter's trap of imagining that those he interviewed gave him scoops they had not already written in their memoirs. In fact, there is little really new. Nevertheless, Sergeant offers a vivid and illuminating canter through the events that led to Mrs Thatcher's fall, and the undermining of her successors which contributed to the Tory party's decline. This is an important story, and it needed telling. 
Sergeant is not unsympathetic to Lady Thatcher's situation. A single- minded workaholic thrown out of what she regarded as her rightful job when still in full command of the faculties which had dominated the previous decade, she would have had to go into a nunnery to avoid overshadowing her successors. It would have been better for the Tory party if Michael Heseltine had seized the crown in 1990 and led it in a clearly different direction (as she had done after defeating Heath).
Poor John Major was cursed with the burden of being her reluctantly anointed heir, which raised expectations he could not fulfil. Some of her statements about his inadequacy to fill her shoes were breathtakingly arrogant. This was not just frustrated table-talk which leaked, but published statements whose effect was calculated. Thatcher could not help reminding the party that it had made a great mistake when it got rid of her. Praising Tony Blair as a worthier inheritor of her mantle, she could not disguise a Schadenfreude that her party had got what it deserved in 1997.
Yet the Tories' eclipse is also a tribute to her success. She set out in 1975 to expel socialism from British public life, and succeeded beyond her wildest hopes. She was so successful in forcing the Labour Party to embrace her values that she left the Tories with no distinctive project. Much the same happened to Labour after 1951, when the Conservatives' adoption of Attlee's new consensus doomed Labour to 13 years of internecine squabbling. The Thatcherite legacy may have been fatal for her party, but it is what happens when all your dreams come true.
The reviewer's biography of Margaret Thatcher is published by Pimlico


THE MAKING OF MARILYN

She was a teenage war bride who packed parachutes in a munitions factory in southern California. He was a young Hungarian emigre who had fled Nazi-occupied Europe in the late 1930s and landed in America with nothing but a plan to earn money by photographing beautiful women. Had she not met Andre de Dienes at the end of the war, it's likely that Norma Jeane Dougherty (formerly Norma Jeane Baker), being a notable beauty, would still have become a Hollywood legend, but, without the chance meeting that resulted in his revealing early portraits of her, would we have seen the girl who turned into Marilyn Monroe? 
The road trip that De Dienes - already an established fashion photographer for Esquire, Vogue and other magazines - and his protegee took through America's rural west may be one of the less momentous milestones in Marilyn Monroe's career, but the images that came out of it show something rare: her raw, youthful beauty set off by the rugged American landscape, and her natural flair in front of the camera. This stunning portfolio goes on display at London's Atlas Gallery this month.


The photographer first encountered his lifelong muse when she was sent to him on a "go-see" by her agent, Emmeline Snively, of the Blue Book agency in Los Angeles. In his memoir of that period, De Dienes cannot overstate the physical and emotional effect Norma Jeane had on him: "I could hardly believe it... An earthly, sexy-looking angel! Sent expressly for me! As minutes passed, I fell more and more in love..." 
It was autumn 1945, and at the age of 19 Norma Jeane was already separated from her husband, Jim Dougherty, a merchant marine. As such, she considered herself free to take up De Dienes' offer of a month-long tour, for which she would be paid $ 100 a week as well as being fed and clothed. Whether through naivety or determination, Norma Jeane was ambitious to succeed as a model and chose to place her trust in this good-looking stranger with a camera.
De Dienes' original test portraits of the woman who had such an instant sexual allure for him are paradoxically wholesome. Dressed in childish polka-dot frills, with glowing pink cheeks, her curly hair tied up in ribbons and braids, Norma Jeane bears more of a resemblance to adolescent ingenues such as Judy Garland, Elizabeth Taylor and Deanna Durbin than she does a factory worker who has recently walked out on her sailor husband. It was his plan, ultimately, to photograph her nude, but despite everything that happened to them subsequently, that never came to fruition.
They set off northward. The first stop was in Death Valley, where, true to his word, De Dienes bought new clothes for her to model. No longer childlike but still looking very much the country girl, Norma Jeane, in her bright sweaters and tomboyish denim, is in dazzling contrast to the clear blue desert sky and pale, rocky landscape. Climbing, striding, perching, laughing, she appears an extremely active model who contributed much to the photographic sessions.
Warm and co-operative though she was in front of the lens, at night Norma Jeane resisted De Dienes' desperate entreaties to share his bed, chastely insisting that she needed to sleep undisturbed if she was to give of her best as a model. De Dienes resolved to act like a gentleman, reluctant to upset the otherwise close and harmonious friendship that was developing between the two of them. Separate cabins were booked until, almost two weeks into the trip, they arrived in Portland, Oregon, where a solitary hotel room was the only one available for miles around.
Fate brought about the end of a frustrating fortnight for De Dienes - one in which he had seen every man whose path Norma Jeane had crossed respond dramatically to her astonishing beauty and sex appeal - but finally, and willingly, she became his lover. Their new-found intimacy is touchingly visible in his subsequent shots, set against the snowy Oregon mountains: a softness and warmth has replaced the sparky, questioning look that previously existed in Norma Jeane's eyes. Besotted with each other and detached from reality in their wintry bolthole, the pair became unofficially engaged and made a plan to marry once Norma Jeane had obtained a divorce from Dougherty.
But almost as soon as they had bonded, Andre and Norma Jeane were forced apart: a close friend of De Dienes' had died suddenly in New York. Distraught, he abandoned the shoot and drove back to LA, from where he would then fly to the east coast.
Re-entering Hollywood, De Dienes saw the magic of his time alone with Norma Jeane fade away. Agents, directors and other photographers soon began to swarm around her, and with an eye on her future, Norma Jeane did nothing to discourage them. When he departed for New York they were still betrothed, and she promised to marry him as soon as she was able. But in the summer of 1946, the divorcee Norma Jeane changed her mind and declared that what she wanted was freedom to pursue her career. When they next met, Norma Jeane no longer existed. By writing "Marilyn Monroe" on a sheet of paper for him, she formally declared her new identity.
The affair was over, but Monroe's friendship and professional association with De Dienes would continue through her years of world fame, association with Kennedy and marriage to the late Arthur Miller, right until her death in 1962. A mere three years after her first professional modelling assignment, Marilyn Monroe was a rising star in the film industry and arrived in New York on a publicity tour for Love Happy, in which she appeared with Groucho Marx. Out of the blue she rang De Dienes at his studio and proposed that they take off again, just him, her and the camera, for a day out. Recapturing the spirit of their first shoot, they took two bathing suits, a silk scarf and parasols to Tobey Beach on Long Island. Again, De Dienes came close to fulfilling his ambition of shooting a nude portrait of her, but she remained covered in front of the camera, even though, tantalisingly, her modesty was at times only preserved by a windblown scarf. The joyous, vivid images could be seen as a tender tribute to their friendship. Did Monroe sense that she was already losing the carefree life that she had first found on the road with De Dienes when she escaped from her suffocating marriage and tiresome job on a factory production line?
Looking at the vitality captured here it is hard to imagine the fragile, bleach-blonde, dead-eyed doll she would become. It was Andre de Dienes' theory that, between the day she gave her first interview to the press in 1949 and her death 13 years later, Monroe had not a single peaceful day. "And that's probably what killed her."
Andre de Dienes: Vintage Nudes and Marilyn Monroe, Atlas Gallery, 49 Dorset Street, London W1 (020-7224 4192; www.atlasgallery.com) 25 Feb to 9 Apr


SATELLITE, CABLE &amp; DIGITAL: PICK OF THE DAY

Europe: a Natural History (9pm BBC4) 
Europe may seem like an overcrowded continent - after all, 730 million people are crammed on to an area half the size of North America. And yet, as this eye-catching series demonstrates, it still has room for spectacular natural phenomena.
Narrated by Sean Pertwee, tonight's series opener, "Genesis", goes back aeons to discover how Europe was formed. It shows how the birth of the continent is memorialised in some of its most astonishing landmarks. 
It begins in one Europe's most faraway regions - the northern coast of Norway (above). Here the rocks reflect the genesis of the continent. The Norwegian stones date back some three billion years and are some of the most venerable in the world. The documentary goes on to use dazzling computer simulations to recreate dinosaurs swaggering through Oxford, tropical seas engulfing the vineyards of France, desert sands swamping St Petersburg and the birth of the Mediterranean itself.

RADIO: PICK OF THE DAY

In this three- part series, Guy Barker tells the story of Chet Baker (right), the man they called "the James Dean of jazz", beginning with the formative years. With his matinee idol looks and cool playing style, Baker was held as up as the great white hope of jazz in the 1950s.
He became a romantic hero even though his private life was in turmoil. By the end of the 1960s, his clean-cut image had been dealt an irreparable blow through consistent drug abuse. Even now, the myths continue to abound about the nature of his death. Did he fall from his hotel window or was he pushed after a fight with a drug-dealer?
