Clipse
Hell Hath No Fury
Sony, pounds 12.99
A tough upbringing has always been a source of credibility in hip-hop, and Clipse's story places them alongside the likes of Jay Z and Ghostface as street hustlers-turned-musicians. Virginia-born brothers Pusha T and Malice have made the popular move "from crack to rap'' thanks to the efforts of the world's smartest production duo, the Neptunes, whose work is crucial to their second album.
The Neptunes turn out hot, inventive beats based on steel drums, guitars, and even, on Wamp Wamp, bagpipes. Producer Pharrell Williams also takes the mic on the new single Mr Me Too and the disquieting ballad Nightmares.
For all their boasts of coke-dealing, Clipse's album shows little of the excess associated with using the drug, and the sparse, twitching funk of the instrumentals seems perfectly suited to their cynical perspective on the thug life.
But their bragging is not merely an empty claim to credibility and, like the album as a whole, leaves most of the competition struggling to keep up.


Dizzy Gillespie All-Star Big Band
Dizzy's Business
MCGJ, pounds 14.99
You might think there is something rather strange about the Dizzy Gillespie big band making a new recording 12 years after Gillespie himself died. On the other hand, all the great jazz ensembles were to some extent co-operatives.
Others helped him, through solos and arrangements, to create the original music. And some of them - the veteran saxophonists Jimmy Heath and James Moody, the trombonist Slide Hampton, who is also musical director - are playing here. That gives the enterprise authenticity.
This is not just a trip down memory lane. The repertoire is a judicious blend of recycled old favourites and new compositions, performed with crackle and snap. A series of trumpeters stands in for the great man, of whom Roy Hargrove is the most impressive. Nonetheless, it's impossible not to miss Gillespie himself.


Menotti: Missa 'O Pulchritudo'.
Vierne: Messe solennelle
William Ferris Chorale, Composer Festival Orchestra, cond William Ferris
Cedille CDR 7001, pounds 11.99
Vierne's organ-accompanied Mass was written in 1899 in the Franckian manner; Menotti's grander setting dates from 1979 yet is closer to the ethos of the Vierne than one might imagine, not least because Menotti's music is resolutely backward-looking and, in being unable to escape the influence of Poulenc in his spiritual guise, sounds almost French at times.
These performances were recorded live at concerts in Chicago in the early and late 1980s and the balance is not always ideal, while some of the solo singing is a little weak. But the singing of the William Ferris Chorale under its founder (who died in 2000) is sturdy enough.


Brahms: Piano Quartets Nos 1, 2 and 3. Three Intermezzi Op 117
Marc-André Hamelin (piano), Leopold String Trio
Hyperion CDA 67471/2, 2 CDs, pounds 19.99
Schoenberg orchestrated Brahms's G minor piano quartet "because the better the pianist, the louder he plays, and you hear nothing from the strings''. He might have thought again had he heard this wonderfully lucid performance from Marc-André Hamelin, in close partnership with the Leopold String Trio.
Hamelin can produce an authentically chunky Brahmsian sound when required. But his liquid beauty and delicacy of touch ensure that the strings are never overwhelmed. There is vigour and passion aplenty, too, and a frenzied abandon at the close of the gipsy finale (whoever said that Brahms could never "let go''?).
You will hear more sumptuous performances of the vast A major Quartet, but few that sing as tenderly or bring such a dancing, Schubertian grace to the scherzo and finale. In the C minor, conceived under the shadow of Schumann's final illness, Hamelin and the Leopold Trio catch all of the first movement's brooding, youthful despair, and keep the tense night-ride of a scherzo fleet and airborne.
As a bonus, we get Hamelin's subtle and sensitive performances of the late Intermezzi, dubbed by Brahms "three lullabies for my sorrows''.


The Good, the Bad &amp; the Queen
Honest Jon's/Parlophone, pounds 12.99
Damon Albarn may owe his fame and wealth to Blur and Gorillaz, but it is the richness and strangeness of his side-projects that have earned him his status as the Renaissance man of British pop - from Mali Music and a Chinese-themed opera to an album improvised on wastepaper baskets. Yet if the idea of assembling a band with veteran afrobeat drummer Tony Allen, mothballed Clash bassist Paul Simonon and Verve guitarist Simon Tong might seem to be courting marginality for its own sake, the result is one of Albarn's most melodic works to date - and certainly his most overtly English album since Blur's Parklife in 1994.
Defining this band's territory, the first single, Herculean - one of last year's best pop moments - is an elegy to England which is haunted by a sense of national decline and a visionary mood that extends through the 12 short songs on this fascinating album.
Indeed, despite the band's intriguing line-up, this is really Albarn's show. Almost every song has moments of dreamy, if slightly gloomy beauty perfectly suited to his quintessentially English, and rather underrated, voice. If some of the tracks feel like sketches rather than fully evolved songs, they're framed by a range of typically eclectic musical references - English folk, dub, music hall, 1960s psychedelia, traces of afrobeat and, of course, the obligatory Kinks lift - in this case from Days.
Fuzzy, trip-hop-influenced production from Gnarls Barkley's Danger Mouse enhances the sense of weariness and unease in Albarn's emotive singing. Yet, despite tantalising nods towards current politics in The Bunting Song and A Soldier's Tale, the message of the lyrics remains muffled. Albarn's pronouncements on everything from the Iraq war to Live Aid suggest that he wants to be a moral leader, and he clearly feels very passionate about England. But he holds back from the big statement that Herculean promised, depriving this album of a what would have been a powerful emotional core. 
Still, the territory explored by the music is compelling enough. From hangings in 18th-century London to "cold stone homes'' sprouting on the Essex flatlands, its world is the one inside Albarn's head, and there probably isn't a more interesting place in British pop right now.


Tales of Opera
Simon Keenlyside (baritone), Munich Radio Orchestra, cond Ulf Schirmer
Sony 82876 884822, pounds 13.99
Few, if any, contemporary baritones could match Simon Keenlyside's versatility and panache in this, his belated CD opera recital debut. An aria such as the Prologue from Leoncavallo's Pagliacci may seem an ambitious choice for an essentially lyric voice. But Keenlyside more than compensates for any lack of Italianate heft with the ardour of his phrasing and subtlety of his colouring.
Elsewhere, he ranges effortlessly from the virile exuberance of Rossini's Figaro to the mingled anguish and tenderness of "Eri tu'' from Un ballo in maschera. Keenlyside's characterisation is always vivid and true, while his aristocratic elegance of style should satisfy the most demanding connoisseur.
Singing in French, Keenlyside is equally idiomatic in "Sois immobile'' from Rossini's Guillaume Tell and the despairing bravado of Hamlet's drinking song in Ambroise Thomas's opera. In Yeletsky's love song (Tchaikovsky's The Queen of Spades), the Russian language taps a new, darker spectrum of colours, while his Mozart encompasses an unusually thoughtful Papageno in Die Zauberflöte and the most sensuously honeyed accounts of Don Giovanni's serenade you will hear today.


Must see EXHIBITIONS

Tim Gardner: New Works
Twenty meticulously executed watercolours by a 33-year-old Canadian artist who has been working with the collection at Trafalgar Square. National Gallery, London WC2 (020 7747 2885), until April 15.
Unfolding Pictures: Fans in the Royal Collection
Fans made from ivory, jewels and ostrich feathers with provenances that stretch back from Queen Mary to Queen Charlotte. The Queen's Gallery, Buckingham Palace, London SW1 (020 7766 7301), until Feb 11.
William Roberts: England at Play
The leisure activities of the working classes from the 1920s to 1970 seen through the eyes of an artist associated with the Vorticist group. Pallant House Gallery, Chichester (01243 774557), until March 18.
Barbed Wit: Italian Satire of the Great War
Coloured designs for black-and-white postcards, including work by artists for and against Italy's participation in global conflict. Estorick Collection, London N1 (020 7704 9522), until March 18.


DVD Reviews

Keane
15, Soda Pictures, pounds 18.99
Lodge Kerrigan worked as cameraman on two of Fred Wiseman's great documentaries. His devastating tragic Keane shares Wiseman's patient confrontation of an ugly or painful reality, as well as his persistence in reaching a difficult truth through scrutiny of confused people and messy lives. This intense drama of mental disturbance and grief keeps us close to a hero driven to the edge of the normal world by his obsession with a traumatic event.
New York, with its raw, unforgiving streets, is the bleak habitat of the heartbreakingly unhappy William Keane (Damian Lewis, disturbingly believable). He says he has lost a six-year-old daughter at the Port Authority bus station (hell on earth, if you've not been there), and he haunts the place, pleading for help from passers-by and reliving repeatedly the four minutes, months before, when she disappeared. So desperate and uncontrollable is his need to re-find her that when, in his dirt-cheap motel, he befriends a sweet child called Kira (Abigail Breslin, from Little Miss Sunshine), we fear equally and excruciatingly for the girl and for him.


Belle de jour
18, Optimum, pounds 18.99
Unlike many films of its era, Luis Buñuel's story of an affluent young Parisienne drawn into working part-time as a prostitute (2pm to 5pm, weekdays only) is as fresh, strange and shocking today as it was in 1967.
One reason it hasn't dated visually - as Jean-Claude Carrière, who co-wrote the screenplay, explains in the extras - is that its 24-year-old star Catherine Deneuve was persuaded to opt for a classic couture, rather than wearing the very much in-vogue mini-skirt. And the glacial Deneuve looks divine, which makes the less-than-angelic ideas floating through her mind - rough sex, flagellation, humiliation - so much more disturbing.
Carrière says that he and Buñuel researched the subject of female masochistic tendencies in depth. "All the fantasies described in the film,'' he says, "have been experienced by a woman who told us about them or allowed somebody to tell us.''
Just as intriguing are the legends that have grown up around Belle de jour. Theories about what a mysterious lacquered box contains are endless. And, apparently, many women have noticed a baby in the closing sequence. There isn't one.

Flushed Away
PS2 (version played), GameCube, DS, GBA. Available now, from pounds 19.99
D Movie-licensed videogames can sometimes be those rarest of things; they can expand and improve upon their source material, making a movie-like gaming experience that is second to none. Or they can be quick cash-ins, so tacky, uninspired and insipid that you wonder what sort of sadist designed them. Flushed Away falls into the increasingly large latter camp, populated by such modern "classics'' as Catwoman and Fantastic Four. Vaguely following the story of the Aardman film, you take the role of Roddy, a posh rat flushed into the sewer and forced to fight the nefarious Toad - but not before seeing off his minions. A platform game at heart, the fact that the jump command barely works rather hinders progress, and makes the experience less playful entertainment than a miserable exercise in patience. The sloppy controls, bland graphics, linear gameplay and tedious repetition make the sewer seem the perfect place for this flotsam of a title.

