Tony Blair Rock Star Friends &amp; Crocodiles Elizabeth David: A Life in Recipes Eleventh Hour

Although it has fallen a little out of favour, 'synchronicity' was once a favourite New Labour buzzword - along with 'flexibility', 'stability', 'connectivity' and something really nasty called 'reflexity'. How odd then that the DVD I was sent of Tony Blair Rock Star (Thursday, Channel 4) should be suffering from a bad case of unsynchronicity.
Whenever anyone taking part opened their mouths to speak, their words would follow several seconds later. Stranger still, during a dramatised recreation of Blair being caned at Fettes, he cried 'Ow!' when the man beating him was at the top of his upswing, while the cane made no noise at all when it connected with his bottom.
But however disconcerting this was, it also seemed rather apt. Tony Blair's early self and his later one have never really fitted together. There's a fundamental plausibility gap that this programme only succeeded in widening. Various school friends recalled how Blair had been the 'Head Boy of Cool' at Fettes. Yet all the evidence - and certainly the dramatised extracts in which the man playing Blair grinned away like a rictus monkey beneath a bushy wig - suggested you could find cooler things inside a blast furnace.
This impression was only fortified by accounts of how, when Blair came to London to make a foray into rock management, he phoned up various local vicars to ask if he might borrow their church hall for a disco. Here again, we may look on disdainfully from our crushed-velvet-covered thrones and give him one of the lowest coolness scores in history.
And there was even worse to come with Blair's Mick Jagger impersonations. According to a number of apparently sane and sighted people, these impersonations were uncannily accurate. Not judging from the recreations here they weren't. I've always thought that my own Mick Jagger impersonation was unsurpassably feeble, but Blair's was so bad it practically warranted a trip to Devil's Island.
While all this was jolly enough, it required some keen - nay desperate - stretching to make it last for an hour. The recollections about the young Blair were not anecdotes exactly - they were more like the balls of yarn from which, given intense tuition, serviceable anecdotes might eventually be spun. As for the scene in which 'Blair' was seen having simulated sex with a girl he met at a party, I can only say that at least it succeeded in giving me a clearer idea of what he's on about when he talks about 'The Third Way'.
Stephen Poliakoff's Friends &amp; Crocodiles (last Sunday, BBC1) covered roughly the same historical ground and featured an equally ungraspable central character. Damian Lewis played Paul Reynolds, a Gatsby-like figure first seen in the early 1980s throwing a series of lavishly decadent parties at his country house. Lizzie Thomas (Jodhi May) was the prim secretary he engaged to try to put his various projects in order.
During the next 20 years, their respective fortunes rose and fell - he went bust; she prospered then lost everything when the dot-com bubble burst; he staged a late comeback as the owner of a new chain of bookshops after sinking into shambling hippiedom.
It all looked very sumptuous and possessed an alluring hallucinatory quality, but over nearly two hours the suspicion grew that the sumptuousness of the exterior was not matched by a corresponding richess on the inside. All the supporting characters were grotesques of one sort or another, while neither Lizzie nor Paul had any real depth to them.
As for their relationship, it never progressed beyond a rather unlikely clash of opposites. That said, Lewis almost succeeded in making Paul credible - which sounds like a back-handed compliment but isn't intended to be given how few cards he was given to play with. The result was like a fable with no particular moral attached - one, moreover, that at times seemed almost as self-indulgent as one of Paul's parties. Poliakoff has done such fine work over recent years that he should be allowed the odd dud. However, there was a worrying sense here that no one had dared try to rein in his excesses, or tell him that the centre did not hold.
ALTHOUGH MUCH SPARSER TO LOOK at, Elizabeth David: A Life in Recipes (Tuesday, BBC2) suffered from a similarly undeveloped core. It began in 1994 with David's mayonnaise whisk being sold at auction. Thereafter the action swung back and then forward over her life, with the various scenes being interspersed with slow-motion shots of her chopping up vegetables.
In wartime London, she moaned a lot about the beastliness of the food and was introduced to stockbroker Peter Higgins (Greg Wise) in a restaurant. He too had finely developed taste buds and the moment their eyes met over the top of a menu you knew they'd soon be at it like two eggs in a coddler. Their ensuing affair proved to be the nearest thing that David ever had to a fulfilling relationship.
Catherine McCormack (left) was extremely impressive as Elizabeth David. The trouble was that she appeared to be so unpleasant, so humourless and so devoid of charm that it was very hard to do anything other than wish her ill. While Amanda Coe's undernourished script did not manage to find any redeeming features in her character, James Kent's unnecessarily discreet direction failed to give it any compensatory oomph.
But whatever the deficiencies of all of the above, they are as nothing compared with Eleventh Hour (Thursday, ITV), a relentlessly grim and ludicrous new series starring Patrick Stewart as Ian Hood, 'Government Science Adviser'. In the first episode, Hood investigated the death of 27 malformed foetuses. However, it soon turned out that all the foetuses had the same DNA and he realised he was on the trail of a wicked cloner called Gepetto (Jane Lapotaire).
Although this was not necessarily such a bad thing under the circumstances, Eleventh Hour appeared to have been photographed by someone with a similar aversion to light as a rabid dog has to water. As a result it was almost impossible to work out what was going on, or indeed what race any of the characters belonged to.
Peering through the gloom, I think I'm able to report that this is the only opening episode of a new series I have ever come across that lacked any kind of resolution. At the end, Hood didn't even find Gepetto: she just melted into the darkness, still cloning fiendishly away. Certainly, this is a novel idea - having a sleuth who never apprehends anyone - and I suppose it might catch on. Somehow, though, I doubt it.

'Get Carter!'

Modernism and emotionalism make strange bedfellows. But strange things happened at the Barbican last weekend in Get Carter!, the latest of the BBC Symphony Orchestra's annual composer surveys and a retrospective celebration of the music of Elliott Carter. At 97, this great and uncompromising American modernist is enjoying what must be termed a 'late late period', a rich and prolific Indian Summer in which he is still producing new and challenging work. Even now, few of the notes he writes make for comfortable listening.
So where was the emotionalism? Despite his age, Carter made the trip to London, and his presence was a reminder - if one were needed - that he is also a great human being. Not too frail to take numerous ovations from an appreciative audience, this old New Yorker showed wonderful humour and humanity in his platform interviews, not to mention astounding long- and short-term memory.
Carter is a bit of walking history. With the exception of Debussy (still in his forties when Carter was born), Carter enjoyed connections with all the other composers played here by way of context. Ives, Copland, Sessions, Bartók, Stravinsky and Schoenberg - he knew them and heard several of their premieres. Carter also represents an all-but-vanished American world: his grandfather was in the Civil War, and the young composer grew up in a New York as described by Edith Wharton.
Given all this, and the newness of his invention, the one disappointment in the BBC's programming was that it didn't bring us fully up to date. Nothing of his most recent work was played, even though Chicago and Boston heard the premieres of (respectively) Soundings and Three Illusions last autumn. There was just one first London performance, Of Rewaking (2002), a slightly underwhelming set of three songs for mezzo and orchestra to words by William Carlos Williams. On a single hearing they sounded less evocative than the poetry itself, and that despite Jane Irwin's rich-toned traversal of the vocal lines. Once again, it was difficult to avoid the conclusion that Carter's vocal works do not count among the peaks of his achievement.
But then Carter's music is hard. His thoroughly transatlantic style means that Americans view him as European and Europeans as American. Although his music has its own sound, he can seem to lack the distinctive voice of other elder statesmen of music such as Ligeti and Kurtág. A more sympathetic view, and one reinforced by his greatest works, is that he reinvents his soundworld with each new piece.
And with the exception of Symfonia, we were treated to Carter's most important scores. Friday's opening concert, with Oliver Knussen conducting the BBCSO, concluded with a blistering account of the Piano Concerto. It summons up a brutal soundscape, and Nicolas Hodges played with all the fiery virtuosity required of the soloist who has, increasingly, to go his own way.
Equally, it was good to hear Ian Brown (piano) and John Constable (harpsichord) with the London Sinfonietta in the erupting sonorities of the Double Concerto. This concert drew a large audience, despite being held in the graveyard Saturday lunchtime slot, and listeners were also rewarded with Michael Collins's warm performance of the Clarinet Concerto. Add Nicholas Daniel's luminous account of the Oboe Concerto under the baton of David Robertson, and the significance of the concerto in Carter's output became clearer than ever.
Only Carter's most orthodox acolytes would pretend that all his work is on this level. Of the Three Occasions, only the fresh and thrusting 'A Celebration of Some 100 x 150 Notes' bears his unmistakeable signature. Similarly, in Rolf Hind's piano recital Night Fantasies paled next to the Piano Sonata (in which Hind sounded more at home).
This work is a modern classic full of grit and vigour. Composed in 1945, the sonata is also the first work to anticipate Carter's mature style. Though some regard the other early works as uncanonical, Get Carter! gave these a welcome airing. The BBCSO played the breezy Holiday Overture, and the Guildhall Symphony Orchestra under Diego Masson revelled in the muscular neo-classicism of the ballet The Minotaur. Earliest of all was the Symphony No 1 (1942), a piece of idealistic Americana played with panache by idealistic young players.
One non-Carter highlight was a rare performance of Copland's audacious Connotations; but, from the BBC Singers in choral pieces to the Arditti Quartet in chamber music, the spotlight was firmly on Carter.
Of course, his music was never designed for such wall-to-wall exposure, and if towards the end some of the BBCSO's performances were on the glacial side, that proved the players were only human. But as an enriching, educative experience this was in the best BBC tradition, and for anyone wanting to 'get Carter' the Barbican was the only place on the planet to be.

