 
 There is a curious theological positivism in certain quarters, where theology is regarded as meaningful and philosophical notions are thought of as, if not meaningless, at least irrelevant or even poisonous to the theological task, and certainly to be resisted. Despite Jenson's dislike of metaphysical notions culled from the philosophers, he is clear that what his work amounts to is metaphysics of a sort. Being is, as he concedes at one point "incurably theological", meaning, I think, that it is a concept common to both the Christian and Hellenistic-philosophical "theologies" (Systematic Theology, Vol. 1, p. 208).
However, the metaphysics Jenson underpins his doctrine of Christ's pre-existence with (and his doctrine of God too), is difficult to make sense of. Perhaps this is due to the nature of the task: How can we even begin to fathom the interior life of God? But if this is the reason, it is not given prominence in Jenson's account. In any case, my concern is not with any purported mystery in the neighbourhood (although, the nature of God is mysterious). My concern is rather that Jenson's theologising is somewhat unclear, and perhaps downright inconsistent. Despite the fact that Jenson writes with wit and style (and something close to an addiction to the pithy aphorism), on close examination of the metaphysical notions he deploys in his doctrine of God, it seems that what he has to say about divine eternity is rather murky.
Consider Jenson's conception of divine infinity: God is temporally infinite. This sounds like the view that God endures through time (the temporal traditional view), in which case, like all other things in time, it would seem that God has a past, a present and a future (at least, this is the traditional way of thinking about this matter. I am not concerned here with whether or not it is logically possible to think of other ways in which God might exist in time). Some things are in his past and appear to be irreversible. Some things are in the future and are yet to come. But Jenson denies this "Aristotelian" picture of divine temporality. What does he replace it with? A notion that God is temporally infinite, but has no past or future and is past and present to himself because he is somehow future to himself. It is rather as if God exists through time by projecting himself backwards in time from his future to his past and present. But what could that possibly mean? Despite valiant efforts, Jenson is unable to explain.14 He suggests that the temporal referents of God are not like the cartographical referents used in orienteering: we cannot go backwards, forwards, up or down, to discover what this temporal infinity means. God's infinity, according to Jenson, is like the before and after of a narrative. And, like the arrow of time, God's eternity does not reverse itself. But this only makes matters more muddled. How can God's infinity be like the sequence of a narrative when he has no past, and no future? Perhaps, like a narrative, there is a sequence of events that are temporal, but are not past, present or future to God. From other things that Jenson says in Systematic Theology, Vol. 1, it seems this is one way he could be understood. So, in his discussion of creation in Systematic Theology, Vol. 2, Jenson recapitulates what he has said in Systematic Theology, Vol. 1 and extends it:
The life of God is constituted in a structure of relations, whose referents are narrative. This narrative structure is enabled by a difference between whence and whither which one cannot finally refrain from calling "past" and "future" and which is identical with the distinction between the Father and the Spirit. This difference is not measurable; nothing in God recedes into the past or approaches from the future. But the difference is also absolute: there are whence and whither in God that are not like right and left, or up and down, that do not reverse with the point of view. . . . It indeed better suits the gospel's God to speak of "God's time" and "created time," taking "time" as an analogous concept, than to think of God as not having time and then resort to such circumlocutions as Barth's "sheer duration." (Systematic Theology, Vol. 2, p. 35.)
Taken at face value, this adds the following to our understanding of Jenson's doctrine of God: God has a narrative-like life that is temporal, and which we may speak of in terms of past, present and future. However, God's past is identical with the Father (who creates?) and his future is identical with the Spirit. Moreover, time, as applied to God, is an analogous concept. In which case, we should take care not to think of past and future as literally true of God (or, at least, this seems to be what Jenson is getting at). But this is very strange indeed. Why should we think that God's past is identical with the Father, or his future with the Spirit? What does that mean, exactly? In what sense is one person of the Trinity identical with a particular time in the life of God? Surely if all the persons of the Trinity are co-eternal (and necessarily so) it is meaningless to speak of the Father as identical with the past and the Spirit with the future. It may be that co-opting a doctrine of analogy with respect to divine eternity is helpful—after all, God's life is so unlike ours how are we to comprehend it?—but this does not help Jenson a great deal because it is difficult to see what divine eternity is analogous to on his doctrine of divine eternity.
Even if we concede that he can make sense of divine temporal eternity without duration, there are other problems lurking in the neighbourhood. For instance, how can it be the case that God's infinity does not reverse itself, and yet moves in sequence both from past to future and from future to past at one and the same time? Jenson offers no explanation of this matter. It is clear from the whole thrust of his systematic theology that, like Pannenberg (although for different reasons), Jenson's desire to emphasize talk of God's future has to do with what he sees as an important biblical theme: the hope of what is to come, and what is promised by God. (See, for example, what he says about the Gospel as God's "promise" that opens up, and even "impels" history in Systematic Theology, Vol. 1, p. 15.) But it is one thing to make eschatology an important constituent of one's view of history from a God's-eye perspective. It is quite another to claim that God's future somehow constitutes or brings about his past and present. As it is, what Jenson gives us is a picture that makes very little sense of divine infinity and appears, in the absence of further clarification, to be incoherent.
 
This makes the task of understanding what he says about the relationship between divine eternity and Christ's pre-existence extremely difficult. Jenson is happy to reiterate much of the tradition in what he says about who it is that pre-exists (although, as we have already noted, he goes well beyond the tradition in his three observations about Christ's pre-existence15). But how Christ pre-exists is much less clear. Recall that, in explaining the third of his observations governing his doctrine of Christ's pre-existence, Jenson says, "God's eternity is the infinity of a life. For what obtains in life always comes from a future; the difference between God and us is that he, as the Spirit, is his own future and so is unboundedly lively" (Systematic Theology, Vol. 1, p. 143). This fits with what he says in chapter thirteen about the infinity of God. But it is contentious. Jenson says that Christ's life comes "from the future" because the life of the Godhead comes from the future in some fashion. However, even if some sense can be made of this notion,16 why is it preferable to traditional ways of thinking about the divine life? Part of the answer seems to be that Jenson thinks it is inappropriate to incorporate metaphysical concepts from philosophy in Christian theology because philosophy presents a rival theological account of the world. On this view, any understanding of the divine life that relies upon philosophical notions imported into theology is tainted. Jenson's point is not that his understanding of the divine life is preferable to some other view. His point is that the biblical picture should govern what we say about the divine life, not some prior metaphysical commitments. This is an important theological insight. But I know of no orthodox theologian who would deny it. Indeed, one test of whether or not a theologian is orthodox is often thought to be whether or not they make a procrustean bed for Scripture out of their prior metaphysical commitments.17 And if this is true, then the dialectical force of Jenson's point is considerably blunted. Obviously, Jenson is not claiming that all metaphysical notions that have been incorporated into Christian theology have to be expunged. For then, we would need to eliminate all talk of the doctrine of the Trinity or of Chalcedonian Christology from our theology. It seems that what he is committed to is the rather weaker claim that the "Greek" theological (i.e. philosophical) account of metaphysics is false, and a Christian account is true. (Even this is too strong. What he needs to say is that much of Greek metaphysics is false, although some of it has been usefully appropriated in Christian theology, in such doctrines as the Trinity and Incarnation, since he would agree that these two classical doctrines have their place in a systematic theology.) But it is not clear which thinkers he has in mind when he makes this sort of claim. For instance, does this include all philosophers that have ever written on metaphysics, or just the non-Christian philosophers who have written on the subject? A charitable reading might include only the latter. In which case, his point would be something like this: metaphysics done in a purely philosophical way, without reference to Christian theology, if appropriated uncritically by theologians, is likely to end up distorting one's theology, rather than enhancing it. This might be true (I am not committing myself to this view, merely conceding the point for the sake of the argument). But, one would also have to say, in all fairness, that classical theologians relied to a considerable extent, on prior philosophical training in their theologising and were happy to use the tools of philosophy for theological ends (even where they apparently repudiate much of their philosophical training, as with Calvin or Luther18). It seems to me that it could be argued, I think persuasively, that classical theologians who rely on such a method are not, for the most part, guilty of subordinating theology to philosophy as Jenson seems to think they are.19 (And, to be fair to Jenson, at one point in his discussion in Systematic Theology, Vol. 1, p. 21, he does allow that Thomas' metaphysics are derived from dialogue with Aristotle, not through an uncritical and osmotic absorption of Aristotle's thinking).
So, if we accept Jenson at his word, it seems that his view amounts to a preference for his own metaphysical commitments over other, possible ways of thinking about the metaphysics of divine eternity, rather than a rejection of metaphysics per se (whether he wants to call his metaphysics "theological" as opposed to "philosophical" is largely irrelevant to the issue, in as much as it is metaphysics he is engaged in). Furthermore, the advantage of traditional ways of articulating this doctrine over Jenson's account is that they are both compatible with Scripture and have the imprimatur of the vast majority of the tradition, something conspicuously absent in Jenson's account.
 

