While abrogation in the specific
legal rulings occurred due to social change, such abrogation was not possible in universal
and fundamental principles of law since such principles are not bound by time and space.
In his famous work titled al-Muwafaqat, Al-Shatibi argues that the universal principles
such as our knowledge that justice is good and injustice is wrong, the protection of
people's properties and life, among others, are found in every religion because of the
Qur'anic verse, “The same religion has He established for you that which he enjoined on
Noah, the which we have sent by revelation to you, and that which we enjoined on
Abraham, Moses, and Jesus” (Qur'an 52:13). The details of law (juz'iyyat) such as penal
laws of Islam, the laws of inheritance for men and women, and other laws governing the
individual and society as explained in the Qur'an or other religious texts differ from one
religion to another, just as they differ according to time and space. Since such juz'iyyat are
based on time and space, they should accept abrogation, revision, and change according
to the needs of each society. In other words, the interests of society can override such
juz'iyyat but they cannot override the kulliyyat. Simply put, the kulliyyat are the goals (or
maqasid) of the Shari'a while the juz'iyyat are the means to those goals. The purpose of
Shari'a is not to cut people's hands or stone them to death (focusing on the juz'iyyat) but
to establish a just society (focusing on the kulliyat). If suspending the juz'iyyat (specific
legal rulings) will ensure the realisation of the kulliyyat (universal principles), then such a
suspension (naskh) will be legitimate under Shari'a.
With the concept of maqasid al-shari'a (intent and motive of Islamic Law), it
becomes possible to apply the Qur'an to changing times and changing conditions in
society, so that the data revelata remain dynamic and creative, always applicable and always
invigorating society. Unfortunately, due to the development of legalism in Islam, the
focus has shifted from the kulliyat to the juz'iyyat. Under correct interpretations of law in
Islam, the change and the modification of juz'iyyat is acceptable in order to meet social
change as long as such change does not undermine the kulliyat.
Therefore, any political and legal system that fulfils the kulliyat is acceptable and
considered as fulfilling the requirements of the Shari'a. The question is, does the British
and political systems fulfil the kulliyat as required under Islam? It is my opinion that the
British legal and political systems as they stand at the moment meet the goals of the
Shari'a. I am aware that there are still points of conflict with regard to certain 'moral'
issues. Islamic law requires that we overlook such differences and focus on masalih
3
(public interests) and universal principles (maqasid) such as justice, respect and protection
of a person's beliefs, protection of life, protection of sanity and intellect, preservation of
lineage, and protection of a person's property or wealth, among others.
An example of how the interpretation of Islam in a society will be influenced by
masalih (public interest) and maqasid (the purpose of law) is given by the famous classical
theologian and theorist Ibn Taymiyya who is widely considered as the father of
conservative Islam. His student Ibn Qayyim narrates that Ibn Taymiyya once said: “I was
passing with some of my friends in the days of the Tartars, and saw a group of them
[Tartars] who were drinking alcohol. One of my friends wanted to reprimand them, but
I prevented him from doing so and said, Allah has prohibited strong drinks as they divert
people from Allah and offering daily prayers, but strong drinks have diverted these
people from committing murder, capturing children and plundering, so leave them
alone.” (see Ibn Qayyim's I'lam al-muwaqqi'in )
Thus, drinking alcohol, although haram (prohibited) under the Shari'a, in this case
it was overlooked both as masalih (public interest) and the need of the time in order to
save the people from murder and plunder and creating chaos in the society. Under
Islamic law, the universal and fundamental principles are the spirit and the intention of
the Law-giver (qasd al-Shari') and will always override the specific legal rulings and other
interpretations of law that are seen to be at odds with the spirit of the law. It is safe to
say that according to this theory, the purpose of law in Islam is not necessarily to follow
the letter of the law or to establish a theocracy and Islamic state, but to fulfil a higher
goal and greater purpose (maqasid) of establishing a moral and just society. Whatever
method can be used to reach this goal is considered “Islamically correct”. If it is also
possible to achieve this goal without having to apply Islamic laws, then suspending such
laws is also considered “Islamically correct”. If voting in the elections ensures that
Muslims are able to live in peace and freedom, then it becomes a general obligation (fard
kifaya) to vote for that party that best serves their interests (masalih).
The three main arguments which have been advanced by those against voting in
Britain are (a) none of the political parties contesting the elections represented the
aspirations of the Muslims, (b) Muslims cannot support any party which espouses only
some policies that are Islamically applicable, and (c) instead of voting Muslims should
fight towards the establishment of an Islamic state or caliphate.
The first argument is certainly not unique. It has been made by many individuals
and Muslim organisations that believe that the government has not delivered on its
promises. There is no doubt that there are Muslims who are disillusioned with the
current state of affairs, and hold the current government responsible for what they
perceive to be a deterioration in school standards, health care, safety and security, job
opportunities, moral values, the war on Iraq, among other things. The reluctance or
hesitancy of some Muslims to vote, or indeed their desire to vote for an “opposition”
party, can be understood from this point of view.
The second argument is highly debatable. While the British system does allow
practices which are at variance with Islamic norms and values, this does not negate the
permissibility of participation in the system, provided that the following conditions are
met :
1. the state is committed to the establishment of peace and justice.
2. the system guarantees freedom of religion.
3. the system allows for participation of all citizens in decision-making.
The British system meets these demands. Therefore, participating in the political system
is both legitimate and desirable.
While Muslims are entitled to oppose any measure which they consider to be immoral,
the definition of morality should not be confined to issues such as abortion on demand,
4
gay rights, gambling, among others, but should be broadened to include issues of
housing, water, health care, economic and social justice, education and employment.
These are recognised by Islam as fundamental and universal rights (kulliyat) and maqasid
(purpose of law is Islam) to be enjoyed by every citizen. Muslims should have absolutely
no hesitation in supporting initiatives to fulfill these fundamental rights; in fact, they
should be actively involved with government, as well as in Non-Governmental
Organisations promoting these and other related rights.
Furthermore, Muslim opponents of participation will have to learn to accept that
it is not in the nature of a secular state to define issues of social morality, nor to enforce
any particular standard of moral and ethical behaviour on its citizens. The responsibility
is upon individuals and communities to ensure that they safeguard their religious values
and that they do not become victims of what they consider to be social vices. They
should focus their energies on constructive means of maintaining and promoting these
values at the level of civil society rather than on attempting to compel the state to adopt
them.
Muslims will have no advantage in isolating themselves from the mainstream of
political life and becoming a marginalised community. They must commit themselves to
a system of cultural and religious pluralism within which they are free to assert their
religious freedom. While maintaining their specific religious identity in the Western
democratic order, they must remain conscious of their British identity.
The debate engendered by extremist groups and their clerics, I venture to
suggest, can in fact be seen in a positive light. It should provide a platform for Muslim
theologians and Islamic legal theorists to debate important questions in relation to the
role of Muslims in the broader British society, their approach to secular democracy, and
their national/cultural identity. Through this process, it may indirectly help Muslims to
focus on their future role and involvement in national life.
The interaction of Islam and the praxis of the British socio-political and cultural
context have led to a civil war of ideas within Islam in Britain. It has caused a radical
division between the so-called “progressive” elements schooled only in the secular
sciences at Western universities while lacking even rudimentary knowledge of the
classical Islamic sciences, and the “conservative” or “traditional” elements educated in
the traditional universities and seminaries in the Middle East or Indo-Pakistan subcontinent
and have not been equipped with the knowledge of contemporary humanities
and social sciences.
The secular educated Muslim “experts” have only succeeded in scratching the
surface of a complicated and highly sophisticated Islamic discourse in their media
contributions and appearances. This has continued to frustrate the youth and other
intelligent Muslims who are searching for sophisticated answers based on the primary
sources of Islam. In order to maintain the link with the Islamic traditional legacy (turath),
the traditionalists' response has been a condemnation of any attempt to recast and reinterpret
Islam from a contemporary perspective and have considered such an exercise a
serious departure from orthodoxy and orthopraxy. While this attitude has been
successful in preserving ritualised Islam and Muslims' symbols of cultural nationalism
(“Asian” cultures), it has failed in providing answers to a number of contemporary
questions. The primary Muslim concern cannot be mere survival of an old tradition
(turath) – Islam as a museum that displays once meaningful deposits – but the
actualisation of a challenging message for a contemporary generation.
The future of Islam in Britain rests upon the emergence of a generation of young
scholars who are schooled in both the classical Islamic disciplines and contemporary
humanities and social sciences. A reader of the Qur'an who grew outside of Islamic life,
who is attending a secular university, is more likely to see the Qur'an as a collection of
5
conflicting theological claims than is a reader who grew up with frequent participation in
worship, who has access to the classical sciences of Islam. Lack of knowledge of the
English is not the problem as suggested by the Muslim organisations in Britain and the
Home Office. The problem is much more complex than that; it is one of methodology
and approach. Traditional Islamic seminaries should stop producing graduates who are
only able to function as Mosque Imams teaching ritualised Islam. The dominance of the
modern Western idiom is such that the scholar of Islam (the 'alim) must now conduct
not merely a traditional discourse, but also a discourse cognisant of modernity.
Since the Muslim of today is very often exposed to contemporary disciplines, and
thereby exposed and possibly co-opted by their associated worldviews and assumptions,
it becomes imperative to address contemporary issues that are associated with the
Western disciplines. Islamic scholarship can no longer ignore the host of other worldviews,
religious or secular, with which it competes for the attention of contemporary
human beings. To wish for Islamic disciplines which have no connection to the West is
to forget that because of colonialism, globalisation, and migration, the Muslim is all too
often caught up in images, concepts, and paradigms quite alien to classical and medieval
Muslim scholarship.
Muslim organisations and groups in Britain should promote a serious intellectual
debate that focuses on the primary sources and texts of Islam as points of reference.
Such a debate will provide the platform to those who would otherwise have resorted to
extreme measures in order to be heard.
April 2005
6

