1 Just war revisited
1 Antagonistic praxis and evangelical counter-praxis
On the famous Ghent altarpiece, on which the Van Eyck brothers
depicted the adoration of the Lamb of God standing upon an altar
on a greensward in front of the Heavenly Jerusalem, there appear
in the lower left-hand panel two groups of people at the edge of
the worshipping crowd. They are separated from each other by a
rocky outcrop, but share a common urban background; and that
contrasts them with a balancing pair of groups on the lower righthand
panel, set against a wilderness landscape. Those on the right
are the hermits and the pilgrims of the church; but the groups on
the left are identified as the church's just judges and milites Christi,
'soldiers of Christ'. To our modern sensibilities this is immediately
shocking. How, we wonder, could the lay service exercised in a civil
context by Christian judges come to be extended to soldiers? The one
group serves peace, the other war; this seems enough to set an infinite
spiritual distance between them. Can one who fights offerworship to
the sacrificed Lamb? Our sense of shock is excusable. Yet the idea that
these two roles, judges and soldiers, are analogous, an idea that grew
out of the twelfth-century romanticisation of the Christian knight
such as we meet in the legends of the Round Table, was one of the
great achievements of the late middle ages. Today we commonly call
it the 'just war theory'.
There are good reasons to hesitate over this achievement. The will
of God for humankind is peace: that all-determining truth contains,
and shapes, any further truths that we may hope to learn on this
subject. And from it flow three further propositions. First, God's
peace is the original ontological truth of creation. We must deny the
sceptical proposition that competition and what metaphysicians call
'difference' are the fundamental realities of the universe, a proposition
which the creation, preservation and redemption of the world
make impossible to entertain. Secondly, God's peace is the goal of
history. We must deny the supposed cultural value of war, its heroic
glorification as an advancement of civilisation. For war serves the
ends of history only as evil serves good, and the power to bring good
out of evil belongs to God alone. Thirdly, God's peace is a practical
demand laid upon us.We must deny any 'right' to the pursuit of war,
any claim on the part of a people that it may sacrifice its neighbours
in the cause of its own survival or prosperity. For the Gospel demands
that we renounce goods that can only be won at the cost of
our neighbours' good.
Philologically, bellum is duellum, the confrontation of two, the
simple and unmediated difference of opposites. No Christian believes
that duellum can be 'just' or 'necessary', because no Christian
believes that opposition can in fact be unmediated. All oppositions
are subject to the pacific judgment of God, of which neither party is
independent. To this extent every Christian is, to use a term which
had some currency early in the twentieth century, a 'pacificist', rejecting
antagonistic praxis, the praxis of unmediated conflict. All
Christians, therefore, can recognise something like a sin of belligerence
or a 'crime against peace'. That crime consists in making antagonistic
praxis a goal of politics, whether as means or end; that sin
consists in cultivating antagonism as a form of self-perfection.
Against what moral standard is war a crime or a sin?Here, indeed,
is a puzzle. For there is universal evidence of a connection between
warlike behaviour and the development of culture. Antagonistic
praxis is strongly tied to the cultivation of certain human virtues;
it is the occasion of achievement, self-discipline and virtuosity. This
is made possible by a psychological fact, that the peril of confrontation
with a mortal enemy may evoke a sudden access of courage
and capacity. Within his interpretation of the human passions, St
Thomas spoke of what he called an 'irascible contrariety', by which
he meant that our passionate reactions to good and evil not only take
the form of an instinctive attraction and repulsion, but also, as we
see good and evil as presenting a challenge to our own capacities, of
a reflective contrary movement, shrinking from or pressing towards
action. So faced with an immediate threat to our lives, there is released
within us a dialectical response, not only of extreme fear but
of extreme boldness, on the basis of which a culture of the virtue of
courage may be perfected.
From Achilles to Patton, war offers its rich and varied crop of military
heroes, for whom the destruction of enemies has been the stuff
of outstanding performance, whether in brutal hand-to-hand assault
or in elegant tactical ingenuity. But the satisfaction of disposing of an
enemy is not confined to the hero himself, nor even to those who fight
alongside him and aspire to imitate him. The hero is, in fact, never as
solitary as the songs that celebrate him make him seem. His combat
is a moment in the building of a society; his enterprise furthers the
life of a community of men, women and children, for whom the
warrior's deeds are a common point of reference, a 'transcendental
representation', and who reinforce with passionate self-censure the
narrowed moral perspectives which pave the way for heroic virtues.
The unbridled excess of war, the ritual mutilation of corpses, the
slaughter of non-combatants, the rape of women, the destruction of
property, every kind of violent display, in fact, are all indivisibly of
a piece with its constructive, culture-building and virtue-perfecting
aspects. They are the rituals through which the mortal conflict of a
few becomes the common object of love within a political society.
Furthermore, the access of heroic courage is surrounded by a
wealth of disciplines and restraints. The practical traditions of the
warrior classes, found in many cultures, develop virtues of selfmastery,
decisive action and contempt for death, creating an ´elite
to which the combatant r ˆ ole is confined. In Israel's traditions, on the
other hand, which were comparatively inhospitable to heroic ideals
and jealous of the popular militia, a different set of disciplines
emerges, sometimes clashing with the heroic ones.2 Cultic restraints
surrounding warfare present a theological interpretation of battle
as a moment of special divine empowerment. Religious law forbids
committal to battle without the assurance of prophecy and oracle
that the cause is Yhwh's own, since such engagements are not available
for the pursuit of ordinary human goals, and the temptations
of self-enrichment must be offset by a general destruction. In their
different ways these two traditions of restraint have a similar aim: to
construct a wall around the encounter of battle, to make an unbridgeable
difference between the ordinary relations which bind peoples
to neighbouring peoples and the exceptional moment of antagonistic
confrontation. The heroic ethic demands magnanimity when the
critical moment is past; it forbids 'avenging in time of peace blood
which had been shed in war' (1Kings 2:5). The destructiveness of battle may
not spill into the subsequent life of the community, and in the
greatest celebrations of warrior deeds the heroism of the vanquished
is honoured alongside that of the victors. In ancient traditions, then,
antagonistic praxis is separated off. It is treated as a special and occasional
eventuality, a crisis in which the ordinary rules of social
recognition are dissolved in mutual bloodshed, but which in turn is
decisively set aside, so that ordinary rules of social recognition may
reassert themselves.
This entwining of the pursuit of warwith the growth of civilisation
directs us to themomentof truth in the old assertion that self-defence
was a natural right. The praxis of mortal combat is not destructive
to human sociality as such; it is simply a moment at which human
sociality regroups and renews itself. The rejection of war, then, is
no demand of natural law. It is a distinctively evangelical rejection.
Christians refused to go along with this controlled recognition of
antagonistic praxis and its associated virtues. They had a message to
proclaim about the end of history: the episodic collapse and recovery
of sociality was something that God had done away with once for all
in the cross and exaltation of Christ. The unification of all rule in
his rule, the subordination of all sovereignty under his sovereignty,
forbade them to think that sheer unmediated antagonism could, in
however carefully defined circumstances, be admitted as a possibility.
Since every opposition of hostile parties was subject to the throne
of God and of his Christ, there could be no outright duality. Antagonistic
praxis was superseded by the climax of salvation-history. To
use the phrase of John Milbank, whose framing of the problematic
we have to some degree followed, a counter-praxis was demanded, a
'peaceful transmission of difference', that would overcome the confrontation
of the two with the rule of the one, revealing the unifying
order of the kingdom of God.
But what is the shape of this counter-praxis? It cannot be the
waging of peace against violence. Christians believe that violence, in
the radical ontological sense, 'is not'; and to oppose violence with
peace is to agree that violence 'is'. The praxis which corresponds to
the ontology of peace is not a praxis of peace simply and as such,
but a praxis of winning peace out of opposition. 'Not the simple
being of peace,' as BerndWannenwetsch declares, 'but the service of
reconciliation'.
This counter-praxis has more than one theatre. Staged against
the supportive backdrop of the community of belief and worship,
it takes a pastoral shape as mutual forgiveness, by which enemies
who believe the Gospel are made enemies no longer. But it must
also be staged missiologically against a backdrop of unbelief and
disobedience, and here it assumes the secular form of judgment –
not final judgment, but judgment as the interim provision of God's
common grace, promising the dawning of God's final peace. This,
too, is a word (not the first or last word, but an interim word) of
evangelical proclamation: God has provided us a saeculum, a time to
live, to believe and to hope under a regime of provisional judgment;
here, too, it is possible to practise reconciliation, since God's patience
waits, and preserves the world against its own self-destruction.
The practical content of this interim commongrace is the political
act, the same political act thatwe encounter in any other political context:
government-as-judgment, the exercise of Gospel faith within the
theatre of unbelief and disobedience. This may be exercised also in
response to the crime of war. The outcome of this act of judgment,
when it is successful, is like the outcome of every other successful
act of judgment: a law, which regulates relations between the parties
and provides the measure for their future peace. The evangelical
counter-praxis to war, then, amounts to this: armed conflict can and
must be re-conceived as an extraordinary extension of ordinary acts
of judgment; it can and must be subject to the limits and disciplines
of ordinary acts of judgment. In the face of criminal warmaking,
judgment may take effect through armed conflict, but only as armed
conflict is conformed to the law-governed and law-generating shape
of judgment.
Materially, this proposal may appear to amount simply to another
kind of war – a 'just' war. But the name by which the proposal has
been universally known in the last generation – 'just-war theory' –
is a misnomer, since it is not, in the first place, a 'theory', but a
proposal of practical reason; and it is not, in the second place, about
'just wars', but about how we may enact just judgment even in the
theatre of war. The term 'war' itself, subject to every kind of reification
and deconstruction, is hardly usable. Formally, what is proposed is
toto caelo different from the crime of war: it is a provisional witness
to the unity of God's rule in the face of the antagonistic praxis of
duellum. Yet it is no less true in this form than in any other that
judgment has only the same material means available to it as crime.

