Travel: Brazil: Is it as green as it's painted?: To reach Praia do Forte, 'Brazil's first eco-resort', you have to take an environmentally unsound 16-hour flight. Esther Addley opens our guilt-free special with a moral dilemma

I'm not, to be honest, feeling terribly green about all this. According to the ecological consultants Best Foot Forward, a return flight from London to Brazil chugs out 2,606kg of carbon dioxide per passenger into the atmosphere, meaning that I've already used twice the annual carbon emissions of an average African just in getting here. Add to that a 65km drive through the Atlantic rainforest in a rattling taxi whose exhaust sounds like a cheese-grater, and it's probably fair to say the planet and I are not on the best of terms right now. 
The problem with vague green instincts such as mine is that, in the final analysis, they are so terribly hypocritical. I mean, obviously I recycle the Sunday papers, and all my lightbulbs are those expensive ones that last for ages, but I also really enjoy driving around London when the congestion charge isn't on, and can never quite remember to turn the tap off when I'm brushing my teeth. And I'll be honest and confess to a genuine soft spot for lush, palm-fringed silver strands where the only sound is the chirruping of contented songbirds and the low rumble of a tickling surf. That sort of thing not being widely available on these shores, we hypocritical wannabe greens have to take our carbon-combusting appetites elsewhere. And we rarely hitch-hike.


I'm not certain the Praia do Forte can square this circle, but it certainly wants to try. Styling itself Brazil's first "eco-resort", the four-star, 247-bedroom hotel was opened by a Swiss-Brazilian industrialist who had decided to buy up 30,000 hectares of Bahian subtropical rainforest to the north of Salvador in order, he says, to show it was possible to develop it sensitively. The resort's motto is "use without abuse", insisting it's possible to serve limitless caipirinhas and coconut dishes to well-off Europeans in its narrow coastal strip with minimal environmental impact, all the while providing a model of sustainable development in its relationship with the local community. 
Even more impressively, it's apparently green enough for noted Brazilian rainforest fan Sting, who spent New Year here a few years ago with his abundantly proportioned family.
Certainly the resort has found itself an utterly lovely spot, clinging to a cliche-fulfilling stretch of palm-carpeted yellow strand that's tickled by a flat, blue ocean and punctuated by small swampy rivers, natural pools and mangrove swamps. The forest stretches to the gates of the resort; just across the Linha Verde (green line) highway north from Salvador, itself designed to have minimal environmental impact with tight restrictions on roadside development, the trees take over and stretch to the horizon. The best spot from which to take in the scale of the Praia do Forte estate, of which the resort is only a small part, is from the Garcia d'Avila fort, a 16th-century hilltop ruin that may be Brazil's oldest stone building and was once the seat of a colonial estate that stretched across 10% of the vast baby nation.
From here it is clear that what the resort has most strongly in its favour is space. There is not another luxury hotel beyond the bluff; part of the hotel's grounds themselves are almost wild and it's quite possible, in walking from your room to one of the bars or swimming pools, to be entirely distracted by the mangroves or the fruit trees, shedding pecans thickly on the ground while I was there, or the scores of birds and occasional small monkey. Every room has a wide balcony facing the sea and nothing has been built higher than a palm tree (though those are pretty high round here). A travel agent who had just come from the Caribbean commented on how refreshing it was to see restaurants and entertainment venues built without walls and open to the warm Bahian air rather than enclosed to allow the cranking up of a chilly and power-thirsty air-conditioning system.
And while the hotel cannot quite resist some of the mystifying rituals of all-inclusive hotels the world over (noisy poolside dance classes, anyone?), it makes good use of the rich environmental resources at its disposal. Forest hikes, river kayaking expeditions, moonlit walks to the nearby beaches on which humpback and hawksbill turtles lay their eggs (these sites are strictly controlled), all accompanied by biologists and experienced guides - there is little doubt that the hotel makes a genuine attempt to interact sensitively with the forest and marine ecosystems it inhabits. The attractive little children's area also runs its own mangrove and forest trips.
Most impressive for me was the use, where possible, of local people as guides and rangers; the estate's foundation offers schooling, adult education and environmental training to the local community. It's difficult to top a day spent trekking for a few kilometres through high, creeper-trailed trees, splashing into a reed-fringed lake to cool off, then spending the late afternoon stretched out like a contented walrus on a sun-lounger while women in traditional Bahian dress swoop by with cocktails. By the evening, pleasantly exhausted under the stars and scratching absent-mindedly at the odd insect bite, it's possible to bask for some hours in a warm glow of one's own faint ecological smuggery.
But the chiming ironies of the "eco-resort" that it costs the earth to reach are never quite out of mind. The restaurants and bars are roofed with intricately thatched palm-leaf rather than lined with solar panels, as would seem eminently sensible in this nicely toasted region; and it takes only a moment to register in the early evening that the faint pffft-pffft-pffft sounds creeping over your balcony are not contentedly-chirruping crickets but scores of sprinklers keeping the expanses of grass a lush, brochure-ready green. The resort has also considerately dealt with the irritating problem of local poverty that can be such an inconvenient eyesore when holidaying by developing the local settlement of Praia do Forte, also now owned by the estate, into something of a toytown that the hotel's maps refer to as "the fishermen's village". In truth it's been nicely done, and the village is a lively and pleasant place in which to have a beer or buy cuddly turtle toys, but the bustling little sandy strip is now laid out entirely for the convenience of the holidaymaker with reals burning a hole in their sarong. No doubt it has benefitted the locals economically, and the injunction against their selling their houses to outsiders may even have helped keep property affordable for them while luxurious mansions are being built just a few hundred metres to the rear, but you will search for a long time here for anything approaching Bahian authenticity.
Most frustrating of all is the exhibition centre of the Tamar Project, Brazil's highly regarded turtle conservation body, which sits at the tip of the village beside its prettily restored little chapel. This is the project's national headquarters and the resort makes much of its proximity to the hotel, but while children might reasonably be entertained for a short while by the enormous turtles basking almost within arms' reach, there is an infuriating lack of information for anyone with even the mildest interest in how turtle conservation actually works. There are some lovely touches - local children are trained to be "mini-guides" outside school hours, helping the community to develop its own appreciation of the importance of conservation - but the centre's slightly sheepish apology for the tiny size of its tanks (only one in 100,000 turtles bred on the beaches ends up in a tank for "environmental education purposes", declare a few small notices) feels pretty lame.
However, the ethics of eco-tourism are more complicated than a simple equation of long-haul flights with environmental evil, according to Justin Francis, director of ethical travel agent responsibletravel .com. "What is important is to look at the overall impact of your holiday; not only the flight, but also what happens when you are on your holiday. British tourists spend £2bn in developing countries every year, and while, of course, not all of that trickles into local people's hands, a lot of it does." What about the environment? "In developed countries we can afford to set aside national parks that are paid for by governments, but in developing countries, vast areas of wilderness are largely supported by tourism revenues. So if you didn't take your flight to Brazil, there would certainly be far less emissions and global warming wouldn't be impacted in the same way. But it might mean that local people were at risk of losing their jobs, and secondly that the protected area that you visited would earn less money towards its own conservation. And, of course, the rainforest does contain trees, which are an effective way of absorbing carbon dioxide. We need to look at the whole picture, not just the flight."
I feel better already. And in any case, to damn Praia do Forte for the things it could do better is perhaps unjust. This is a genuinely lovely resort - varied, beautiful, and with enough remaining of a pleasant amateurishness of service to avoid impersonal slickness - and its adoption of an ecological branding is far from cynical. This part of Bahia's coast is perhaps Brazil's first serious stab at mainstream tourism development that coexists happily with its munificently rich environment, and as such might reasonably be hoped to provide a model for others. Those unconvinced need only consider the new, multi-resort Costa de Sauipe development a few kilometres up the coast, a site of such brash exuberance that its name, all over Brazil, prompts a slight wrinkling of the nose in distaste.
Praia do Forte is not really green, in other words, but it's greener than it might be. And if you are going to build luxury resorts right in the middle of lush natural paradises - and we do seem to want just that - so much the better to build them like this one. It is, after all, better to recycle the Sunday papers than to do nothing.

PYRGIC PUZZLES: More monkey puzzling . . .

1 How many animal KEYS can you find of the form: 
*** KEY?
(Each * represents a missing letter.)
2 How many human KEYS can you find of the form
*** KEY?
(Same rules apply. . .)


3 EM Fourstar drives to A Passage To India to get a takeaway. On his way there he managed 12mph, and on the return journey only 6mph. Assuming it took no time at all to pick up his takeaway, what was his average speed for the whole journey? 
4 'Can the half be greater than the whole?' asked the drunken philosopher of the petrol pump attendant. Well, **** can be just a little more than **** **** (in which each * stands for a letter). How?
5 Inflamed by a newly discovered interest in statistics (Geddalife!), you throw a pair of dice repeatedly. The product of the two scores is noted each go, and whether the result of this multiplication is odd or even. Which of the following seven outcomes is most likely?
O O O O
O O O E
O O E O
O O E E
O E O E
O E E E
E E E E
Do not try this at home.
6 The warder in the Nick Of Time has a set of keys which all look similar, but no two are identical. At least that is what was thought until today. Which pair of keys within this column are in fact identical? This is a very simple puzzle even if you're sober!
7 The warder keeps his sandwiches in a safe with a 14-digit combination number consisting of a pair of 7s separated by 7 digits, a pair of 6s separated by 6 digits, a pair of 5s separated by 5 digits, all the way down to a pair of 1s with a single digit between. His memory of this number is at best patchy:
4 * 3 ***********
Can you help him retrieve his sandwich if he shares it with you?

