Georgie Fame – Charlestons (Three Line Whip – TLW006)
Georgie Fame's latest and own Three Line Whip label release has a mix of revived
and new tunes all sounding characteristically warm and fresh. There are nine
originals (one co-credited) and four covers. The opening “Anthem For A Band”
(Fame) sets the heart-warming tone for this collection of trademark
arrangements and riffing horns.
Georgie's core band remains as it has done for some years now with Georgie on
keyboards and vocals. Guy Barker on trumpet and Alan Skidmore on tenor
saxophone add much more than their two horns worth. Anthony Kerr is on
vibraphone giving the ensemble an added distinction to its sound. Tristan Powell
is on guitar, with brother James on drums and Geoff Gascoyne on bass. The band
is joined in places by Georgie's former long-time collaborators Madeline Bell
(backing vocals), Zoot Money (backing vocals) and Ralph Salmins (percussion).
There is the further addition of Nick Payn on saxophones.
“Charleston Walk” (Fame) is being dubbed the new “Moondance” and has
necessary inevitable references to it as its doubtless inspiration. Burch's “Preach
‘N' Teach”; looks further back, originally being the B-side to “Yeh Yeh”. The
obviously blues of “How Blue” is another trademark piece: Fame blues at an easy
walking-tempo. The reappearance of Robeson's I.E.O.K.O. (a.k.a. “The Canoe
Song”) is welcome: here as an introduction to the historical narrative of
“Flamingo Allnighter” (Fame), having previously been used as an intro to the
aforementioned “Moondance”. This turns into one of Georgie's name-droppin'
excursions and also quotes from the live sessions at Ronnie Scott's; “like Count
Basie, chasing your blues away”.
Co-Rhythm King, Andy Fairweather-Low's former hit “Wide Eyed And Legless” is
pleasant enough though not an essential inclusion. “Your Face” (Fame) gives Guy
an extended showcase solo. On the medley of “Skiing Blues” (Fame) and “I Lost
My Sugar In Salt Lake City” (Rene/Lange) Tristan gets to feature some of his
rarely heard, judicious guitar effects. The original “Wogan's Air” co-written with
Candida Lycett-Green some two decades ago is finally made public. It is as
relevant today as a tribute to the evergreen broadcaster as it was when first
penned.
There is not exactly a title track as such, though some of the tunes are more
Charlestons than others. Even so, the unifying theme of most of the pieces is the
Charleston two-note rhythmic phrase. The original “Charleston Proposition”
includes a very short reading of James P. Johnson's “The Charleston” that no-one
will have trouble identifying. The short “Hymn For Him” signs off the collection,
acting effectively as a doxology.
There is no better way to pass an evening hour than giving a Georgie Fame
album a spin. This is as good as anything he has done. Lovely stuff!
Rating: 8 - Frank Franklin

Van Morrison - Huntingdon Hall, Worcester, 10/12/05
He bounded on stage, all smiles, “Merry Xmas everyone, welcome to Worcester,
we're going to have a grrrrrrreat...”
No, of course he didn't. You would need to squint quite hard when regarding Van to
discern a sunny disposition. He stands solid and four-square, implacable, and
apparently unemotional. No nonsense about yelling encouragement to his bandmembers
(a very fine outfit indeed, I'd tell you their names were it not, apparently,
a closely guarded secret) for a particularly fine solo – though you imagine he would
make it clearly known if something happened that he didn't much like.
The band was a superb 7-piece: 2 horns, slap-bass, drums, grand piano, guitar,
and delightful, darting sequined young woman on percussion and occasional vibes
(Teena Lyle?). With guest Chris Farlowe, not a whit abashed by the august frontman.
After a warm-up from the band, then one from Chris, there he was: to howls of
rapture such as I've rarely heard.
He did 90 minutes, no break, no song introductions, no attempt to get in touch
with his audience, a bit like Dylan in his Rolling Thunder mood, and he was superb.
Playing harp, guitar, and a surprisingly good sax, he went through 18 songs, with
lots from his latest CD “Magic Time”.
“Fame”, from the CD “Back On Top”, a mid-paced funk, was followed by “Keep
Mediocrity At Bay”, from “Magic Time”, and the wonderful prophet-in-his-owncountry
lament “They Sold Me Out”, earning him his place as the Michael Caine of
Rock. “Stranded”, with vocal interjections from Chris, and “Magic Time” from the
eponymous cd drew loud applause.
He did a nice sax-solo on “Have I Told You Lately That I Love You”, and opened his
back-catalogue with “Hey Mr DJ” from the cd “Down The Road” (2002), and
“Sometimes We Cry” from “The Healing Game”, whose emotional impact quite
transfixed a group of Vanatics sitting in front of me.
To Nashville – or, given his now customary expression of frozen disdain –
gnashville, with “Your Cheating Heart”, then he delighted the crowd with the longawaited
“Slipping Away”.
“Help Me” reminded you of what a good harp-man he is, following which he stood,
brooding like Don Corleone, (break their legs or give 'em the full lupara
treatment?), deciding to stay after all and belting out “Brown-Eyed Girl”, followed
by the merest hint of a smile when he finally allowed us the anthemic “Gloria”.
And off, with nary a word. 90 minutes to the second, as contracted, with no
interval, the famous Huntingdon Hall raffle was drawn behind the scenes, which is
a pity: I should have loved to see the expression on Van's face when they asked
him to draw the winning ticket.
I've not been much of a fan, but I am now: V is definitely still TM. - Bob Jones

The Che Brewer Band - The Dinkum, Polegate, East Sussex, 25/6/05
Guitarist and vocalist Che Brewer was joined by Sal Martin on drums, Lucas Cope on
rhythm guitar and co-writer of all the material with Che, and Portuguese born Jose
Pinto on bass guitar.
This band is extremely versatile and range from straight blues to more funky and
jazzy blues. This versatility is due to the band members' influences and being
introduced to the more funky side as Jose has just graduated and has had the
opportunity during his time in college to experiment with all the genres blues
encompasses. He was also tutored by Julian Dean, bass player of the now extinct
Toploader. It was so refreshing to hear such original material and no covers. Clapton
fan Che has a wonderful blues voice and sings from the heart, using all his vocal
chords and expressions to their full potential, and gets across to the appreciative
audience the sentiments of his fluid lyrics. They are a charismatic band and perform
live as if they were seasoned professionals. The guitarists play towards each other
and the drummer doesn't get overlooked either and they all join in the gaiety.
They moved swiftly through the first set, ending on a raunchy song entitled “Red
Letter”. I was able to find out more about Lucas's custom built guitar, which is a
combination of a Gibson Les Paul body with a Fender Telecaster neck, made from
mahogany and maple. His granddad, who was a pattern maker, crafted this beautiful
instrument.
The second set opened with “Carry On” which suited the audience. Che brought the
lyrics alive and this band really is a happy band to see and hear. They then slowed
down the tempo with a beautiful song called “Lights Go Out” which reminded me of
Robin Bibi's “Switch off the Night”. Their second set was a pick n' mix of wonderful
live music, with long instrumental interludes. Lynyrd Skynyrd influences were
evident. Che and Lucas were really giving it some and produced fabulous
entertainment. A song they have only been performing for the last three months is
entitled “Billy” and it has the makings of a hit. Che encouraged audience
participation on this number and it worked brilliantly. The timing was acute and
professional. The intro on “B What You Can B” had all three guitarists huddled
together as if expecting Macbeth to appear, it was certainly hubble bubble and I
expect they could get into trouble. When it came to their next song, “Stones”, Che,
being the showman he is (thought terribly modest), did a quick impersonation of our
Mick. This was melodic and rocky blues all in one at its best, with a funky back beat
that gets stuck in your head. All the way through Sal on the drums kept a tight ship,
and his snare was crisp and played with perfection. Then came the solos to introduce
the band which led into their penultimate number entitled “Blues in E”, good bit of
use of the wah wah on this one, and the tune drops down and then builds up. This
ensured a rapturous request for an encore and we were treated to “Rainy Night”
which ended a brilliant evening. The band has recently supported Keane, and I hope
this enabled them to raise their profile, because they are an essential band to see. -
Helen Steele
www.thechebrewerband.com

Storm Warning - Tawe Delta Blues Club, Swansea 14/2/06
With Storm Warning, there's no ‘Look at me, Mum!' Instead, there is a confident
and professional setting out of the musical stall. So it was at Swansea's Tawe Delta
Blues Club. Opening with “The Blues Are Back” from their superb debut CD,
Breaking Out, we had a foretaste of the evening's entertainment, the rhythm
section of drummer Roger Willis and deft Derek White at the bass declaring just
how tight they intended things to be.
And, if the Blues truly are back, what better to follow with than Peter Green's “Long
Grey Mare”, which allowed all band members to showcase their abilities, individual
and collective. Ian Salisbury at the keyboards expanded the sound and offered
some truly worthy fills, counter-melodies and solos. On guitar, Bob ‘Mad Dog'
Moore played inventively from a broad catalogue of styles – sometimes relaxed and
sleepy, sometimes jazzy, sometimes urgent, but never clichéd or repetitive.
With some bands, the lead vocalist is the screaming banshee around whom chaos
reigns. In the case of Storm Warning, Stu ‘Son' Maxwell is the anchorman who
pulls together all the components. His delivery is laid back yet compelling; his voice
– smoky, gravelly, edgy – has a powerful intensity. Their frequent changes of
dynamics allow Son to stamp his personality on the performance. And yet the
process is gentler than that... Storm Warning build an atmosphere and inveigle you
in. Almost by osmosis, the audience are tugged into the process and by halfway
through the first set, we were all an enthusiastic part of the experience.
Son's harmonica work served to complement his vocals as the band showcased
songs from their debut CD and introduced us to a ‘work in progress' – “Mr.
Charlie's Blues”. Although these guys have only been playing together for some 18
months, they are all seasoned musicians. And it shows.
The second set began with “Woman? Or The Blues?” Never having realised that the
two were mutually exclusive, I find this title a conundrum. Nevertheless a good
choice to hook us back in. A couple of well-considered, nicely-arranged covers
followed and then the haunting “Bullets”, again from the CD, its pulsating beat
grabbing the collective attention.
“Whisky Blues” led to an upping of the tempo as we headed for the climax. J B
Lenoir's “Talk To Your Daughter” – owing more to Robben Ford than to Nine Below
Zero – preceded Sonny Boy II's “Don't Start Me To Talkin'” providing a riotous,
meaty finish.
Time constraints dictated that the much-deserved encore – a new instrumental
“Are You Alright With That Phil?” – was brief but, by then, Storm Warning had done
what they had to do. - Blues Show Bob
