Carmen is a woman of many songs and one aria. The songs are part of her daily life; the aria is a preparation for death. John Steane discusses

Carmen and Don Giovanni (see Aria No 25) have more in common than their city of part-time residence. They are fictitious characters who have fascinated a wide public ever since their creation. As operatic roles, they are highly prized so that what a first night as Don Giovanni is to a baritone, so is a debut as Carmen to the mezzo-soprano. They're also seen frequently as anti-heroes, which inevitably means that there will be others to defend them. True, Giovanni goes to Hell, like Doctor Faustus, and (in the novel at least) when Don José observes 'You are the devil', Carmen answers simply 'Yes'. But then, as has famously been claimed, Satan is the true hero of Paradise Lost, and the case for Carmen is certainly easier to make than that. 

What concerns us here, however, is character as portrayed in music, and particularly in the form of the aria. Don Giovanni, as argued previously, is exceptional in the whole of opera, more especially in Mozart's masterpiece named after him, in that his single aria is functional and not expressive of character; he also has two songs, much better than the aria and much better-known, but they too are functional, setpieces, one a drinking-song, the other a serenade. Carmen similarly has well-known songs, the nearest she has to an aria being the solo we know as the card song, interpolated in an ensemble with two other women. The difference between the two roles is fundamental in this: that the 'aria' is deeply personal and inner, while the songs too tell directly of the personality, her view of life and her reaction to the situation of the moment. We know very little of Don Giovanni through his music: Carmen, one of the most real characters in opera, is inseparable from hers.

Her first song is the 'Habanera', or song in the style of Havana, which she sings promptly, with minimal introduction, following her arrival on stage. Many are the curvaceous provocations, challenging glances and deft dental clampings of artificial flowers accomplished in the course of this slinky little number. Bizet's original composition was apparently more subtle and as he met the demand for something simpler is said to have remarked that they asked him for rubbish and had now got it. The 'rubbish' has of course proved extremely popular, and it certainly establishes Carmen in sound and sight very effectively. It does, however, lend itself readily to the visual and stylistic portrayal of Carmen as silent-screen vamp.

Leontyne Price presents a sophisticated version of this kind of Carmen, introducing her in the 1964 recording under Karajan. Before the song itself, Carmen exchanges a little banter with the young men who gather at midday to see the girls from the cigarette factory. They want to know when she is going to extend her favours to them. 'Perhaps never,' she says. 'Perhaps tomorrow but certainly not today, that's for sure.' Price's 'C'est certain' is tough American: Catfish Row perhaps. That is the outward-going Carmen: dangerous, we note. Now, with the quietly suggestive outline of the dance-rhythm and the lazy, faintly sleazy droop of melody, this Carmen begins to sing almost as to herself. And that's more dangerous still. There's something (not inappropriate) of the blues singer's manner in the way she loads the syllables of 'apprivoiser' ('tame'). Contempt, perhaps (the very idea that you can hope to tame this wild-bird, love)? At the corresponding place in the second verse, 's'envola' ('flies away') gets a little staccato flick on the last syllable (you think the love-bird is docilely nestling and, flick, it's gone). In the novel, Don José recalls that one could never be bored in Carmen's company – it was impossible to know what was coming next. Similarly Price works the changes: at one moment the tone is languid, breathy like cigarette smoke, at another it is a projectile ('prends garde à toi') or a snake-bite. At one moment, the word 'l'amour' vibrates with promise, the next it sounds deflatingly like mockery, 'lurv' in inverted commas.

But Carmen is also as various as her singers. Another Carmen can come along, disperse this sultry noontide heat and substitute a bright spring day with a personality to match. Victoria de los Angeles, with Beecham for her conductor, sees the charm of Carmen – as charm. She flirts with the young men, and her 'c'est certain' is no more than a conversational closure (she has a song to sing). The song is sung out, wide-awake and at a comparatively brisk tempo. The little homily, about the bird of love, is delivered with a smile; she teases a little but in a good-natured way. The song, after all, moves into the major key soon enough, and the chorus sing along happily.

Now Victoria de los Angeles was Spanish, but her manner is plausibly French: that is, she suits the language in which she is singing and which is the native language of the composer. Attached to Carmen the role, and even more to Carmen the opera, is the question 'How French/Spanish is it?'. Accepted opinion holds that the opera is very French and the character (or her music) only a little less so. We have no recordings of the original Carmen, Célestine Galli-Marié, but the singer who by the turn of the 19th century was internationally most identified with the role was Emma Calvé, who recorded five excerpts, some of them more than once. These provide an odd accompaniment to the many written accounts of her performances on stage. They were found intensely dramatic, even shocking, and she herself, as the baritone Emilio de Gogorza put it, seemed, in the part, to possess 'la beauté du diable'. Yet the style of her singing on records suggests hardly anything of that kind. Her 'Habanera' (four recordings in all) is really very plain, innocent of suggestion, mildly playful in some phrases, rather gloomily off-putting in the low-lying notes of 'il te tient'. There is no reason to think that the Victor recording of 1907 (with orchestra) is not representative: at least it gives no support to the sleazy-vamp school. With little of the gypsy or the Spaniard about it, it strikes one as unequivocally French.

Carmen's second solo, 'Près des remparts de Séville', is a sprightly melody in triple time after the manner of the popular Spanish dance known as a seguidilla ('Séguedille' in French). This offers less incitement to sleaze than the 'Habanera', even though Carmen at that moment is exercising all her powers of seduction on poor José whose duty it is to take her to prison and see that she is locked up. Callas puts a kind of streetwise hardness into her voice as she intimates (almost in as many words) that she would take him as her new lover on the spot. When he appears to capitulate Callas's 'Oui' of acceptance is vividly cautious (not sure yet that he is well and truly hooked) and then the note of victory is undisguised in the full-voiced reprise of the opening measures. It might seem that her impersonation is so complete that there can be nothing to add, but Conchita Supervia is livelier and Geraldine Farrar even more resourceful. Supervia holds out the greater promise of reward, not just in the finespun
enchantment of 'Je pourrais bien aimer' but in the vibrant lustre of her voice. She would be fun to be with; we're not so sure about Callas. 

Farrar's old recording (1915) brings us Carmen in the absence (one would think) of a Carmen voice. Here, more than with Callas, Price or los Angeles, is a lyric soprano, without dark chest tones or rich colourings in the middle voice a natural for José's country sweetheart, Micaëla. She has no tenor to sing to in the studio and yet produces perhaps the most persuasive enticement of all. Her proposition, 'Qui veut m'aimer, je l'aimerai' ('Who wants to love me, I will love him'), is of course the opposite of her creed as stated in the 'Habanera', but in this recording, with a breath of rapture for punctuation, she almost persuades herself to believe in the deception. Then at the first reprise of 'Près des remparts', with wily portamenti that are all her own, she seems to lay a trail which he must follow. She slows down and waits, slows down some more, the mesmeric magic at work: and he's caught.

But these, we note, are songs; so is the wordless tune she sings so infuriatingly when put under arrest, so is 'Les tringles des sistres se tintaient', the gypsy dance at the beginning of Act 2, and so is 'Là-bas dans la montagne' at the end. In Act 3, the soprano Micaëla has a full-scale, set-piece aria, the sort of occasion denied to Carmen herself who must be content with the cardsong, short, restricted in range, restrained in style by a remorselessly syllabic simplicity of utterance.

It is of course unforgettable and immensely effective, the still centre of Carmen's restless being, the turning-point of the whole opera. Callas and Supervia both find the right darkness of tone, Supervia providing (incidentally) an answer to those critics who found her Carmen at Covent Garden merely 'kittenish'. One thing she fails to do, and that is to build a crescendo molto towards the climactic note as marked. Callas does that, and throughout conveys the meaning of these sequences of imperturbably even notes: such is the tread of Fate, sure and inevitable.

Sung like this, the card song is a moment of frozen time. The steady pad of quavers reflects Carmen's acceptance as surely as it does the relentlessness of her destiny. In more modern times, Angela Gheorghiu has to some extent countered this with a measure of overt emotion expressed mostly in the breathing. Here the acceptance is sad and reluctant. The cards' message ('Carreau. Pique!') was not necessarily foreseen, and its certainty brings fear. Not till the final reiteration of 'la mort, toujours la mort' is the ineluctable conclusion drawn. This is a valid reading, supported by the six stabbing fortes in the orchestral bass which tell that even to this fatalistic nature the sentence of death comes as a shock.

It is another reminder (and we never quite outgrow the need for such lessons) that the score is still the best authority. Another comes with our last recording. Funny, you might say, but we never really noticed it, or, more likely, never took it quite seriously: but the initial marking for the singer, not cancelled till the song is nearly halfway through, is pianissimo. Teresa Berganza, alone among these singers, observes it. 'Oh but,' you say, 'that may work on records but in the theatre it's simply not practicable. The voice has to carry, and carry over the orchestra.' And then we observe that the orchestral marking is ppp, that is, an explicit reminder that they must play even more softly than the voice is singing – and Claudio Abbado is the one conductor who sees to it that the instruction is obeyed. The orchestra maintains life at the lowest possible pulse; the voice has visibly paled. The episode is isolated, out of time as measured in the opera up to now. The stillness also allows those secretive notes, rising by ominous chromatic degrees then sinking, to make their subdued point with unsettling clarity. In a vague, intuitive way we have all felt how special this short solo is within the main body of the opera. Berganza and Abbado show us the why and the how.

And this is Carmen's 'aria', hardly worthy of the name in duration and show. The audience who intrudes applause at the end of it is barbaric. Unlike Don Giovanni's single aria, also hardly deserving of the name, Carmen's is personal, the real means of our knowing the character at its heart. This is what an aria properly does: it is the primary means by which the artistic creation of operatic character, known from within, is accomplished.