Race Face Workshop X-Type Fitting

Two-piece cranks are pretty much the norm, at least on mid to high-end bikes. They've gained favour thanks to increased stiffness and theoretically improved bearing life. 
Most designs are outwardly similar but all use slightly different fitting and adjustment techniques due to alternative bearing preload methods. Rather than using a threaded cap to load the bearings, elastomer compression washers sit at the centre of Race Face's X-Type chainset system. Full instructions are included, or can be easily downloaded, but we feel there are a few extra tips and ideas that should help steer you in the right direction, whether you're a first-time fitter or are re-fitting after some maintenance. 

SPACER OPTIONS: 
Before starting, it's well worth checking the instructions or logging onto raceface.com and downloading the installation guide for your chainset. This way you can ensure the correct sized preload elastomer, number and position of additional sealing spacers. This will prevent an annoying partial disassembly and part swap. You could bargain on a trial-and-error methodology, but with the vast array of possible options you're likely to be there for quite some time. 



TOOLS FOR THE JOB: 
Rag or cleaning cloth, 8mm and 10mm Allen keys, Park BBT9/Shimano TL –FC32 or 33 or similar external BB cup spline tool, grease. Optional torque wrench with 8mm Allen fitting. 



1 Once the old chainset and bottom bracket have been removed, thoroughly clean the bottom bracket threads and inspect them to make sure there are no burs or swarf from manufacture or previous fitting. If it is not already done, it is a good idea to get the bottom bracket shell faced so that the two faces are perfectly parallel. This will prevent the bearings in this outboard bearing design becoming misaligned and guarantee maximum life expectancy. Any good bike shop should be able to do this for you. 



2 Once clean, grease the threads. 



3 Your bottom bracket shell width and front mech type determines how many 2.5mm spacers you will need to insert between the bearing cups and the bottom bracket shell. For 68mm shell, 2 drive, 1 non drive; for 73mm shell, 1 drive side. If an E-type mech (or chain retention device) is used, reduce the drive-side spacer count by 1. 



4 Place any required spacers between the bearing and bottom bracket shell and screw the drive-side cup in. It has a reverse thread so it tightens anti-clockwise. 
Make sure to nip the cup up fully. It must be tight up against the spacer or E-Type front mech. 



5 Insert spacers as/if needed and screw the non-drive side cup into the frame. 
A standard thread is used, so tighten clockwise. 


6 Push chosen preload elastomer into recess on rear of left-hand crank. 



7 Slide 1mm rubber spacer/seal onto axle. 



8 Apply grease to the polished areas of the axle. 



9 Slide left-hand crank and axle through the bottom bracket from the non-drive side. Take care to keep the axle perpendicular to the bearings or you can damage the inner, plastic bearing sleeve. The axle may be a tight fit through the bearings so a couple of taps with a rubber mallet may be needed. 
Spread grease, removing excess before inserting axle through bottom bracket. 



10 Clean any dirt that may have fallen onto the axle splines during installation. 



11 Slide any required spacers onto exposed drive-side axle. Grease the splines. 



12 Check the drive-side crank splines are clean and free from debris before fitting. 



13 Slot the drive-side arm onto the axle. Slowly screw the 8mm Allen key until the arm nips up against the axle. Make sure the crank arms are at 180° to one another (don't laugh, we've seen it done plenty of times). Tighten the crank bolt until the crank bottoms out on the spindle. This will seem as if it needs too much pressure, but you can feel and hear when the cranks hits the stops. The first time the cranks are fitted, there is often a lot of resistance to this bottoming out, so it is a good idea to wind the crank off (using the 10mm Allen key release) and slide it on again. It will be noticeably easier the second time. 



14 Always check the 10mm Allen key release bolt is fully tight. Take note that (like the drive-side bottom bracket cup) it's a reverse thread. This just needs nipping up. Don't be tempted to hang off the, inevitably long, handle of the 10mm Allen key. 

WARNING: 
X-Type cranks come with a 3.5 and a 2.5mm preload elastomer to account for variations in finished bottom bracket shell width, while maintaining perfect chain line. Raceface.com has installation instructions with a chainline position and spacer requirement chart that should be consulted before beginning. 

TOP TIPS: 
Wrap the chain around the bearing cup before attaching the drive-side crank, then slotting it onto the granny ring as you attach the drive-side crank arm. This will save you wrangling with the chain to stretch it around the whole chainset later. 

If you are unsure or nervous about the amount of force needed to get the crank bottomed out, use a torque wrench. You can expect to need at least 30ft/lbs and possibly up to 50ft/lbs.
Crank Bros Cobalt Chromoly Bottom Bracket £44.99
Tested: September '07
Weight: 251g/113mm axle/5-year warranty/68 or 73mm shell 
Contact: 2Pure Ltd 0131 448 2884 

We said we'd be testing a chromoly Crank Bros Cobalt bottom bracket back when we tested the Cobalt crank. Unlike the titanium bracket the chromoly axle is significantly stiffer and in our opinion works better with the crankset, maximising the two-piece construction, plus the weight saving (around 50g) you get with titanium wasn't really significant or worth the extra £100. Long term reliability with ISIS bottom brackets always crops up, which is why the Cobalt comes with a five-year warranty and also why we'll be putting some serious mileage on this unit before an update. 

MBR RATING: 8/10
Four new Dirt Divas courses for female mountain bikers.
Dirt Divas have launched four new courses this year specifically for women mountain bikers... Back to Basics, Singletrack Skills, Drops &amp; Jumps and Bike Maintenance! The courses, which are run by fully qualified coaches in Crowthorne Woods, Berkshire take place every month throughout the summer, the first one kicking off on April 27th. The courses cost £85 per day which includes lunch and a brilliant goodie bag. Dirt Divas are also offering private lessons and group private lessons which would be ideal for mixed groups of ladies and guys! 

Check out further details at www.dirtdivas.co.uk
Ambleside Killer Loop — winner!

Neill Pearson from Surrey is the fourth winner of our Best of British Killer Loop comp. He was first to unearth the hidden waterbottle last weekend, revealing the codewords 'Tioga Disk Drive'. 
Neill told MBR: "By the time I got there people were looking all over the place, just finding a piece of land or wall that was not occupied. I think as the last lot of treasure (Rosedale) was buried 40 yards off the trail people assumed the same. But after jumping over walls and looking under sheep I decided to go back to the reference point and start again. Within two 
minutes of logical thinking I had found it! 

"Everyone was really friendly and congratulated me apart from one bloke from Carlisle who called me a b*stard! He did have a smile on his face though. A big thanks to MBR for setting up this comp, it has been great fun." 

For details of the next Killer hunt, check the May issue — in the shops on Weds 26th March.
Join mbr in the Alps - Reader Holiday
Here's your chance to join the mbr team in the Alps on a reader holiday 
27th June to 4th July 2008.
mbr have teamed up with Ride On Tours &amp; Le Boomerang Hotel to offer our readers a fantastic holiday in the Alps. 

WHAT'S INCLUDED: 
• 7 nights chalet/hotel accomodation 
• Breakfast and evening meals 
• Transfers to/from Geneva 
• Six day lift pass 
• Guaranteed entry to PassPortes du Soleil (28-29 June) 
• Local guides 
• Onsite pro mechanic 
• Top quality bike hire fleet 
• mbr goodies 
• Prize draw 

NOT INCLUDED 
• Flights 
• Insurance 
• Lunch 

PRICE 
• £ 490 

DATES 
• 27th June to 4th July - (option of Sat 28 June - Sat 5 July) 

If your interested in joining mbr in the alps then contact Le Boomerang direct on 0033 450 798 065 ozyalps@leboomerang.com 
The Marin Rough Ride 2008 The Marin Rough Ride 2008 is on Sunday June 8th this year, one week later than normal, but still takes in some classic Welsh Moorland riding
For this, the sixth year, Marin have returned as main sponsors, they are providing spot prizes and a test fleet which will be available from Saturday lunchtime onwards. 

This popular event is a great ride across the open hills of the Welsh borders and attracts just under a 1,000 riders from all over the country. 

Riders return year after year to pit themselves against the demanding route which varies each year, but never uses forestry. 

The route is across moorland tracks opened just for this one event by express permission of the various landowners. 

It has the smallest proportion of road for any single loop off road event in England and Wales. 

The atmosphere is kept delightfully laid back and welcoming, the marshalls are really friendly and helpful. 

The campsite, on the edge Hergest Ridge, above the tiny market town of Kington on the welsh border, has wonderful views of the surrounding hills. 

The event costs £27 for advance entry, which includes all camping and event tee shirt. 

Visit the website (www.roughride.co.uk) for further details and entry. 
Olympics "Too Flat" Shocker
You heard it here first... (or not)
For the first time in living memory, mountain biking made the papers in January when the UCI declared the proposed 2012 Olympic venue of Weald Park in Essex “too flat”. We can't say we were shocked at the news, as we've been saying the exact same thing ever since the venue was announced. 
Olympic chiefs are determined to host the mtb'ing in Essex, which leaves us with Epping, although we've got our fingers crossed that they might look slightly further afield to develop a site that is truly world class and will show XC racing — and not just London Village — in the best light. 
IMBA-UK's involvement in this continues, and is keen to see that there is a legacy for mountain bikers after the Games, in the shape of a world-class mtb facility close to London.
MBR BIG WEEKEND

The mbr big weekend is back by popular demand. Now in its forth year the event has established itself as one of the must do events of the year, why not join over 500 other off road riders for a great weekend.
MBR BIG WEEKEND – MTB Marathon 


Margam Park, South Wales 31st May - 1st June 08 

25km - 50km - 100km off road rides 

The mbr big weekend is back by popular demand. Now in its forth year the event has established itself as one of the must do events of the year, why not join over 500 other off road riders for a great weekend. 

The action takes place at the Margam Country Park 
just 5 mins from junction 38 of the M4. Click here for Google map 

Your £30.00 entry includes free camping, Saturday guided off road rides at Afan Forest Park, kids and fun races and entry to the main event on Sunday and it's not all cycling. Richard Johnson and the RJ guide stunt display team will be performing all weekend and Saturday night sees the return of the big party with free pasta, entertainment and a live band. 

To make it even better value for money you can bring non riding members of your family and friends along for FREE, kids especially welcome. 




