Before you can compile a budget, you need to make sure you know what your income is. For most people, this is simply a case of working out how much their take-home pay will be at the end of each month, or the amount of benefit they will receive. For students in higher education it is more complicated than that. The days when all students received a maintenance grant are long gone and grants have, by and large, been replaced by student loans. Thanks to devolution, there are now also various systems in place in different parts of the UK. So before you can begin to budget and manage your finances effectively, you need to know what sources of income you can access and how and when to apply for them. The rest of this section looks at that in more detail. The money you can get will depend on where you live at the moment and the type of course you will be studying.

Read this chapter then turn to the section relevant to you as indicated by the chart. NB Part-time and overseas students should turn to Chapter 7.

Terminology

The student support system includes some terms and phrases you may have not have heard before. Before going into any detail about what you might get, it is worth briefly explaining what some of those terms mean. . .

Local Education Authority The local authority responsible for handling your application for student support. In England and Wales, this might be your local council if you live in a 'unitary' authority. If you live in a 'unitary' authority, one council is respons- ible for provision of education and student support services and collection of Council Tax. Examples of unitary authorities include Southampton, Reading and Slough. In other cases a local district or borough council will collect Council Tax but a county council will be responsible for education and student support. For example, if you live in Epsom, you pay Council Tax to Epsom and Ewell Council but Surrey County Council are responsible for student support. This does not apply to London Boroughs which are, in effect, also unitary authorities. A full list of student support contacts can be found in Appendix A. Otherwise it will be your county or borough council. In Scotland, all student support applications are handled by the Student Awards Agency for Scotland in Edinburgh, and in Northern Ireland by the Education and Library Boards.

Student Loan A loan from the Government towards your living costs whilst you are studying. The student loan is repaid after graduation.

Tuition Fees Money you pay to your university or college for your course. Under current rules, students contribute around 25% of the cost of tuition with the rest coming from public funds. Students from countries outside the European Union will often have to pay much higher fees, sometimes up to £8,000 per year. Scottish and EU students who study in Scotland do not have to pay tuition fees.

Grant for Tuition Fees A grant towards the cost of tuition fees - not everyone has to pay the full amount. The latest Government estimate is that approximately 40% of students will not have to pay any tuition fees at all, 30% will have to pay a proportion and 30% will have to pay the full amount.

Dependants' Allowances Additional allowances paid to students with children or other dependants. These are paid as grants and do not have to be repaid.

Disabled Students' Allowances Additional allowances paid to some disabled students. These allowances do not depend on income and do not have to be repaid.

NHS Bursaries Students on nursing, midwifery and other health- profession courses (excluding medicine and dentistry) receive a different package of support and usually qualify for bursaries from the National Health Service.

Eligibility

Now you know which chapter will be relevant to you, you first need to find out if you are eligible for funding. There are common rules across the UK with some variations and exceptions. You need to meet ALL the conditions to be eligible for student support funding.

Residency

This is probably the most complex rule to understand. To meet the criteria you must have been 'ordinarily resident' in the UK, Channel Islands or Isle of Man for at least three years on the 'relevant date'. The 'relevant date' is taken to be 1 September if you start your course between September and December (1 August for courses in Scotland where the academic year starts earlier). The rules say that you must have been living there as part of your 'ordinary life'. If you came to the UK during that time principally for the purposes of education, you will not be eligible and therefore unable to apply for any support at all. If you are not a United Kingdom national, you must also have 'settled status' on the relevant date. Broadly speaking, this means there must be no restriction on your stay for an immigration reason.

EXAMPLES

Pauline came to the UK in 2000 to do her A levels. She is originally from Nigeria. She is not eligible for student support funding as her main purpose in the UK for at least two of those three years was for education.

Olukayode is from Ghana and was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain in the UK in 2001. He had been in the UK since 1997. As there is no restriction on his stay (his leave does not run out on a certain date), he is eligible for student support funding.

The main exceptions to these rules are: 

• Students who have been living temporarily in another European Economic Area country because their parents were employed in that country. (The EEA is made up of the European Union plus Iceland, Norway and Liechtenstein.)

• Nationals and spouses of nationals from other EEA countries who have 'migrant worker' status or whose parents are or have been migrant workers in the UK.

• People (and their families) who have been recognised as refugees by the British Government.

• People (and their families) who have been granted 'Exceptional Leave to Remain' or 'Exceptional Leave to Enter' the UK as the result of a failed asylum application.

If you think you might be in one of these groups, speak to your relevant authority for more information as the rules are very complex. You can find details of your relevant authority in Chapters 2-5, depending on where you currently live or, in the case of healthcare-profession students, where you will be studying.

In addition to all the above, to qualify for certain supplementary grants made by the devolved assemblies or Scottish Parliament, you must also be 'ordinarily resident' in that particular country of the UK on your 'relevant date'.

European Union Students

Students from EU countries (excluding the UK) who have been 'ordinarily resident' in the UK for three years prior to the start of the course must apply to the Home Office for 'settled status' before the 'relevant date'. This means that, although you will have a right of abode in the UK, you must make an application for Indefinite Leave to Remain in order to qualify for support towards tuition fees and living costs.

If you do not have 'settled status' you might still be able to apply for support towards your tuition fees if: 

• You are an EU national, or child or stepchild of an EU national; and

• You have been ordinarily resident in an EU member state, or another EEA country, for at least three years prior to the start of your course; and

• You will be taking a full-time course.

At the time of writing, there were plans for the enlargement of the European Union to 25 countries from the present 15. It is likely that nationals of the additional countries will be able to apply for support towards their tuition fees from the next academic year after the date on which their home country becomes a member of the European Union. If this applies to you, check with your relevant authority for further information.

Course Eligibility

To be eligible for funding, your course must be an 'eligible course' and you must be studying at a university or college that receives public funds. For students studying full-time courses, this includes: 

• Full-time first degree courses at universities in the UK, leading to awards such as BA, BSc or LLB. For students from Scotland and Northern Ireland, courses at Trinity College, Dublin, and the National University of Ireland (University College Dublin, University College Cork and University College Galway) are also eligible courses. 

• Higher National Diplomas (HND).

• Foundation Degrees.

• Certificate or Diploma of Higher Education (CertHE and DipHE courses).

• Foundation courses where the entry requirements are the same as for the degree but only if you enrol for the whole course (i.e. foundation plus degree) and the university treats the foundation course as a necessary part of the degree.

• Sandwich courses, where your course involves periods of practical work experience and you study full-time.

Most universities and colleges in the UK receive public funds. Some private colleges and the University of Buckingham, the UK's main private university, have courses that are 'specifically designated'. This means that although the course is taught at a private institution, it receives some public funding, and students on those courses can receive student support funding. The rules on this, as with most other elements of student support, are complicated, so seek advice from your LEA/ELB/SAAS if you are considering a course at a private university or college.

EXAMPLES

June will be starting a BSc in Physics in September. Her course is an eligible course.

Debbie will be starting an AVCE course in September. Because this is a 'school level' course, it is not eligible for student support.

Cameron will be starting a National Certificate in IT course in September. This is a course of further education and is not eligible for student support.

Sinead will enrol on a Foundation Degree in Aircraft Engineering in February. This is an 'eligible course' so she can apply for student support.

The main sort of course that is not eligible for student support is the Foundation Course in Art and Design offered by many universities and colleges of art and design. In most cases, this course does not necessarily form an integral part of a degree course and can be studied without progressing to a degree in art and design. If you are aged under 19 when you start the course, which usually lasts for one year, and you will be studying in England, your tuition fees should be paid by the Learning and Skills Council. In addition, you may be able to apply to your university or college for assistance from the Access to Learning Fund or Learner Support Fund, depending on your university or college. Foundation art and design students are not eligible to apply for student loans.

Part-time Courses

Part-time degree courses attract a different package of student support. However, the general eligibility requirements are broadly the same as those for full-time courses.

Your Age

There is no age restriction on grants for tuition fees. You are therefore eligible to apply for these regardless of your age. Nor is there any age restriction on Dependants' Allowances, if you have depen- dent children or adults, or are on Disabled Students' Allowances.

To qualify for a student loan, you must be aged under 50. However, if you are aged between 50 and 54 at the start of the course and can show that you intend to go back to work once you have completed your course, you will also be eligible. If you do not plan to go back to work, or are aged over 55, you will not be eligible for a student loan at all, but may be able to apply for assistance with tuition fees and other supplementary grants. There are no age restrictions on eligibility for NHS bursaries.




