Blackmailed over wild car romp with two lads

Dear Deidre
I HAD a wild sex session in a car with two guys. I enjoyed every minute but in the cold light of day I feel so ashamed.
I'm 40 and married with three children, a boy of six and twin girls of 11.
But now I could lose everything. These lads are threatening to tell my husband if I don''t agree to see them again.
I don't go out much and at first it felt like a real treat when my sister asked me to go for a girlie night with some mates. We went to a nightclub and after a couple of drinks I started to relax. I noticed a young guy at the bar giving me the eye. I was flattered.
We met later when I was buying a drink. He said I was gorgeous and asked me to dance. Egged on by my sister, I said yes. Before I knew what was happening we were kissing and he whispered for me to go outside with him.
I said no at first, but I was very tipsy and gave in. We got into his car and he started to touch me. It all got very steamy.
Next thing his mate climbed in the back seat and started to join in. I was carried away having two guys so hot for me.
They were begging me to go back to their flat but I drew the line at that. My sister came out of the club then and they agreed to run us both home.
Next morning my sister rang and said she'd spent the night with the two lads and given them my phone number. Now they're blackmailing me.
DEIDRE SAYS: Don't give in. Next time they ring, tell them they're wasting their time. I think you can safely call their bluff. Even assuming you don't have to tell your husband, you need to do some serious thinking about why you let things get out of control and put yourself at risk with strangers.
If it was just drink you'd feel only remorse, but you enjoyed it. Chances are it has highlighted issues in your marriage and now's the time to tackle them.
My advice line today Spice Up Your Love Life will help you have more fun at home.

Married life is torture

Dear Deidre
MY husband shows me no love or affection and I can't stand the torture our marriage has become.
I'm 38, my husband is 40 and we've been married for 20 years. We have a daughter of 19 and a son of 15. I've dedicated my whole life to my family.
When I try telling my husband how I feel he just says, "Here we go again".
I think it's time we went our separate ways but our son will be devastated.
How do I sort out the mess my life has become?
DEIDRE SAYS: By finding ways to love yourself more and build your own security.
Tell your husband it has reached crisis point.
Ask him to join you for couple counselling. If he refuses, go alone. Relate offer individual and couple counselling (0845 456 1310, relate.org.uk).
Plan your future. Happily divorced parents are preferable to married, miserable ones. Your son will cope if you're OK.


I can't climax

Dear Deidre
MY soulmate is everything a man could ask for but I still can't climax when we make love.
I'm 32, she's 29 and we've been together six months. I'm experienced and can give my girlfriend multiple orgasms, but I only climax if I do it myself.
It has always been the same. She is frustrated for me and knows she's not to blame. What's wrong with me?
DEIDRE SAYS: You're scared of losing control -sexually or emotionally. It's probably behaviour learned from way back.
An emotionally damaging experience in childhood -an overpowering mother, or one who abandoned you -can affect your attitude in adult relationships.
My free leaflet for men who can't climax will help you.


She has shrine to dead hubby

Dear Deidre
MY girlfriend's husband died three years ago but her main bedroom is still covered with photos of him.
She is 36, I'm 34. She was with her husband for 15 years and we've been together for two.
From the beginning of our relationship we only ever had sex in her back bedroom.
She refuses to take the photos down and insists that when she dies she will be buried with her husband. She became pregnant six months ago and we were ecstatic.
I had high hopes that would have given us a future.
But she miscarried at 12 weeks and now we seem to have gone back to square one.
I'll be so angry and hurt if she doesn't change.
DEIDRE SAYS: Being widowed young is tragic. Try to be patient a bit longer.
Suggest she talk to Cruse Bereavement Care (0870 167 1677, cruse.org.uk) who can help her move her life forward.

I'm not ready to wed

Dear Deidre
MY girlfriend wants us to get engaged but I think we're too young.
I've known her as a friend for nearly two years and we started dating three months ago. She is beautiful, great fun, and I love her dearly. I can't believe how lucky I am to find such a wonderful girlfriend. We're both 18.
The problem is she keeps on about us getting engaged and wants to plan our wedding. I just don't feel ready for that step. When I tell her she just cries and says it means I don't love her.
It's not true but I still feel too young to start talking about marriage.
She's now thinking of ending it because I won't agree to the engagement. I'd hate to lose her but how can we make it work when we want different things?
DEIDRE SAYS: Stick to your guns. If you give in just to keep her happy, you'll be miserable and it will all end in tears anyway.
You can't know how either of you will change over the next few years. Tell her you love her but insist that right now you lead independent lives. If she's so emotionally needy as to end it, you'll have had a lucky escape.
NEED to talk? If you're feeling troubled by emotional or sexual problems you can call 020 7782 4010 between 6pm-9pm today to talk in confidence to an understanding and experienced sex therapist and counsellor from my team. (Calls limited to a maximum of 20 minutes, normal phone rates apply.)

We're in the final with 888.com

STEPHEN STIRMAN was our first competition winner to win a seat in this Thursday's Sun Free Poker tournament final.
The 52-year-old postman from Staplehurst, Kent, thought he would give it a go because of the fantastic prizes up for grabs.
Stephen, pictured below, says: "I love entering these free tournaments, playing for brilliant prizes and knowing it is not costing me a penny.
"It's really exciting and as I reached the final stages I would have been happy just to make the top 20 and qualify for the final.
"But to actually win the daily tournament outright was amazing. I shouted out to my wife, Stephanie, 'I've won!'
"And she couldn't have been happier -what with a trip to Australia on the cards this week.
"It just goes to show, as the old saying goes, you've got to be in it to win it.
But, believe me, you don't have to be a poker professional to come out on top.
When I first started playing online poker for free I used the 888.com poker school. It really helps you get a feel for the game and gives you the confidence to enter tournaments like this.
"The website is very easy to use and taking part couldn't be simpler.
"All you have to do is hope for good cards and your fair share of luck -after that it's down to how well you play.
"Now I can't wait to sit down and take part in the main event on Thursday for a chance to win a seat at the Aussie Millions or a trip to Sydney with my family.
"And you could join me in the final!"
DREAMING of Down Under? You could be there -thanks to 888.com.
The online poker site is exclusively offering Sun readers the chance to win two awesome ten-day holidays to Australia.
All you have to do for a chance to win a fantastic trip for four people is register and play in our FREE online poker tournament. So you DON'T have to win, you just have to enter!
Your name will go into the hat and you could be flying out with your family or friends to take in the sights of Sydney!
The tournament winner will scoop a holiday for two in Oz PLUS bag a seat at the Aussie Millions poker tournament in Melbourne in January. The seat is worth a staggering £ 4,000 and it could be yours FREE -playing for a prize pool of $5,000,000.
It's being televised by Fox Sports Net -and you could be one of the stars of the show! You will get all travel and accommodation expenses paid for you and a friend. But even if you don't grab that final seat you can pick up great prizes along the way.
Two online tournaments start every day and each day's winner will get a fabulous 888.com chipset. Those finishing second to tenth in the Final will also get a chipset.
Plus there will be eight spot prizes of 888.com hats and shirts given out at random every day.
If you are a poker beginner, don't worry -888.com's poker school will teach you the rules of the game in about TEN minutes. And there is a 24-hour customer support line for Sun readers.
So register now for our FREE online poker tournament -it's not for real money so you've got nothing to lose, and you could be on your way to the other side of the world!
For full terms and conditions, go to the website.
Your easy steps to register and enter
1. Just log on to www.thesun.co.uk/888 and click on Enter The Competition.
2. Now download and install the easy-to-use 888.com software.
Select Money Play (don't worry, no deposit is needed and you won't be playing for real money) then register your details.
3. Create a user name and you will receive your password. Now you can enter our special restricted tournament, at 8pm and 8.30pm daily until November 22. Please register before 7.30pm or you won't be eligible for the tournament until the following day.
4. On tournament days, open the Pacific Poker program between 6pm and 8.30pm.
Tournaments start at 8pm and 8.30pm so please don't be late.
5. There are a series of tabs in the Poker Lobby.
Look under the Multi-Table tab and you will see two tournaments called The Sun Restricted.
Choose either one -they are the same but have different start times.
6. Double-click on the tournament and you will enter the Tournament Lobby.
Then click on Join The Tournament.
You are now registered for the tournament.
7. You will automatically be seated at a table when the tournament begins.
8. The Top 20 from each tournament will win a place in the final on November 23 - with fantastic prizes up for grabs. If you are in the Top 20 in any of the daily qualifiers, repeat the steps above on November 23 and go for the grand prize. Good luck!
OTHER successful daily tournament winners joining Stephen in Thursday's main event include: John Bowman, Manchester; Steven Brittle, Southend; Kaye Nicholson, Leicester; Paul Moss, Chesterfield; Alex Frame, Wishaw; Steven Owen, Wolverhampton; Maurice Crowson, Northampton; Jason Peacock, Sheffield; Darren Haystead, Chichester; Stephen Fielding, Oswaldtwistle; Frank Scotney, Truro; Zafar Iqbal, Bradford; Kev Bailey, Southampton; Steven Pollock, Dumfries.
But don't forget, there's still time to enter TONIGHT, TOMORROW and WEDNESDAY!

