In due course a number of modern, flat-bottomed skiffs appear
– all powered by outboard motors and driven by smiling men in
jeans and tee shirts! Our gear loaded on the boats, we head along
the Juarema. Three extraordinary figures are waiting to receive us,
all naked to the waist, with chests and legs ornamented with
abstract patterns rendered in an indelible blue dye. One carries a
club, another a bow and a handful of long arrows. I am the first
ashore – I smile, wave, bow and shout a greeting. The men stare
back – unmoved, unsmiling – aggressive it would seem. It occurs
to me that this is a quintessential 19th-century moment. I, the
intrepid explorer, land with nothing other than a bottle of water to
face the disdain and steely gaze of the painted savage. The
warriors motion me forward and we enter the village – Indian file
– and then I realise that the warrior in front of me is wearing on his
head the object of my quest – the Umahara feathered headdress!
We are led into a village formed by a collection of long huts,
mostly constructed of vertical timber planks with pitched roofs
covered with timber shingles or thatched with leaves. Most of the
village is gathered in the shade, men in one group, women in
another. They are waiting for us, and as we appear they all start to
smile and gesticulate. The message is clear – we are welcome.
The appearance of the Hikbatsa men and women is I realise as I
survey the scene, really quite extraordinary. The faces and bodies
of both men and women are ornamented with blue dye – mostly
arranged as vertical bands, although many have curved bands
following and framing the curves of the mouth. And many have
dabs of red, or red bands instead of blue. This makes them look
wondrously barbaric. But, somewhat incongruously, most of the
men wear rather natty sports shorts while the women – with only a
very few exceptions – wear bikini tops or bras and roomy pants.
And then I notice the football pitch with goalposts and, standing
next to a newly built hut on a concrete plinth, a huge satellite dish
surrounded by a wire fence. Clearly, all is not quite what it first
seemed.
I am then led to the ceremonial hut. It's overwhelming. I
expected to see one or two Umahara headdresses, but the hut is
full of them and other bright feathered headdresses, hanging from
hooks on the wall and from the timber beams that support the
roof. The Hikbatsa have put their treasures on display. I gasp and
gawk, smile, congratulate and thank them – they beam back, nod,
shake my hand. First we are to see the headdress in a dance, then, I
am told, we can discuss how it is made and its meaning. The dance
takes place every day for 90 days after 1 June and is to do with
‘celebrating new things'. I suppose that means it relates to harvests
and crops but, since the Hikbatsa venerate the moon, I wonder if
the 90-day period has to do with a series of new moons. Then the
dance starts. Four ranks of men, each four men wide, all wearing
large palm leaves strapped to their backs, blow instruments made
from hollowed bamboo stalks and thump, to one side of the
football pitch and back again, the tingle from the bells on their
ankles mixing with the deep moans from the bamboo pipes to
make a very distinct sound. Up and down they go, hypnotic in
their music and their movements. All wear feather headdresses,
but only a select few the Umahara. After a number of turns across
the pitch the dancers make their way into the ceremonial hall and
continue, moving from one side to the other, still puffing on their
pipes.
After the dance I talk to one of the celebrants, a splendid
looking fellow with a Umahara on his head and feathers stuck
horizontally through his nose. His name is Juarez Paymy. He
explains, in a most articulate manner, the meaning of the
Umahara. It used to be worn in war but is now worn in peace, in
dances such as we have just seen. It represents continuity with the
past, a powerful memory, and ensures the continuing identity of
the tribe – in the present and in the future. It is the symbol of the
tribe, the emblem of its pride.
UMAHARA HEADDRESS OF THE HIBATSA TRIBE 23
Before bed there is dinner, and another dance. We gather
around a fire – made by twirling a wooden stick to create friction.
Do the Hikbatsa always light their fires like this, or is it just being
done for our benefit? I'm now getting slightly suspicious. I sit
around the fire with my new Hikbatsa friends, we beam at each
other. Then the dancers appear – it's the same routine but this time
women carry on after the men have finished. In the flickering light
the chant-like rhythm and tone of the bamboo and bell music is
even more hypnotic.
When cocooned in our hammocks, hanging all in a row from
the walls of our hut, something odd happens. Thumping dance
music starts to echo across the village – the Hikbatsa are having a
disco! I am surprised, but drift off to sleep to the sounds of Latin
American pop music. Quite pleasant really.
Sunday 4–Monday 5 July
In the morning, before sunrise, we are up and packing. We have a
long journey. The villagers – our savage painted and feathered
friends of the previous day – drift towards our hut. Now they are
attired in jeans, tee shirts and baseball caps. The show is over –
they come to say goodbye, and to trade. Much of what they offer
we would not be allowed to keep – jewellery made from the
feathers or teeth of protected birds or animals. They escort us to
our craft and look at us wistfully and with curiosity as they wave
us goodbye. What can they make of us, I wonder? We whisk in
from another world, rush around in a frantic manner, ask
simplistic questions, they give us the answers we want, dress as we
expect them to dress and then we rush off again. Nick says
sardonically, as our craft speeds away, that they're now climbing
back into costume and waiting for the next tour group to arrive.
They're not, of course, but there is some truth in what Nick says.
The Hikbatsa are being drawn into the modern world – like it or
not. The authorities must know this and realise that, if things
continue, the Hikbatsa will be a thing of the past, dispersed into
the nearby towns and cities, their culture and traditions just a
memory – and their lands available for development. Is it really
just a matter of time before all this is gone?
As we make our way back from Juina, our little six-seater offers
us the big view with chilling accuracy – farming and cattle land
wrenched from the rainforest. The sad little clumps of forest,
marooned among huge fields and pasture, are poignant indeed. As
we approach Cuiabá I notice a complex of tower blocks rising out
of what looks like rainforest. What an image. It seems to me, as I
fly towards it – like a moth into a flame – that Brazil has been
developed with almost unseemly haste. It has the sixth largest
economy in the world, but this seems to be fuelled by the
exploitation of resources that, in many cases, are not being
renewed. It wants to be one of the world's great nations – and no
doubt will be but, I fear, at a daunting price. The evidence of the
country's ruthless rush to material prosperity is now part of its
history, and the indigenous people are not the only losers. Brazil
has a population of over 178 million. Over a third lives on less
than a dollar a day. It's a beautiful country but troubling – and
now we are going to see its other side, a place that could hardly be
more different from the rainforest of the Hikbatsa – the great
hedonistic dream city of Rio de Janeiro.
We arrive at Rio late at night, the plane landing at the water's
edge, and we drive through the bustle of a great metropolis to
our hotel just next to Ipanema Beach. People are strolling in
the hot evening air along the seafront and in the busy streets
behind. One thing is immediately striking: many people – both
men and women – have very little on. Rio is one of the few great
cities of the world where a chap can go for a stroll in his
underpants, no matter how brief or how late or early the hour, and
no one blinks an eye.
Despite the late hour I have a drink with Jim, a passionate
advocate for Rio and for Brazil in general. Jim recommends
cachaça, a cocktail made from sugar cane and rum, and
caipirinha, made from cachaça plus green limes, sugar and lots of
ice. He talks of what the Brazilians call ‘jingu' – the joyful, funloving,
easy-going spirit of Brazil – of the passion of the place and
of the creative and positive way the different people of the land
have fused, coalesced, to create a nation with the virtues of many
diverse races. I am intrigued by this, but wonder what survives of
the different cultures that, according to Jim, now lead such an
ideal life.
Christ the Redeemer, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Tuesday 6 July
We wake up to discover a mist hanging over Rio. We cannot see
our treasure! We have to wait – and hope that the weather lifts to
reveal the statue of Christ the Redeemer that hovers, open-armed,
on a mountain top 710 metres above the centre of the city.
The statue was conceived in 1921 to celebrate both the Roman
Catholic faith of Brazil and the country's independence from
Portuguese rule a hundred years earlier. Carlos Oswald designed
the figure – Christ with the cross, amended to the familiar figure of
Christ with open, welcoming arms. The revised project was taken
up by engineers Hector de Silva Costa and Pedro Viana to work
out how to actually build the mighty statue on its narrow
mountain peak. They decided that it was to be built of concrete
reinforced with steel, with the concrete given beauty – and
protection from the salty sea air – by being clad in a mosaic-like
veneer of shiny, pale cream soapstone. Finally the French sculptor
Paul Landowski modelled and manufactured the 45-tonne, 4-
metre-high head in France and sent over moulds for the
outstretched hands. When finally assembled the figure stood 30
metres high, on an 8-metre plinth.
By the afternoon, the clouds have burnt off, but only a little. I
can now just make Christ out, breaking through the gloom. We
decide to ascend the mountain for a closer look. But, as we arrive,
the clouds return and I see Christ only as a shadowy form with
wide outstretched arms, through an almost mystic mist. It is
strangely moving. But I have not chosen Christ the Redeemer as a
treasure because of its majestic scale or because of its artistic
quality – rather because it was, from the moment of its
completion, such a powerful symbol. In its scale it seemed to
capture the great aspirations of these lands, in its open arms it
celebrated the mix of peoples making up these nations and – of
course – in its Roman Catholic imagery it made the statement that
this part of the globe was to be the new Catholic heartland and
that the old religions of the displaced civilisations were finally
dead. Seventy years on it is possible, with hindsight, to take a
different view. The statue has great spiritual power and it has
become the image of Rio and of Brazil. But it presides over a
curious and troubling world – the city of beautiful beaches and
people, luxury apartments and style also contains the largest slums
in Brazil and streets in which beggar children are still killed by
vigilantes as if they were rats. 


