Justice for Colombia! 
Conscientious objector forced to serve in military 

*  Andreas Speck 

In early October, Colombian conscientious objector Juan Carlos Montoya Munera was forcefully recruited by the Colombian military in the city of Antioquia, and taken to the barracks of the Batallon Bombona Coronel Diaz, where he is being forced to perform military service. 
During the same week the Colombian military forcefully recruited a number of youths in the cities of Medellin and Antioquia, also taking conscientious objectors. On 10 October Alejandro Piedrahita, a conscientious objector and activist with WRI's affiliate Red Juvenil, was detained by the military together with 50 others. He announced his conscientious objection to the military and was later secretly released by the military, while ensuring that other detainees did not see him leave. 
    The following day, Hector Fabian Londono, another Red Juvenil activist, was detained while observing the military detaining other youths. He also declared his objection, and called Red Juvenil while detained by the military and was released. 
Official denials
Although the Colombian constitution recognises freedom of conscience and religion in Article 18, the country does not recognise the specific right to conscientious objection. 
    Forced recruitment is a common practice in Colombia. At bus stops, in market places, on the street the military pick up youths. Those who cannot prove that they already have a military service record or have a valid reason to be exempted, are taken to recruitment centres. They are then dispersed around the country to conflict areas, border areas, forests and swamps to perform military service under very harsh and dangerous conditions - this despite Law No48 which states that conscripts are to perform their service in their home areas. Such forms of forced recruitment are officially denied by the armed forces. 
    After being deluged by letters of protest from around the world, Juan Carlos Montoya Munera was released from the barracks just a few days after his "recruitment". Red Juvenil express their thanks to everyone who writes.

Striking "terror" in the budget-lines of the powerful 
The issue of repressive legislation is becoming a regular feature in PN's editorial and comment section. However, we make no apology for banging on about it, when current and proposed measures have such a profoundimpact, not just on how protest is viewed and policed, but also on how the wider public - and we ourselves - perceive our identity, power and actionsin opposition to the inherent violence of government and corporations. 
Real concerns
October saw the government challenged repeatedly over terrorism legislation and policing by its own independent legal adviser, human rights groups and the mainstream media. 
    In mid October Lord Carlile published his comments on the 2005 Terrorism Bill and, while noting that between 15 September and 5 October the government had effectively backtracked on a number of the most controversial aspects, still found much to criticise. Real concerns remain over several of the proposals, including the power to detain suspects for up to three months without charge - something which Carlile identifies as open to challenge under the Human Rights Act. 
Influencing government? Damn right!
Human Rights groups have been quick to condemn many of the measures outlined in the bill, with Amnesty International calling the "sweeping and vague provisions [...] dangerous and ill-conceived". 
    But of special concern to PN readers may be the broad definition of "terrorism" as a prism through which all subsequent offences may be viewed. The 2005 Act uses the definitions of terrorism laid out in the 2000 Act - which includes serious damage to property and interfering with, or seriously disrupting, electronic systems if the "use or threat is designed to influence the government". Separate powers in the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 relate to "economic terrorism" with reference to private companies. 
    These definitions potentially cover forms of nonviolent direct action which use sabotage, for example ploughshares activism - which has "disarmament" at its core. 
Information is power
Powers in the new Act also criminalise the publishing and dissemination of material designed to encourage terrorism. Hmmm.... well, if the definition used is as above, perhaps PN should prepare for a visit from the Met's anti-terror unit! After all, we are not about to stop publishing helpful guides to cutting fences, or opinions on the pros and cons of sabotage, or cheery articles about economic damage to the military-industrial complex - all of which hope to influence both government and the public. 
    As one anti-nuclear activist recently quipped: "In all this there appears to be no recognition of protest, NVDA, civil disobedience or acts of conscience. If I carry on as I am, I think I'm going to become a terrorist! See you all soon (in the exercise yard)". 
Love yourselves
The government also got a ticking off when journalists put two and two together and remembered Carlile's annual report on the use of the Terrorism Act 2000 and in particular the use of Section 44 (published in May). 
    Since its introduction almost 60,000 people have been stopped and searched using Section 44, without any reason being required. The use of Section 44, Carlile said, "could be cut by at least 50 per cent without significant risk to the public or detriment to policing". 
    A disproportionate number of PN readers and friends have fallen victim to the overzealous use of this section over the past three years - sometimes, genuinely, just being in the wrong place at the wrong time; often while involved in protest. 
    Unless the government takes heed of Carlile's suggestions on this and the 2005 Act, nonviolent activists and campaigners should start learning to love their new label.

CND CONFERENCE 
A case of my enemy's enemy? Nonsense! 

*  Janet Kilburn 

This year's CND conference took place close to the heart of London's poshistani shopping district -- the West End. Within two minutes of arriving, we had discovered the first two rules of the venue we had managed to break (no bicycles,no gaffa tape, blimey, good job we ditched the dog!). You can't take some people anywhere. 
However, the morning quickly moved into the usual round of resolutions and voting, with very little to report. The resolution opposing Trident replacement was duly passed and the rest followed suit with little argument. That was... until the Iranian Ambassador got up to speak... 
Logic?
On the way to the venue that morning I had been having a heated chat (read "ranting") with a fellow activist, trying to work out why an anti-nuclear campaign like CND would invite a representative of a nasty government like Iran's to pop into conference for a natter. 
    I'm not just singling out Iran here, though representatives of a theocracy with possible nuclear ambitions would be high on my list to avoid. The only conclusion we could arrive at was that the Iranians were welcome because the US-UK axis of evil seems to hate them so much. Logic? Well, sort of. 
    Anyway, the guy got to say his bit and then take questions. At this point a group of Iranian political exiles in the audience jumped up and made some fairly pointed comments. Refusing to be silenced they were asked to leave and escorted from the building by CND staff and officers. 
    We caught up with them on the steps outside to hear what they had to say. It seems their main objection was that, if CND was particularly interested in Iran, then there are many Iranian activists and campaigners they could invite rather than a representative of a government that, for example, persecutes and executes gays, "adulterous"women, political opponents, organisers, etc. Sounds reasonable. 
Dialogue and engagement
So PN asked CND for a comment on why they had invited the ambassador in the first place and why the Iranians had been ejected. Here is the response from CND chair Kate Hudson: 
    "Given the possibility of attack on Iran, and the media saturation with opinion that assumes Iran is guilty, we felt we wanted to hear the view of the Iranian government, which is, after all, the key player in this. CND has a policy of dialogue and engagement, and we do not feel this was out of kilter with that approach. We were particularly interested in raising questions about the supposed need for nuclear power and the possibility of considering sustainable alternatives. 
    I spoke to the Iranian protesters beforehand, as did other colleagues from CND, and we were happy for them to be there, give out their leaflets, and ask a question in the same way as everyone else. Jeremy Corbyn MP (in the chair) answered their first question in full. He then allowed another protester to make a contribution, but after about a minute he asked him to conclude. The protester wouldn't and after I had spoken with them asking them not to disrupt the meeting -- which they refused -- they were escorted out. 
    In our view they had crossed the line from protest which made their point clearly, to undemocratically preventing CND delegates from asking their own questions -- specifically around nuclear weapons and power. As I stated to conference on Sunday, there was no implied support for the Iranian government, but a desire for peaceful -- but firm -- lobbying and dialogue." 
A bit ironic
For a campaign which supposedly supports nonviolent direct action -- something which often involves highly undemocratic process and results, and which just a few weeks earlier was riding high on a certain Mr Wolfgang's intervention in Jack Straw's speech at the Labour Party conference -- it all seems, well, a bit ironic.

On Fisk, Faslane and fashionable attire 

*  David McKenzie 

There was no way I wanted to miss Robert Fisk's lecture in Stirling, so I was not critically put off by the irritating call notice which referred to him as the "revered foreign correspondent". 
"Sound", "respected", "influential" would have been fine but "revered" does rather take us into that stratosphere of adulation in which we kneel down and cast aside, like Pilgrim's bundle of sin, all our unworthy critical thoughts. The worry of course was not about Fisk himself, who I imagine would be embarrassed by such an oily phrase, it was about the problematic nature of the regard in which some people appeared to hold him. The problem is not the celeb -- it's the celebrants, the people who don't grant to the hero the minimal right to talk bollocks on occasion. 
Rhetorical hyperbole?
In the event the lecture was far from bollocks, it was hugely interesting, illuminating and sobering. New to me was the possibility that instead of dampening down the insurgence in Iraq thecapture of Sadam Hussein had given it new impetus, since potential fighters who had hitherto been put off by the fear that the ex-dictator would be the beneficiary of any rebellion against the occupiers could now take up arms with more confidence. 
    He admitted (as Lindsey Hilsum has done) that hands-on journalism in Iraq is now next to impossible. Hilsum says that reality is too dangerous for most foreign journalists so they have to rely on our own "lack of illusion"[1]. This of course puts a higher premium on the judge ment of the journalists we tend to trust. I did wonder about Fisk's judgement when he asserted that we could be sure that the people of Baghdad were not that night discussing in their homes the pros and cons of the draft constitution (this was on the eve of the referendum) but were focussed on garnering the scarce necessities of life. 
    As a piece of rhetorical hyperbole to highlight the distorted agenda of Iraq stories in the western media it was maybe OK, but since on his own admission he didn't really know what was going on inside people' s homes he was simply guessing or extrapolating. (Note to self: carry critical faculty with you at all times.) Anyway, I am looking forward to the new Fisk book.



