Dealing with debt
Many people can find themselves in debt as a result of the end of a relationship or death of a partner.
It is important that you take steps to manage your debt. This factsheet will help you do this and tell you
where to find further help and information so you can be in control of your financial situation.
FACTSHEET
ENGL AND/WALES
EDITION
NOVEMBER 2005
LONE PARENT HELPLINE
0800 018 5026
If you ignore debt it won't just go away, it is more likely to
make the situation worse and make you more anxious. Help
is available – a specialist money adviser can help you free of
charge.
Don't confuse free specialist money advice with that
offered by debt management companies who charge for
their services, and who you may have seen advertised on
the television.
How can specialist money advisers help me?
They can give you information, advice and practical help and
will not make judgements about your situation. Specialist
money advisers are trained to assess your financial situation
and offer reassurance. They will check if you are entitled to
any extra income, such as tax credits or benefits, and will
make sure that you are liable for the debt you are being
asked to pay. Advisers can also help you to work out and
negotiate repayment plans with your creditors and may act on
your behalf. Any repayment plans that they negotiate will be
based on what you can realistically afford. If you are required
to go to court, they can help you prepare for your case and
may be able to attend a hearing with you and in some cases
represent you. See FURTHER HELP AND INFORMATION for
organisations that can help.
ACKNOWLEDGE THE PROBLEM AND ASK FOR HELP
You will know if you have a debt emergency if:
_ bailiffs are about to call or have called already;
_ you have received an eviction notice;
_ you have received a summons to attend a court hearing;
or
_ your gas or electricity is at risk of being disconnected.
You must deal with these emergencies straight away.
Contact a specialist money adviser (see FURTHER HELP AND
INFORMATION) who may be able to get the creditors to
suspend any action until you have received specialist advice
about your situation.
Facing a visit from the bailiffs?
Bailiffs are used to recover arrears of various debts. County
Court bailiffs are used to collect money owed under County
Court orders and private sector bailiffs are used to collect
debts such as Council Tax or Magistrates' Court fines.
Both types of bailiff work by seizing items of value that
belong to the person owing money. In nearly all cases, bailiffs
will offer a payment arrangement as an alternative to taking
away the seized items.
Unless they have a warrant to evict you, bailiffs are not
allowed to enter your home by using force or causing
damage to property, although they can legitimately gain entry
through an open window or a back door. You can refuse
entry, unless they have previously entered your property and
made a list or verbally indicated the goods that they intend to
seize. Refusing entry is only a temporary solution – the debt
still remains and may be increased by charges added by the
bailiffs each time they visit your home.
Unless collecting Magistrates' Court fines, it is unlawful
for bailiffs to seize ‘basic household goods' – this means
that beds, bedding, normal clothing, a cooker and dining
table with chairs cannot be taken. Children's toys and other
possessions can also not be taken as they belong to the
children, not the person owing the money. Get expert advice
DEAL WITH DEBT EMERGENCIES
255 Kentish Town Road, London NW5 2LX Tel. (020) 7428 5400 Fax (020) 7482 4851
info@oneparentfamilies.org.uk www.oneparentfamilies.org.uk
The National Council for One Parent Families is a registered charity no. 230750
and a company limited by guarantee no. 402748.
This factsheet relates to lone parents who live in England and Wales. It is not a comprehensive guide to the law, nor a substitute for
specialist or legal advice. We have done our utmost to ensure that the information provided is correct at the time of going to press and
have tried to indicate where legal or other specialist advice is absolutely vital.
DEALING WITH DEBT
and complain to the court or creditor if a bailiff makes
extreme claims or threats, or if their charges seem excessive.
Threatened with eviction?
If you are paying rent or a mortgage it will almost always be
a criminal offence to try to evict you without a court order,
unless the landlord lives in the house with you. If the landlord
tries to evict you, you should seek specialist advice as soon
as possible.
If you are in arrears or if you have missed payments,
landlords and mortgage lenders generally have the right to
seek possession of your home. Threatened, attempted or
actual eviction without a court order may be illegal and you
will need to get expert help in this situation. Also seek advice
immediately if you receive notice of a court hearing.
If you receive an eviction notice from the County Court, it
will state the eviction date, which is when you are expected
to have left your home. If, on the date of eviction, you are still
in your home it is possible to ask the court to suspend the
eviction, but you must act immediately. Contact a local advice
agency, Shelterline, a housing advice centre or a solicitor (see
FURTHER HELP AND INFORMATION) and ask for an emergency
appointment.
Have you received a summons to attend court?
You may receive a summons to attend a court hearing if you
‘wilfully refuse' or ‘culpably neglect' to pay a debt collected
by a Magistrates' Court (for example, Council Tax, business
rates, financial penalties/fines and arrears of maintenance
payments, National Insurance arrears and contribution orders).
The ultimate penalty for this is imprisonment, so you need
to attend court to explain why the arrears have accumulated.
The court will need to be satisfied that you are someone who
cannot pay, as opposed to someone who will not pay. If you
do not attend, a warrant will be issued for your arrest.
If you receive a summons, you will need legal
representation and may get help with the costs: see FURTHER
HELP AND INFORMATION. It is also a good idea for you to
make childcare arrangements while you attend court.
Is your gas or electricity about to be
disconnected?
Gas and electricity companies have a right to disconnect the
supply of fuel if their bills are not paid. However, their licence
conditions require that they offer a prepayment meter where
it is safe and practical to do so. If you are threatened with
disconnection you should contact the company immediately
and negotiate an affordable repayment arrangement.
Alternatively, if you receive Income Support or Pension Credit,
it may be possible to arrange direct payments from your
benefit/credit. Contact your local Social Security office for
information or seek advice from a local advice agency (see
FURTHER HELP AND INFORMATION).
If you are already a British Gas customer and in arrears with
your gas, electricity or other essential household bills or costs,
you might qualify for a grant from the British Gas Energy Trust
(see FURTHER HELP AND INFORMATION for details) to reduce or
clear your debt.
Water companies no longer have the right to disconnect
a domestic water supply. If you have arrears on your water
charges you should negotiate a repayment arrangement
based on your ability to pay and/or seek advice from a local
advice agency.
DEAL WITH DEBT EMERGENCIES (continued)
Take practical steps to manage your debt. A good way of
approaching this is to look at the whole picture, rather than
dealing with individual problems as they arise. There are
seven steps for dealing with debt:
1.Check that you are liable to pay each debt.
You should only be liable to pay debts that are in your name,
but there may be exceptions to this. If a debt is in the joint
names of you and an ex-partner, you are jointly liable for the
full amount and either one of you can be asked to pay. This is
known as joint and several liability. If you are having problems
paying a joint debt you should, if possible, provide the
contact details of your ex-partner and ask the creditor to seek
payment from them too. If your partner has died their debts
will be paid from their estate, as long as there are sufficient
funds to cover them. Any outstanding debt will normally be
written off although there are some exceptions to this. This
can be a complex area, so you should seek advice from a
specialist money adviser.
If you have not paid towards a debt or contacted a
creditor within a six-year period, the debt may be legally
unenforceable.
Always check with a specialist adviser before
approaching a creditor.
MANAGE YOUR DEBT EFFECTIVELY
LONE PARENT HELPLINE FACTSHEET
0800 018 5026
DEALING WITH DEBT
2. Maximise your income.
Make sure that you receive everything you are entitled to. A
specialist money adviser will be able to help you to do this.
Make a list of all your current sources of income – you will
need this to draw up a budget and repayment plan. Check
that you are receiving all the benefits and tax credits your
family are entitled to and that they are being paid at the
correct amount. Also check if you are on the correct tax code
and that you are receiving a Council Tax discount if you are
the only adult in your household. If you are not receiving
child maintenance, consider applying to the Child Support
Agency for maintenance to be calculated and collected on
your behalf.
3. Make savings on your spending.
Draw up a list of all of your regular spending, either monthly
or weekly – you will need this to draw up a budget and
repayment plan – to see if any of your expenses can be
cut or reduced. For example, you can save money on fuel if
your home is properly insulated, and you may be able to get
a grant for this – see the EAGA listing in FURTHER HELP AND
INFORMATION. A specialist money adviser can look at your
outgoings and may have other suggestions about how they
can be reduced.
4. Prioritise your debts.
Some debts are more important to pay than others. The
debts that are most urgent are those where non-payment
could lead to imprisonment, you losing your home, or the
disconnection of an essential utility. These include:
_ housing (rent arrears, mortgage arrears, other secured
loans);
_ gas, electricity, telephone and water charges;
_ Council Tax arrears;
_ benefit overpayments; and
_ unpaid court fines or Income Tax and National Insurance
contributions.
A specialist adviser will help you identify which debts you
need to deal with first.
Payments on unsecured credit agreements, such as bank,
credit card and other similar debts, are not priority debts.
5. Draw up a budget.
It is important to do this as it will allow you to work out:
_ how much money you have coming in, such as wages/
salaries, benefits and tax credits and any other payments
made to you;
_ how much you are paying out, for example, all your bills,
money for food and clothing for you and your children,
household and housekeeping expenses, travel and health
costs;
_ how much money you have left;
_ how much you can afford to pay to your creditors; and
_ how much you can spend in the future.
Work out your budget on a weekly or monthly basis and
make sure the amounts are realistic and allow you to
cover all expenses. Remember to include an allowance
for irregular spending such as repairs and important family
occasions like birthdays, as well as an amount to cover your
weekly essentials. Budget sheets are available free from
National Debtline or Citizens Advice (see FURTHER HELP AND
INFORMATION).
DEBT EFFECTIVELY (continued)

