

Beside the great gatehouse, a range of old abbey buildings, with dining hall, buttery and bedchambers, made a considerable dwelling in itself. But John Lucas and his wife Elizabeth made their main house towards the southern end of the site, where an imposing rank of triangle-topped gable-ends and tall chimneys was formed - probably out of the former abbot's lodgings. Here the couple furnished their home with the luxury appropriate to their new importance in the world. Walls were covered with brightly coloured hangings. Four-poster beds had embroidered curtains of velvet, silk, damask and satin. Expensive Turkey carpets were draped on tables and sideboards. These sumptuous textiles, with the arrays of gold and silver plate, formed the main decoration of the house and displayed the family's wealth and importance at a time when art collecting was not yet an aristocratic vogue. The house's centre was the great hall, where weapons hung on racks along the walls. John Lucas's exalted position was now affirmed every day at dinner, when he presided at the high table on the dais, with a huge golden saltcellar at his left hand, marking the social distinction between the important people seated with the master of the house above the salt, and the less significant below it. 

Outside, gardens were made, beginning with formal parterres around the house, bright with flowers in summer, beyond which grassy walks led among avenues of trees. In the middle, the massive twelfth-century tower of the abbey church still stood in Margaret's day, a reminder of what the place had been, while to the south, the high garden mount gave views over miles of countryside - cow pastures, orchards, ponds, dovecotes, farms and houses - much of it owned by the Lucases. 

John had created an ancestral home to be handed down to succeeding generations of the Lucas family, and his second wife, Elizabeth, embroidered a set of fine silk hangings for the family's state bed.8 After John's death in 1556, their eldest son, Margaret's grandfather, Thomas, would continue to consolidate the family's status. 

Thomas was twenty-five when his father died, an ambitious young man, eager to make his mark in the world and to build up the Lucas dynasty. Having completed the family's traditional Cambridge and London legal education, Thomas was elected in his father's place as member of Parliament for Colchester, and in the following decades, favoured by Queen Elizabeth I, he held a plethora of the government posts by which the wealthy country gentry publicly demonstrated their status and power in their local neighbourhood. As a justice of the peace he sat in judgement over local malefactors, and as recorder of Colchester he oversaw the town's legal affairs. He was three times high sheriff of Essex, an annual appointment made by the queen herself that put him in charge of much of the Crown's business in the county. But the job closest to Thomas's heart was his captaincy in the Essex militia. As he donned military dress and mustered and drilled his part-time civilian troops, preparing them to repel foreign invasions or to quell domestic riots, he reenacted the chivalric, military associations of gentility left over from the Middle Ages. Building up a large personal armoury near the great gatehouse at St John's and assembling flags and campaigning equipment, Thomas created a martial ethos that became a tradition for the men of his family: Margaret's father would be a noted duellist of his day, and her three brothers and a nephew were to spend part or all of their adult lives as professional soldiers.

By the later sixteenth century, Essex was one of the richest counties in Britain - 'the fattest of the land: comparable to Palestine, that flowed with milk and honey', as the mapmaker John Norden wrote. A steady stream of traffic - droves of cattle with the 'finest flesh in England', and wagons laden with grain and flour, fresh vegetables, butter, cheese, beer and spirits, leather, wool and cloth - flowed south-west, heading for the London markets. Meanwhile the wool industry boomed. Spinners, weavers, washers and fullers worked at home in their cottages; then the cloth was carried to the merchants' warehouses in the towns. In Colchester the population grew, and houses sprawled far beyond the old town walls - into the countryside to the south, and eastward as far as the River Colne, where boats docked at the port of The Hythe. This was now one of the largest towns in Britain, a full mile across, with a population of around 10,000. Well-built black-and-white timbered houses with bright tiled roofs lined the streets, whose generous raised pavements kept pedestrians out of the mud. Copious fresh water, piped in from springs in the surrounding country, fed the public fountains. 

And in the meantime the Lucas family also prospered. Dedicated to the acquisition of wealth and the social status that went with it, Thomas managed his estates energetically to maximise his income, investing his profits in substantial further land purchases. By the time he died in 1611 at the age of eighty, the Lucases were one of the richest families in Essex, with thousands of acres of land bringing in an income of £3,000 or £4,000 per year. But such vigorous estate management also brought Thomas into frequent conflict with his neighbours. Manifold legal disputes over landownership and boundaries, over questions of access and the enclosure of commons, were pursued by Thomas with intransigent insistence on what he considered his rights; by the 1580s he was widely hated in Colchester as a greedy, selfish miser. When local resentment against him finally culminated in a fierce battle between rival bands of the militia, Thomas fled to London, shutting up his home at St John's for three years.

Though he was unpopular in Colchester, Thomas had successfully established himself at the national level of the royal court. Knighted by the queen in 1571, Sir Thomas Lucas had twice entertained Elizabeth I and her court at St John's. He was well connected in the best circles of society, with sufficient influence to gain for his eldest daughter, Anne, the coveted appointment of maid of honour, in daily attendance on the queen. But he was soon to lose this court favour by the actions of two of his children. 

Sir Thomas Lucas had married well, moving beyond the Colchester mercantile circles his father had joined to wed Mary Fermor, the daughter of a Northamptonshire landed gentleman. The couple had three daughters and two sons. Anne was the first to bring royal displeasure on the family when, while maid of honour at court, she married for love against the queen's wishes. But the family's eldest son, Margaret's father, Thomas, would anger Elizabeth I much more deeply and irremediably.

Born around 1573, Thomas Lucas Jr had received the family's traditional training for a high-profile career in law and politics. But unlike his father and grandfather, Thomas was no ambitious, hardworking student. Instead, he was more interested in the fashionable life of the capital, spending his time in acquiring the gentlemanly skills of swordsmanship rather than the penmanship his father had intended. In London society he also met a beautiful and intelligent young woman named Elizabeth Leighton, the daughter of a prosperous city gentleman. She and the twenty-four-year-old Thomas fell in love, and by the summer of 1597 Elizabeth was bearing his child.

As yet the couple had taken no steps towards marriage, and any hopes they had were now to be cruelly prevented after Thomas was insulted by a young courtier, Sir William Brooke. Probably, given the state of Thomas and Elizabeth's relationship, Brooke's insult was some aspersion cast on Elizabeth's reputation. As Margaret related the story almost sixty years later, the injured Thomas Lucas, compelled 'by the laws of honour', 'could do no less than' challenge his opponent to a duel, 'where their swords were to dispute, and one or both of their lives to decide the argument'. When the pair met in secret, Thomas, an accomplished fencer, killed his man.

Sir William Brooke had been a man of importance at court and a personal favourite of Queen Elizabeth I. His killer was unlikely to escape lightly, and so, Margaret explained in her autobiography, 

Though my father by honour challenged him, with valour fought him, and in justice killed him, yet he suffered more than any person of quality usually doth in cases of honour; for though the laws be rigorous, yet the present princes most commonly are gracious in those misfortunes, especially to the injured: but my father found it not.

The queen could not be appeased and Thomas was declared an outlaw, denied all civil and legal rights, including the inheritance of his father's property. To avoid being convicted and executed for murder, he fled at once into exile abroad, leaving Elizabeth Leighton alone to bear an illegitimate son, a social disgrace that Margaret's account of her family would pass over in silence. Naming her boy Thomas after his father, Elizabeth could only hope that her lover would remain faithful in an absence that stretched out indefinitely into the future.

No record survives of how the exiled Thomas Lucas spent his first four years on the Continent. He may have travelled on the grand tour, which was just emerging as a popular way of finishing a young gentleman's education, or perhaps he served in the English army, fighting alongside the Dutch against the Spanish. However, as an exiled outlaw he could not have held an officer's commission and no certain record survives. The only news linking him to the war - a report that he was killed at the siege of Ostend in September 1601 - was without foundation, for Thomas was some 300 miles away at the time, living at Angers in western France. Here he was part of a group of wild young expatriate Englishmen well known to the authorities for the 'knightly prowess' they displayed in the expert swordplay of their gambling brawls. By October 1602 Thomas had moved on to Paris, but in spite of all the distractions he could find he was lonely and miserable, and he pleaded desperately to the English court to be allowed to return home.

But Thomas had to wait for his pardon until the following year, when the old queen died and was succeeded by King James I. Then - after Thomas's main enemy at court, Lord Cobham, the brother of the man he had killed, was imprisoned in the Tower for his part in a plot to overthrow the new king - the Lucas family's petitions finally achieved success. In July 1603 the king issued a formal pardon for the killing of Sir William Brooke, and in the following March a bill was prepared in Parliament, restoring Thomas 'to his blood and gentry'. Almost seven years after his flight abroad, he could now return home and once again be his father's legal heir. 

But Thomas did not settle at once in Colchester. Instead he stopped in London, meeting his old love, Elizabeth Leighton, and the six-year-old son he had never seen. His father, Sir Thomas, already angry with the son who had nearly ruined the family, disapproved of Elizabeth: her London family lacked the wealth and social cachet he expected in a match for his heir, and she was tainted with disgrace as an unmarried mother. But the lovers remained devoted to each other and Thomas Jr defied his father by marrying Elizabeth secretly in August 1604. Told only afterwards, Sir Thomas accepted the fact and offered the couple a home in the range of buildings attached to the great gatehouse at St John's.

Here Thomas and Elizabeth began to raise a family. In October 1606 a son, John, was born, a legitimate heir for the Lucas family wealth, named after his great-grandfather, who had first settled in Colchester and founded the family's fortunes. Daughters Mary and Elizabeth came next, named for their grandmother and mother. In the summer of 1611 old Sir Thomas died at the age of eighty and was buried in the family vault that he had made in St Giles's Church, just beyond the great gatehouse of St John's. Two years later his wife, Mary, followed him, and Thomas 

