

Princess Victoria's mother, Princess Alice, had died of diphtheria, aged only thirty-five, in 1878. The new baby was named after her. This Princess Alice was to become Princess Andrew of Greece, mother of Prince Philip, and a most unusual woman: striking, strange, and, in her own way, heroic. 

Princess Victoria was a pretty child and a handsome woman: reserved but direct, straightforward, unspoilt, and, by several accounts, somewhat masculine in her manner. Her daughter Alice was simply beautiful: a gorgeous baby, a lovely girl, a fine woman. The Prince of Wales is said to have declared: 'No throne in Europe is too good for her.' 

She did, however, have one defect. She was hard of hearing. When she was four, her mother reported to Queen Victoria: 

The child has grown very much since you last saw her, is very lively &amp; quick with her fingers, but decidedly backward of speech, using all sorts of self-invented words &amp; pronouncing others very indistinctly, so that strangers find it difficult to understand her. 

Alice was taken to ear specialists in Darmstadt and London: there was nothing to be done and, for better or worse, her family decided to make no special concessions to her problem. Although, over time, she became a skilful lip-reader (in several languages) and, it seems, the degree of hearing loss varied at different stages in her life, the disability took its toll, making her more isolated than she might otherwise have been and making others, who did not know her well, regard her as, somehow, a bit odd. 

In late May 1999, her son, Prince Philip, was accused, in newspaper reports, of openly mocking some deaf children at a pop concert in Wales. He was alleged to have jeered at them, 'Deaf? No wonder you are deaf listening to this row.' A few days later, on 4 June, he wrote to me from Buckingham Palace: 

You may have noticed that the tabloids were quick to suggest that I had made another 'gaffe' and 'insulted' some deaf children at Cardiff recently. Needless to say, the story is largely invention. It so happens that my mother was quite seriously deaf and I have been Patron of the Royal National Institute for the Deaf for ages, so it's hardly likely that I would do any such thing. Quite apart from that, I have no recollection of meeting a group of deaf children at the event for the Prince's Trust in the grounds of Cardiff Castle. There were young people milling all over the place and there may well have been a group of deaf children amongst them. What I do remember is that the noise from various stages and bands was quite deafening and I may well have said at some point something to the effect that if anyone were to sit too close to the loud speakers they would certainly be in danger of going deaf.

There would be echoes of his mother's childhood in Prince Philip's own. Her parents loved her dearly, but they left her, frequently for weeks at a time, sometimes for months, in the care of nannies and governesses and assorted family members. Today, Prince Philip shrugs his shoulders: 'It was the way it was.' Little Alice spent her peripatetic childhood in Darmstadt, at Sennicotts (the house the Battenbergs rented in West Sussex), in Malta (where the Mediterranean Fleet was stationed), in London (at different times, in Pimlico, Victoria and Knightsbridge), at Walton-on-Thames, at Sandgate, near Folkestone, and in the various residences of her great-grandmother: at Windsor, at Balmoral, at Osborne House on the Isle of Wight, in the Royal Yacht Victoria and Albert, and on the French Riviera where the Queen-Empress would take her spring holiday. 

Despite her deafness, Alice was a bright child, likeable and liked, and mature for her age, in manner and appearance. 'She is eleven,' one of her great-aunts commented in 1896, 'but as big as a girl of fourteen.' By 1900 the Battenberg family was complete. Alice had one younger sister, Louise (1889-1965), who would one day become Queen of Sweden, and two younger brothers, destined to follow their father into the British navy: Georgie (1892-1938) and Louis (1900-1979), known as Dick or Dickie almost from birth. He was the last great-grandson born in Queen Victoria's lifetime. 

The Queen-Empress died on 22 January 1901. Her funeral took place at Windsor on 2 February. Alice and her parents were there. Sixteen months later, on 26 June 1903, Edward VII was due to be crowned. Alice and her mother were both expected and invited to stay at Buckingham Palace, where the distinguished guest list included an array of European royalty, including Crown Prince Constantine of Greece and two of his younger brothers, George and Andrew. Prince Andrew (known in the family as Andrea) was twenty, a young officer in the Greek army, tall, blond and handsome. 'Interesting', too: he was short-sighted and wore spectacles. Princess Alice was seventeen-and-a-half: beautiful, intelligent, and hard of hearing. The young people fell in love. 

There was time for romance. Three days before the day set for his Coronation, Edward VII was taken suddenly ill and operated on for peritonitis. The Coronation was postponed, but the royal house party went on. The German princess and the Greek prince lingered at Buckingham Palace for a fortnight more. Love blossomed. 

Andrea was a Greek prince, living in Greece, the fourth son of King George I of Greece, but he was not really Greek at all. (This is, in part, a comic opera, remember.) He was German, Danish, Dutch and Russian. 

In the late 1820s, when modern Greece managed to shake itself free from Turkish domination, the newly independent kingdom was in want of a monarch. Having nothing home-bred to hand, the Greeks shopped around (literally) for a royal figure of sufficient international standing and authority and shipped in Prince Otto of Bavaria as their first king. He stayed the course for thirty years, but, following an unpleasant insurrection in 1862 (not the first), made his excuses and left. The search for a king resumed and, this time round, the lot fell to one Prince William, younger son of King Christian IX of Denmark. He was only seventeen. He changed his name, his nationality and his destiny. He served as King George I of Greece for fifty years, from 1863 until he was murdered by a lunatic while out for a stroll in the streets of Salonika in the spring of 1913. 

George I of Greece had an older brother (who became King Frederick VIII of Denmark in 1906) and two younger sisters: Alexandra, married to England's Edward VII, and Marie, married to Russia's Tsar Alexander III. George I also married a member of the Russian royal family: the Grand Duchess Olga, a granddaughter of Tsar Nicholas I. Over a period of twenty years the couple had eight children, the youngest-but-one of whom was Andrea: intelligent, humorous, conscientious, committed to Greece (he could speak English, German, Danish, Russian, French, but he spoke in Greek to his parents) and committed to a career in the army. In her preface to his volume of military memoirs - the aptly titled Towards Disaster, published in 1930 - Princess Alice wrote: 'He took his duties very seriously as he loved his profession, and he wished to earn his promotion like any other officer.' 

The Coronation of Edward VII was rescheduled for 9 August 1902. The courts of Europe reassembled in London. Alice and Andrea met once more. Indeed, their families seemed happy to encourage the match: Alice and her mother travelled to Westminster Abbey in the same carriage as Andrea and his brother, George. 

Fourteen months later (mostly months when they were apart: Andrea's military duties kept him away), in Darmstadt, on 6 and 7 October 1903, they were married. It was a fairy-tale wedding, complete with carriages and kings, three ceremonies (one civil, two religious), feasting, dancing, laughter and happy tears. She was eighteen, a beautiful princess, with orange blossom in her hair; he was twenty-one, a handsome prince, decked out in the glorious uniform of a Red Dragoon. They did not live happily ever after. 

It all began well enough. They had a quietly domestic honeymoon in Darmstadt and, early in the new year, set off for Greece. Having spent several winters in Malta as a child, Alice was at least accustomed to a Mediterranean climate, and her new in-laws evidently did everything they could to give the young bride - still a teenager, partially deaf, in a strange country where she did not yet speak the language - a warm welcome and a sense of security. George I appears to have been a wise man: unstuffy, courteous, considerate, capable, honest, and keenly aware of his position as an 'imported' monarch. He would advise his sons: 'Never forget that you are foreigners among the Greeks, and never let them remember it.' 

George I rode the roller-coaster of Greek politics for half a century. He survived censure, insurrections, intrigues and at least one assassination attempt before the one that killed him. He accepted his destiny, and did what he sensed was his duty, but he made it clear, repeatedly, in public and in private, that he was ever-ready to step down from the throne if his services were no longer required. 

I believe his grandson, Prince Philip, feels much the same way. It infuriates Philip if he is portrayed in the press as someone who revels in the life of a prince, who clings to the trappings of monarchy, who believes in the survival of the Crown above all else. He doesn't. If a monarchy serves a purpose, and if, on the whole, most people are mostly comfortable with it, so be it. If not, fine, let's stop buggering about and have done with it. The Queen would be deeply saddened no longer to be Queen of Canada or Australia (we know how the Queen feels about the Commonwealth, old and new), but Prince Philip is ready to say, in terms, as he did, in Canada in 1969: 'It is a complete misconception to imagine that the monarchy exists in the interests of the monarch. It doesn't. It exists in the interests of the people. If at any time any nation decides that the system is unacceptable, then it is up to them to change it.' 

George I of Greece was a family man, by all accounts a good man, decent, God-fearing and happily married. That said, according to the memoirs of the well-connected Prince von BŸlow (gossipy, gripping, but generally considered reasonably reliable), George I did allow himself 'an occasional relaxation' at Aix-les-Bains, on his annual French holiday away from his queen. When his eldest son, Constantine, followed his father's example, the crown prince's dismayed wife, Sophie (another of Queen Victoria's grandchildren), turned to her father-in-law for guidance. 'You must consult your dear mother-in-law,' he is supposed to have told her, 'she will be able to give you the best advice on this point.' 

Over ten years, Alice and Andrea had four daughters: Margarita (1905-81), born in the none-too-comfortable Royal Palace in Athens, and Theodora (1906-69), Cécile (1911-37), and Sophie (1914-2001), all born at Tatoï, the royal family's cherished country estate nearby. Life at home was fairly placid: Alice rode, sewed, read, played with her children, corresponded with her family. In the streets, it was a little livelier. This was a turbulent decade in Greek politics (yet another one), the ups and downs including a coup d'état and the resignation of all the royal princes from the Greek army in 1909, followed by their reinstatement at the outset of the first of the Balkan wars in 1912. (An incidental side effect of the princes' period outside the army was that they did not venture out socially as much as previously: accustomed to appearing in public in uniform, they felt underdressed - emasculated, even - in civilian clothes.) 

During much of this period Alice and her daughters were abroad, visiting her parents and other members of the extended family in Germany, England, Malta and Russia, joining house parties, attending weddings, christenings, funerals. In May 1910, Alice and Andrea were in London when Edward VII died. They attended his funeral. Alice's father had been a friend of the King's (they had shared Mrs Langtry, after all); Queen Alexandra was Andrea's aunt.
