

Frank 
1950 . . . 

On the night beat in Salisbury's St Anne Street, Police Constable Frank Lockyer knows that there is a cup of hot tea to be had at the back door of Number 72. Mrs Yarrow has a daughter, Rosemary, and every copper in Salisbury - all twenty-three of them - is in love with her. Frank is no exception. But their paths will not seriously cross for another forty years. 

Frank is a good-looking man, a bit short of hair, but with a fine figure. You might think he was managing director of a public company; you would never mistake him for Mr Plod. He exudes charm, courtesy, consideration for everybody before himself. Within moments of meeting him - unless you are a villain he has caught jemmy-handed - you know you are the most important person he has encountered all day. 

He disappointed his father when he did not follow him into farming, choosing, instead, to fight his way into grammar school, en route to his chosen career in the Wiltshire Constabulary. His first Chief Constable told the young recruit: 'You have to be a bit of a bastard to do this job. It comes naturally to me. You'll have to work at it.' 

Jean Bundy's father is a shepherd in Codford, a village a few miles west of Salisbury. Jean is neat, slim, fair-haired, pretty, with a dance of humour in her eyes, if you are fortunate enough to amuse her. Frank spotted her days ago, through the window of Beynons, in Castle Street, where she is a hairdresser. He does not need a haircut. He enters and sits to wait his turn. Jean does not cut his hair - Frank would not allow a woman to do such a thing! She succumbs to the rather formal charms of this big man and agrees to go out with him. 

It is a good match. Soon they are deeply in love. They know how to share the marriage territory, neither trespassing on the other's patch - unless Jean thinks it necessary! They are practical people: they marry - on 4 April - one day before the end of the tax year, to qualify for a marriage rebate of £250, enough to pay for the honeymoon. They catch the train for London and the Strand Palace Hotel, a place that will be eventful many years later for the family. 

Frank is a mixture of ambition and dedication. The desire to serve has a lot to do with his choice of career, but he feels he has more to offer than traffic control. By 1962, he has risen to the rank of Inspector and is a sub-divisional commander. 

Jean and Frank want a family but it does not happen naturally. Jean needs an operation. It is successful and, by the time their daughter Sally is born, on 15 August 1964, he has become the force training officer and a Chief Inspector in Devizes. In 1969, Frank is promoted to become Chief Superintendent and Commander of the South-West Division of Wiltshire. He is Chief of Police in Salisbury when Sally begins her schooldays. 

Sally 

Frank and Jean's daughter looks like her mother: lithe, blonde, very pretty, athletic. She has an open face and an eagerness to experience life. Sally's best friend is Anona, who is very bright. They do everything together, including sharing holidays. Frank and Jean worry that Sally is not academically gifted and may be out of her depth at South Wilts Grammar School, but her headmaster, Arthur Stuchey, tells them, 'She will not be the brightest pupil but what she lacks in natural talent she will make up for with hard work.' 

They are not alone in underestimating Sally's talent; she keeps it well hidden. Sally enjoys school, particularly the choir and athletics; she proves so adept that she runs for her county. Frank, concerned that her Wiltshire accent needs ironing out, sends her to Miss Moore's speech and drama classes. Sally breezes through her grades to win bronze and silver medals. When she takes her gold - acting Portia and reading Jonathan Livingstone Seagull - she is so good that she is offered a scholarship to RADA, the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. 'Your eyes could make your fortune on the screen,' she is told. But show business has no allure for Sally. She prefers the idea of academia. 

After eight good O-level results, she chooses to study history, geography and economics for A level, brushing aside reservations about their difficulty. She likes them and will make them work, despite her apparent lack of natural talent. To the embarrassment of her teachers, at A level Sally gets two As and a B. They have seriously underestimated her: she will easily qualify for Oxbridge, and would bring prestige to the school by going there. But Sally has sussed out the field: she has chosen industrial geography as her subject and although Exeter has a decent course, she did not like the university itself. Her teachers urge Cambridge on her again. Again she dismisses it because the course at Southampton is better and offers more academic rigour. She would have preferred law, but remembers being told she is not bright enough for that career. 

Life is difficult for daughters of coppers because young men are frightened off - especially when Dad is the Chief of Police. Sally is seventeen before Howard Robson takes his chances and asks her out. They do the teenage circuit of cinema, games and dancing but nothing serious comes of it. Howard will go on to become a solicitor. 

At Southampton University Sally makes friends easily, enjoying the non-academic side. She still does not let up on work, determined to maintain her record for outperforming her lecturers' forecasts. She also makes her first firm male friend - John Aylward, who is blond and attractive - and for a while imagines that she is in love with him. That passes when she meets dark-haired Adrian Bradley, an open, portly man, with a good sense of humour. He falls for her. They share many interests and it is a comfortable relationship. Frank and Jean like him. 

Around this time, Jean Lockyer discovers a lump in her breast. It is cancer. It is a bad shock to Sally too, for they are more like sisters than mother and daughter. But an operation proves successful and Jean makes a slow but good recovery. Regular check-ups are reassuring. 

Sally gains a 2.1 in industrial geography, a fine achievement. Yet she is bitterly disappointed: she comes first out of 108 candidates with the highest score ever recorded in that difficult discipline but she wanted - and thought she had made - a 'first'. She missed it by a whisker. Southampton has never awarded a first-class degree in this subject. Sally's is not a modest talent just scraping through her exams by exceptionally hard work; she has serious academic ability and a fine brain: 'Those around me have a career in mind but I don't really know what I want to do. I would say that I drifted into banking. It seemed like a good idea at the time. it is well paid and my studies in human geography gave me an interest in business development.' 

Sally decides on a career in corporate finance with a merchant bank. Her first setback is that such banks are only interested in Oxbridge graduates. 

In 1985, Frank retires from the police force. The most popular Chief of Police in Salisbury's history, he is offered several jobs. He is appointed a consultant in security for United Provident (soon to become Friends Provident) Insurance Company, and the Dean of Salisbury asks him to take on the directorship of the Cathedral Spire Appeal Fund. 

Soon Sally is leapfrogging her peers. Lloyds Bank recognises her ability and she becomes a management trainee at London's Ludgate Hill, with a lending discretion for sums beyond Frank's financial experience. Sally passes the banking exams and leaves Lloyds for Citibank and corporate finance, at last. 

Life, for Sally, could not be better, in the spring of 1988. Jean's breast cancer is in remission, the prognosis excellent. Sally loves her job at Citibank, and has just bought a flat in Tooting with her university friend Vicky. Sally and Adrian are still together but there has been no talk of permanent commitment. 

Steve 

At Citibank, Sally's boss asks her to take an important document to their solicitors, Clifford Chance. She knows of Steve Clark - a junior solicitor there - and that he has just returned from three months' back-packing in Australia. She is shocked at the effect Steve has on her. Flustered, she is aware of his eyes on her. She has not cheated, and would not cheat, on Adrian but this is something outside her experience, perhaps even her control. She makes two decisions: to find out more about Steve, and to improve his dress sense - his shirt and tie are disgusting! 

Sally is a confident person, but she becomes tongue-tied and nervous with a new man. This shyness is a rare reaction for her. 'Goodness knows what he thinks of me!' she thinks. 

Pursuing her enquiries, Sally establishes that Steve is single, has no permanent girlfriend and is eligible. 

Steve is attracted to Sally. He, too, does his 'due diligence' and is disappointed to find that there is a man in her life: that means she's out of bounds. 

Sally knows that she has fallen victim to the 'across a crowded room' cliché. One day she asks Steve's opinion about a legal paper. 

'It's a difficult point,' he replies. 

It isn't. 

'Will it take a while?' she asks. 

It won't. 

'Yes,' says Steve. 

'Could you spare the time to do it over a drink?' 

Her first impressions are confirmed: 

'I can't stop looking at him, then turning my eyes away. I can't stop thinking about him. He takes me to lunch, at Cafédes Amis du Vin, in Covent Garden. That's it. I will have to tell Adrian. 

'Lies are not only wrong, but usually unnecessary, and yet I lied to Adrian about that lunch in Covent Garden. I see him after work that evening and tell him. He is badly hurt, but my feeling for Steve is overwhelming me, making me do strange things.' 

At the flat, that evening, the tears flow as she tells Vicky: 'I'm not going into anything headlong with Steve. I'm not going out with him every time he rings. I'm going to be young and free and single for a while. Give myself time to think and see who else is out there.' 

The phone rings. Steve asks her out tomorrow night. She does not hesitate. 'Where shall we meet?' she asks. 

Steve Clark's forebears were all miners. His father, Alan, was academically bright and made his way from a pit village just outside Newcastle, through grammar school to Durham University, where he captained the first XI cricket team. He married Ruth, whose father was a master butcher in South Shields, and who paid for his daughter to be educated privately. It paid off when she was given a place at Durham. On graduating, Alan joined the Rank Organisation and Ruth became a teacher. They bought their first house in north Derbyshire. He is keen on all forms of sport but his first love is cricket. 

Alan stands as a local Conservative councillor. Ruth has four passions: her two sons, Stephen and Geoffrey, tennis and the Times crossword, which she completes by 7 a.m. each day. The Clarks live life stripped down to its essentials. Books are very important. Education is all. Ornaments are irrelevant distractions. Stephen is born on 19 October 1961 and his brother, Geoffrey, follows two years later. 

Steve is a private man, stoical; he does not show his emotions. His great love is sport, particularly cricket. But he is also something of an artist. His comprehensive used to be a grammar school, but Harold Wilson changed that. Steve's new headmaster believes that competition damages the less able, for life. Against that ethos, Steve makes it into the sixth form and, by dint of hard work, achieves A-level results good enough to give him a shot at Oxbridge - the only member of the sixth form to do so.
