ONE 

A Very British Coup 


After the demise of KAS in 1991, Mann rejoined the army. During the Gulf War, he served as an intelligence officer for General de la Billière, commander of the British forces during the Gulf War, based in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. But hostilities lasted barely a year. Now aged 40, Mann was interested in making money and in 1993 joined Executive Outcomes (EO), a private military company which was hired by African governments to combat insurgency and sabotage. It was founded by Tony Buckingham, a former oil-rig diver and runner for Ranger Oil, and Eben Barlow, a former member of the South African Defence Force and the 'Buffalo Battalion', an outfit responsible for implementing the government's strategy of regional destabilisation on its borders during the apartheid era. In Angola, EO landed a $40 million contract when it was hired by the MPLA government to rebuff the rebel UNITA forces and recapture the oil refinery in Soyo in the northern tip of the country. Using mostly former South African Special Forces officers (some still serving), Mann and Barlow commanded the 800-strong unit and successfully defeated the insurgents. 

Instead of paying the bill in cash, the Angolan government gave EO lucrative diamond concessions and the company's commercial network was born: Heritage Oil and Gas, Branch Energy, Diamond Works and Branch Minerals. Managed by Buckingham, new minerals and oil wells were found and exploited. Suddenly, the mercenaries were multimillionaires. Mann continued to run the military operation but EO was attracting political hostility from the new ANC government in South Africa, who viewed its operatives as being too close to the old apartheid regime. The president of Angola, José Eduardo dos Santos, told Mann that he was also under pressure from the Americans and so EO's Angolan operation was disbanded. 

In response, Mann set up Sandline International, which was marketed as a more 'politically respectable' version of EO. In 1996, he recruited Colonel Tim Spicer, an old friend since they served together in the Scots Guards, and Sandline was hired by the regimes in Papua New Guinea ($36 million) and Sierra Leone ($6 million) to crush rebel forces. But Mann and co. could not avoid controversy. When Sandline infamously shipped arms to Sierra Leone in contravention of a UN embargo, it caused an international outcry. 

By the late 1990s, Mann was a wealthy man. With the spoils of his African adventures, he invested in Diamond Works and Branch Energy, and when they were floated on the Toronto stock exchange, he collected an estimated $10 million. In 1997, the military entrepreneur bought Inchmery, a Palladian mansion on a 20-acre estate perched on the banks of the Beaulieu river in Hampshire, for £4 million. The house once belonged to the Rothschilds and during the Second World War its land was used as a training ground for Polish paratroopers preparing for D-Day. When an old pine tree blew over in a storm a few years ago, it was found to be riddled with bullet holes. For a man in perennial search of intrigue and skulduggery, the property was irresistible and, typically, Mann purchased it using an offshore company, Myers Developments, registered in Guernsey. 

But Africa was still alluring and in 1999 Mann and his wife Amanda moved to Cape Town after seeing an advertisement headlined: 'Is this the most beautiful beach house in the country?' For a mere £200,000, Mann bought Villa Musica in the secluded and elite suburb of Constantia. He set up a new private military company Logo Logistics, bought a plane - an Aerostar 600 - parked his Bentley and enjoyed the benefits of his African escapades. He went fishing, bought sculptures, entertained royally and, in August 2002, secured South African citizenship. With more time on his hands, it was inevitable that he would meet his near neighbour Mark Thatcher. 

Simon Mann is exactly the type of character that appeals to the former prime minister's son: wealthy from exotic diamond deals, a past dominated by risky operations in obscure countries, a fast and colourful personal life and yet very much a member of the upper-class British establishment. Like his mother, Mark Thatcher is fascinated by the secret world of Special Forces and intelligence officers. He would spend hours listening to accounts of Mann's daredevil exploits and nefarious adventures in Sierra Leone and Angola. 'I knew Mark quite well,' recalled Johann Smith, a former member of South African military intelligence. 'He always surrounded himself with former soldiers and the special-forces clique. I got the impression that he would have loved to have been part of that scene.' 

Like Mann, Thatcher was a risk taker and they dabbled in some joint commercial ventures. 'Simon and Mark discussed a number of business deals together - in mining, aircraft and fuel brokerage,' said Greg Wales, a friend of both men. 

They also socialised frequently with their wives and would lunch at The Meeting Place, overlooking Simonstown Bay, or at the Table Bay Hotel near Cape Town. Without their spouses, Thatcher, Mann and friends would drive down to Camps Bay after lunch for what they called 'sundowners'. With everybody crammed into his silver 5- series BMW, Thatcher drove like a maniac down the coast and they would drink at the Harbour House or Vilamoura until sundown. It was here that the son of the former premier would display his legendary charm. 

'Oi you, rocket scientist,' he shouted at one hapless waiter. 'Come over here, sunshine, so I can get my hands round your scrawny neck.' When the maître d' came over to the table and asked, 'Is there a problem, sir?' Thatcher replied, 'Yes, your job is to serve me, not for me to serve you.' 

By the Christmas of 2003, Mann was an honoured guest at the Thatchers' home but only a select few at that party knew about his secret plan. Less than three months later, the former SAS officer would lead a gang of South African and Armenian soldiers of fortune in an audacious attempt to oust President Teodoro Obiang, the murderous dictator of Equatorial Guinea (EG). But they were not motivated by the desire to remove a cruel perpetrator of human-rights abuses. It was claimed that they had struck a secret deal with Severo Moto, the exiled opposition leader, whereby they would receive a lucrative share of the oil revenues and security contracts in exchange for installing him in power. Moto strongly denies that there was any agreement. 

The genesis of the plot can be traced back to early July 2003, when Crause Steyl, a South African pilot with a taste for high jinks and adventure, met up with his friend Simon Mann, the former SAS officer now based in Cape Town, at the Sandton Sun and Towers Hotel in Johannesburg. The two could not have been more different: Steyl, the tough, resourceful Afrikaans-speaking pilot who relished the thrills of flying into African danger zones, and Mann, the sophisticated, softly spoken Old Etonian, member of White's and former Scots Guards officer who was now a wealthy man and looking for new ventures. But they had worked closely together for ten years, notably in Namibia. Steyl was the South African director of Ibis Air International, which was EO's private air force. By the mid-1990s, Ibis Air included a fleet of Boeing 727s, at least two Mi-17 helicopters, two 'Hind' Mi-24 gunships, several small fixed-wing aircraft (one of which had surveillance capabilities) and at least two jet fighters. It was a formidable operation and for two years Ibis Air was instrumental in transporting EO mercenaries into African war zones. Steyl was an integral part of EO and worked closely with Mann. He was sufficiently an insider that in 1994 he joined Mann as a director of Branch International Ltd, a holding company for a string of subsidiaries and associated firms engaged in the hunt for oil, gold and diamonds. Steyl and the former SAS officer kept in touch and by the time of their meeting the pilot was looking after Mann's private plane - a US-registered Aerostar 600 six-seater with a fast-piston engine valued at $350,000. 

Mindful of loose talk, Mann chose his words carefully. 'I've been asked by the boys to assist in a conflict in an African country that is very rich in oil but this time we are not supporting the government of the day,' he said mysteriously. The clear implication was that the pilot would be assisting the rebels of the country with helicopters and aircraft. Steyl viewed it as just another mission, if slightly more dangerous than usual. 'The plan is not final but it is very risky,' said Mann, adding that Tony Buckingham, his former business partner, did not know about the operation. Steyl later learned that 'the boys' was a euphemism for a small group of businessmen Mann claimed were backing the coup. 

Later that month, Mann allegedly met Severo Moto, the chief political opponent to President Obiang, at his Madrid villa to discuss the bounty his merry band of mercenaries would receive for toppling the regime in Equatorial Guinea. According to documents obtained by the authors, it was agreed that Mann, known as 'Captain F', would be paid £10 million and his four lieutenants would receive £1 million each within two months of seizing power. The mercenaries would be paid $3,000 each and, after the coup, they would receive a $30,000 bonus and guaranteed jobs in the presidential guard. Mann was promised an EG diplomatic passport and his troops would become full citizens and be incorporated into the armed forces. The agreements, dated 22 July 2003 and signed by Simon Mann, also stated that the new EG government would buy back the weapons purchased by the operatives. 

After overthrowing the regime, Mann and his cohorts were promised a series of lucrative contracts as well as a share of the oil royalties. A company would be set up with Mann as the CEO, and he would retain a 33 per cent stake. The firm's first task would be to recover 'all the national capital that has fled due to the illegal activities' of President Obiang and they would receive 30 per cent of any assets recovered on a 'no cure no pay' basis plus their costs. It would also be in charge of the intelligence agencies and armed forces, and oversee the outsourcing of security contracts for the police, customs, tax and environmental control. And the company would recruit the 100-strong private guard to the new head of state (Severo Moto) for a fee of £4,000 per man plus all costs and expenses. 

Mann viewed Moto as someone who could be manipulated. 'We'll have a problem with him but once we've put him in power, we'll change things,' he told a friend. 

It was an attractive and seductive package, and easily affordable given EG's newly discovered wealth. A tiny country of 500,000 people on the west coast of Africa, EG's appearance on the map is almost exactly square, clearly the product of imperial interference. Most of the population live on the island of Bioko, just off the Cameroonian coast, but the largest area is the mosquito-infested, jungle-covered province of Mbini on the mainland. Until recently, the country's capital, Malabo, had the atmosphere of an overgrown village in the jungle, with one hotel, a telephone directory with just two pages, little or no electricity and hardly any running water. Stray dogs wandered in and out of the airport terminal, which resembled a shack with a corrugated tin roof. 

That all changed in 1991 when Mobil discovered the Zaffiro oilfield off the EG coast. A year later, production began and US oil giants Marathon and Amerada Hess followed suit after another discovery in the Gulf of Guinea. Suddenly, EG was flooded with what the locals called 'keza' - rich Westerners determined to cash in on the latest oasis of black gold. A new airport terminal was opened and flights increased from Europe - notably there is now a direct flight from Zurich to Malabo - and Texas. Malabo now boasts two swish hotels, where rooms cost at least $150 a night and prostitutes linger outside the gates hoping to service visiting businessmen. Local residents are stunned to see BMWs and Mercedes racing down newly constructed roads and stopping at functioning traffic lights. 'The oil has been for us like the manna that the Jews ate in the desert,' said President Obiang.
