

She even obtained a hoard of shopping lists, postcards and little drunken notes that Alice Vrbsky, Billie's secretary and assistant during the last years, still had in her possession: 

75 watt (2)
60 bulb
sugar 2 bars Camy
Bread 2 bars Lux
12 eggs 1 large lestol
4 tolite [sic] paper
1/2 Ham 1 comet
not too small chicken roasting 

The New York publishers Harper &amp; Row agreed to take on the book and for several years Linda Kuehl was busy with it. But it seems she could never get further than the first few chapters, which she kept on writing and rewriting. It was as if she was looking for the key that would open the door and make everything else follow and fall into place. 

On 9 August 1977 Frances McCullough, Linda Kuehl's editor at Harper &amp; Row, explained in a letter that the book wasn't working. She said it had become a 'choppy, patchy mélange, in which you, the reader, very easily lose your bearings'. She said perhaps another publisher could be found who could take it on and 'if that works, believe me, I'll be very happy'. She said, 'God knows, if it's painful to me, it must be awful for you.' 

Linda Kuehl moved over to Dial Press and went on with her unfinished manuscript, struggling to find the right form. In January 1979 she had made arrangements to attend a Count Basie concert in Washington, DC, and 'in spite of a fierce snowstorm and major travel snarls to the northeastern seaboard' she travelled there by train from New York. She arrived a few minutes before the music began, looking 'quite flustered', and then she disappeared and didn't turn up for the reception after the show. It seems she went back to her hotel room, wrote a suicide note and jumped out of her third-floor window. Passers-by had seen her sitting on the ledge before she jumped. Her family kept her Billie Holiday papers until the 1990s, when they were sold to a private collector. 

He kindly allowed me access to the archive. I was shown bundles of files filled with loose sheets of paper. Everything had been jumbled haphazardly together, either by Linda Kuehl herself or by someone else. Fragments of unfinished chapters, almost obliterated by handwritten revision notes, lay alongside the transcripts of Billie's court appearances and her medical reports. Formal letters from publishers and record companies rubbed shoulders with very informal letters from friends and lovers. There were lists of addresses and several lists of the important dates and events in Billie's life, but each list was uncertain and incomplete and covered with question marks. 

If I had been a different sort of person I suppose I might have tried to establish order in this chaos, but order has never been one of my strong points and I wouldn't have known where to begin here. And so I simply raced through the papers as they presented themselves to me and made copies of anything that seemed particularly interesting or relevant, trusting that I would never know what I had missed out. Before I left New York, I also collected a cardboard box filled with typewritten transcripts of the interviews Linda Kuehl had recorded. Even these were in a strange muddle, with pages missing or repeating themselves, and sometimes a whole interview had disappeared completely. 

For about a year I did my best to construct the bones of a biography out of this material. Just like Linda Kuehl before me, I made lists of what seemed to be the main events in Billie's life and I started chapters with titles like 'A Baltimore Childhood' and 'Harlem in the 1930s'. I then arranged the interviews into little groups and tried to force all those voices into the cages I had constructed for them. But in doing so I lost the wildness and the vitality that made them so interesting, and all I achieved in return was a rather bland uniformity in which one voice merged seamlessly with the next. That was when I decided this book must be a documentary in which people are free to tell their own stories about Billie and it doesn't matter if the stories don't fit together, or even if sometimes they seem to be talking about a completely different woman. 

So this is Billie Holiday's life, seen through the eyes of some of the people who knew her. I begin with the friends she ran around with when she was a young girl in Baltimore: Freddie Green, Mary 'Pony' Kane, Skinny 'Rim' Davenport, Wee Wee Hill, 'Sleepy' Dean and a woman called Christine Scott, who was an inmate at the reform school where Billie was sent when she was accused of being a 'minor without proper care and guardianship'. I end in the late 1950s, with the lawyer Earle Zaidins, who lived in the same cheap hotel where Billie was staying for a while and who got to know her when they were both out in the street late at night, walking their dogs. And Alice Vrbsky; she of the shopping lists. In between there are all the others. 

I lift out a sheaf of papers stapled together at the top lefthand corner and there is an orange stain where the little strip of rusting metal bites into the pages. The interview date, the number of the tape cassette and the name of the person who is speaking are written at the top of the page and there are occasional corrections and notes added in Linda Kuehl's rather bulbous handwriting. 

Sometimes an interview includes a brief account of the circumstances of a meeting, 'in a brown Cadillac Eldorado'; or of what the speaker was wearing, 'a shiny red suit and a white cowboy hat'; or of how they looked, 'shaking and sweating profusely from the effects of a cocaine high'. But such descriptions are unusual; mostly the voices are not given faces to recognise or clothes to wear, and so unless the person happens to be a well-known figure in the jazz world, their words float in a haphazard space without any anchors of recognition to hold them steady. 

I have listened to a number of the original tapes. The quality of the recordings tends to be very poor and it can be difficult to disentangle what is being said. You might hear the human roar of a late-night bar, juxtaposed with the closer, intimate sound of the clink of glasses on a table top, the cellophane rustle of a cigarette packet, someone coughing directly into the microphone. Or the interview is being held in a car with the activity of the street echoing on all sides, or in a private house where doors bang, dogs bark and children burst in and are shouted to silence.Several of the speakers are quite old and obviously frail and forgetful; others are drunk, or high on something. 

It is always strange the way the mind works. We often do not know what we think until we have transformed the amorphous creature of our thoughts into words.We do not know what memories we hold until we have opened the door of recollection. Looking back on a far-away time, the mind often gets stuck on a point of its own forgetfulness and then, like a scratched record, keeps repeating the search for the name it has lost or the event that it cannot quite recapture. 

But Linda Kuehl was obviously a very good interviewer and she never seemed to be in a hurry, or to be trying to steer people's thoughts in a particular direction. And so, if sometimes awkwardly at first, the memories soon begin to flood in, the past accumulating on all sides and becoming vivid. And once the talk is flowing easily, then all sorts of unexpected recollections and emotions emerge out of nowhere and float to the surface like strange balloons. 

As well as being patient and friendly and not easily shocked, Linda Kuehl was also pretty and flirtatious and people obviously enjoyed talking to her. A lot of the men were very challenging - when asked if he rehearsed before a music session with Billie, the trumpet player Roy Eldridge said, 'Why should I rehearse? Would I need to rehearse before making love to you?' - and several of them, including Billie's pianist and fellow heroin user Carl Drinkard, the bass player (and junkie) John Simmons and the music writer Arthur Herzog, obviously fell in love with her in one way or another. But over and over again, Linda Kuehl was ready with the relevant questions and a knowledge of dates and circumstances, and people were happy to talk. When I met Billie's pianist Bobby Tucker in 2003, he remembered Linda with great affection. He said she came to see him on three occasions and she took the time to listen. 

However, although many of the interviews are rich with information and anecdotes, they are often very complicated and difficult to follow and the stories that are being told emerge in broken fragments. In order to make a coherent sequence out of what is being said, I have had to do a lot of untangling, to separate out the various threads of a narrative before piecing it back together. But although I have reshuffled people's words, I have never put words into their mouths or added any detail that wasn't actually there. I also make it clear when I am quoting directly and when I am paraphrasing. 

Take the black narcotics agent, Jimmy Fletcher. He was involved in arresting Billie Holiday on a drugs charge in 1947 and as I read his interview I realised that he had maybe never told this story before and it involved a lot of emotional effort for him to do it. He had met Billie several times, he had talked with her, danced with her, enjoyed her company and had even been in love with her in a way. He knew she had been singled out for a big public arrest and he wished he had not been the one chosen to bring this about. He wished he could have stopped the whole unpleasant business before it unfolded. And as you follow the halting and complicated progression of what he is saying, you slowly begin to realise that he is ashamed of having betrayed her and is struggling to put his shame into words. 

On a different note, Carl Drinkard, who worked with Billie in the late 1950s, tells stories that cover more than a hundred typewritten pages, but his stories keep spinning into junkie paranoia and boastfulness and it is hard to tell the real from the imagined. And then there is the pianist Jimmy Rowles, who says he got drunk in anticipation of talking about Billie, and he drinks as he talks and gets more and more excited as the image of Lady Day becomes increasingly vivid and she swims into the room and is there standing in front of him. 

In an interview she gave at the Storyville Club in Boston in April 1959, just over two months before her death, Billie said, 'I've got no understudy. Every time I do a show I'm up against everything that's ever been written about me. I have to fight the whole scene to get people to listen to their own ears and believe in me again.' 

A huge amount of myth and gossip and savage misrepresentation had already gathered like a thick fog around her during her lifetime and it has gone on growing and proliferating ever since. Of course it is not possible to disentangle an absolute truth about who Billie was or how she lived, but at least we can listen with our own ears to the voices of the people who knew her, and then we can make our own decisions about what to believe and what not to believe.
