The trust question
May 1st 2008
From The Economist print edition
The Tories must do more to convince voters that they could manage the economy better than Labour
OVER the past decade, Labour has enjoyed a vote-winning premium as the party most trusted to look after the economy. That lead has now turned to lag. The Conservatives are beginning to reclaim ground that once looked as impregnable as it was vital. Whether or not David Cameron, the Tory leader, and George Osborne, the shadow chancellor, can press home their advantage may decide the outcome of the general election next year or, more likely, in 2010.
No matter how people grumbled at Labour's tax rises and interfering ways when they last went to the polls in 2005, they credited Gordon Brown with creating the economic stability over which he presided in his long stint as chancellor. But the prime minister's claim to have done away with boom and bust is now looking premature as the financial crisis takes its toll. 

As the gilt comes off Mr Brown's golden years, the Tories are looking better by comparison. Recent polls show that they are now considered more likely than Labour to run the economy well. Just before the last general election, Labour led by 22 percentage points; the Tories are now ahead by 12 points (see chart).
The Tory lead comes at a time when the economy is once again high on voters' worry-list. Over the past two months, the public has been more gloomy about the economic outlook than at any time since 1980, according to Ipsos MORI, a pollster. Yet the Conservatives owe their advantage more to a slump in Labour's standing than to their own advances, points out Peter Kellner of YouGov, another polling firm. The Tories have not yet convinced enough voters that they would be better at running the economy, says John Curtice, a psephologist at Strathclyde University.
With so much going wrong for the government—not least thanks to own goals such as penalising 5m low-income households by scrapping the 10% tax rate—the Tories are not short of ammunition. Their most telling shot is that Mr Brown's much-touted economic stability was built on the rickety foundations of a credit and house-price boom. But as Mr Osborne told businessmen in Liverpool on April 28th, it is not enough for the Tories to find fault with Labour. If they are to look like a government-in-waiting, they must spell out the difference they would make in office.
That is tricky because, as Mr Kellner points out, the Conservatives must also beware of frightening the voters. For a long time the Tories were seen as the safer pair of economic hands, but they lost that reputation on sterling's inglorious ejection from the European exchange-rate mechanism under John Major. And though Margaret Thatcher pushed Britain's economy towards the globalised 21st century, the brusque closure of mines and factories during her years left deep scars. 

All that helps to explain why for the most part Mr Osborne's policies develop Labour's approach rather than break with it—just as Mr Brown leaned heavily on Tory practice before he took office. In particular, the main moving part in economic management would remain a Bank of England that independently sets interest rates to hit an inflation target, Mr Brown's first and most important reform. 
Mr Osborne suggests some changes but they are tweaks rather than an overhaul. To curb political interference, he wants the governor of the central bank to have a single term of eight years rather than, as now, a five-year, renewable appointment. He also wants to give the Bank of England the job of rescuing and reorganising failing banks, whereas the government prefers the Financial Services Authority, which regulates banks. 
The shadow chancellor is developing ideas for discouraging another wild credit and housing-market boom. He is exploring the idea of making banks set aside more capital during good times in order to arrest over-heady expansion. But he does not back the notion that the central bank should pay more heed to house prices as well as consumer prices when setting interest rates, as the IMF recently suggested. 
Just as the Tories are stressing continuity in economic management, so there has been convergence in fiscal policy. In the past two elections, the Conservatives offered explicit tax cuts, but voters suspected public services would suffer. Since Mr Cameron took over as leader the pledge has been to share the proceeds of growth, by holding the increase in public spending below the long-run rate at which the economy expands. Over time this should make it possible to lower taxes, but there is no promise to that effect. 
The trouble is that Labour, after presiding over a long improvident boom in public spending, has itself adopted a policy of gradual squeeze. Plans for the three fiscal years from April 2008 envisage expenditure rising at 2.1% a year, below the 2.5% trend rate of economic growth. And the March budget projected the clampdown a further two years, to 2012-13. 
Mr Osborne says he will stick with the plans to 2010-11. But it will be more difficult for him to deliver eventual tax cuts now that Labour has got there first and nabbed the money. The government is relying on the proceeds of the spending squeeze to reduce the budget deficit, notes Robert Chote of the Institute for Fiscal Studies, a think-tank.
One way that the Tories can bolster their case to be seen as responsible economic managers is to win the respect of businessmen. Mr Osborne promises to lower the main corporation-tax rate from 28% to 25% (to be paid for, however, by lower capital allowances) and to cut red tape. Despite such pledges, a recent survey for the British Chambers of Commerce found little faith among firms that the Conservatives would do much for business. John Cridland, deputy-director general of the Confederation of British Industry, complains that the Tories are sending mixed signals—standing up to business as well as for it. But he says that businessmen now have much more dialogue with them.
Mr Osborne promises more detailed thinking over the next few months on how to reform Labour's discredited rules for fiscal prudence. Naturally he does not want to disclose his hand too early for fear that Labour will steal his best ideas. But the shadow chancellor, who stalled Mr Brown's plan for an early election last autumn with a crowd-pleasing pledge to cut inheritance tax, still has much work to do if the Tories are to prevail when voters eventually go to the national polls. 
London's election
Every vote counts—twice
Apr 24th 2008
From The Economist print edition
The capital's curious electoral system creates a market for second-hand votes

LONDON'S mayoral race is too close to call, but one thing is clear: the contest rests on voters' second choices. The pink ballot that Londoners will fill in on May 1st has two columns: one to mark their favourite candidate, and another to name their grudging second preference. Ken Livingstone, the Labour incumbent, and Boris Johnson, his Conservative rival, are expected to finish neck-and-neck in the top two spots, neither with a majority. The second choices of those who backed losing candidates will be added to their totals, to produce a winner.
The “supplementary vote” has never mattered much before in London, where Mr Livingstone has won the past two elections comfortably. (By contrast, three of England's 12 other elected mayors have at one point taken office only thanks to second preferences.) Now, it could swing things. The biggest prize is the votes cast off by the Liberal Democrats, Britain's third-largest party, which may account for nearly half the total. At London's last mayoral election Lib Dems backed Labour over the Tories. Their current candidate, Brian Paddick, has refused to say which of his rivals he dislikes least, but some polls show Lib Dems leaning towards Mr Johnson.
That may be misleading. For one thing, the polling samples are tiny (sometimes fewer than 100) at that level of detail. And it is tricky to get at true intentions, admits Nick Sparrow of ICM, a polling company. “We have a long history of casting one vote rather than two. The pollster may be asking about something that the poor old respondent has not previously thought about,” he says.
The London Assembly is also hard to predict, again owing to the way it is elected. In a system introduced in 2000 that no other English council uses, 11 of its 25 seats are allocated by proportional representation to any party that polls above about 5%. Small parties benefit: at the last election seats were won by the Greens and the right-wing UK Independence Party (UKIP), which have never elected an MP. The worry this year is that the British National Party (BNP), a thuggish far-right outfit, could win a seat, as it came close to doing last time.
In the past the far right was kept at bay by the electoral system. Tony Travers of the London School of Economics points out that in 1977 the National Front polled 5.3% in elections for the Greater London Council, but failed to win a seat because London then used a first-past-the-post system. If the BNP managed that share this year, it would win a seat. Their chances have been improved by the implosion of UKIP, whose supporters they hope to attract. Maybe—but only one in five UKIPers chose the BNP when casting their second-preference votes in the last mayoral election.
Much rests on turnout, which in past years has been little more than a third. Higher turnout will make it harder for the BNP to reach the 5% threshold, and may benefit Mr Livingstone, whose supporters are more reluctant to vote than Mr Johnson's. Turnout might be boosted by the candidates' larger-than-life personalities and intense rivalry. Which makes it all the odder that the outcome may be determined by people who don't much like either of them.
Gloom for Gordon Brown
May 2nd 2008
From Economist.com
The ruling Labour Party in Britain is battered at the polls. Where next for its troubled prime minister?
LOCAL elections in England and Wales, such as those that took place on Thursday May 1st, are generally such complicated affairs, with contradictory trends visible in different parts of the country, that they manage to offer both solace and chagrin to all the main political parties. Not this time. The Labour Party, and its leader, Gordon Brown, have been comprehensibly humbled. The prime minister's day will get even worse if, as looks likely, Labour also loses its biggest prize: the mayoralty of London. That result is due on Friday evening.
Preliminary results from the 159 local authorities that held elections (local polls are staggered so that not everyone votes at the same time) suggest that Labour has scored its worst performance in local elections for 40 years. Labour seems to have polled just 24% of the total, a full 20 points behind the opposition Conservatives and a point behind the Liberal Democrats. It has done badly even in some regions where it has traditionally been invulnerable, such as industrial bits of Wales, losing more council seats than even the most pessimistic predictions envisaged. The Conservatives, meanwhile, have made some symbolic gains in hitherto hostile territory in the north of England. David Cameron, the Tory leader, described the result as “a big moment”. A “bad” and “disappointing” night, said Mr Brown.

The line emanating from some Labour ministers is that voters were responding to the depressing economic climate, and also, more apologetically, that the government needs to do a better job of listening to their concerns. And there are some genuine reasons to doubt that the implications for Mr Brown are quite as bad as some commentators suggest (one newspaper described May 2nd as his “Black Friday”). As in most local elections, turnout was comparatively low, at around 35%. Some of the individual results will have been determined by local concerns rather than judgments about the prime minister and his rival. 
