Mohmoud Kalinle belongs to multiple worlds _ Somalia, Wales, an African
diaspora _ and so did his wife. (A white Welsh woman, called either Doreen
or Halima depending on the context and addresser, she lived with Muslims
from north-east Africa.)
There is a worldwide diaspora of Somalis living in Europe, North America
and the Gulf States, as well as in other African countries. Tens of thousands of
Somalis now live in the UK, scattered in different cities such as London,
Cardiff, Liverpool, Sheffield, Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol, Hull, Middlesbrough,
Leicester and Newport. London (i.e. the East End) and Cardiff
have the longest established Somali communities in Britain. Because of their
shared culture and language (there are no ethnic divisions among the Somali
people), communication between Somalis outside of their homeland is
relatively easy. People from the various areas of the Somali diaspora, especially
those who are members of the same clan, often visit each other: during
marriage festivals whole extended families in the UK gather together and
sometimes members come from Europe, America and the Gulf States. They
also are beginning to form a virtual diaspora community via the Internet.
Somalis are a people who travel. Traditionally, they were a nomadic
people, herding camel, sheep and goats for thousands of years. The nomadic
life entailed constant movement of people and livestock in search of better
pasture and water. This nomadic tradition seems still to exert its influence
today among Somali economic migrants and refugees. For example, the
settlement of Somali seamen in the UK has not ended their close association
with their homeland. Although they are working-class and often poor, many
manage to travel to Somalia at least every few years. They also keep informed
about events in Somalia via their family networks, Somali institutions (i.e.
cafe´s and other social and cultural centres) and the BBC World Service.
A well-known Somali proverb: A man who has not travelled does not have eyes.
Mohmoud Kalinle has been living in Wales for nearly 70 years, but he is
not the first generation: the Somali presence in Wales dates from shortly after
the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869. The first immigrants were men who
came to work in Cardiff and Newport (south Wales) in the Merchant Navy at a
time when Cardiff was the leading coal-exporting port in the world.2 They
were followed by a second group of economic migrants, arriving during World
War II and the following years of post-war reconstruction, who worked in
both shipping and heavy industry. The most recent group consists of refugees,
including some spouses and families of local Somali men, who have come as a
result of dictatorship and civil war.3
The elderly Somalis now living in Wales came to the UK between 1937
and 1961. These men left their country _ then a British colony _ intending to
earn some money and return home, but things rarely turned out as they had
planned. After their arrival and settlement, most of them joined that invisible,
marginalized group that Marx aptly called the ‘reserve army of labour' _ and
that army was racialized:
We used to do the jobs that the White people did not do, as they were
very hard work and the rewards were little. Once the person responsible
for giving out rations [on the ship] told me to take bacon and when I
refused and told him that I was a Muslim, he told me that I had a British
passport and should eat what the British eat.
(Omar Yussuf Essa, interview, Cardiff, 2004)
Like the Irish immigrants before them, Somali men worked in heavy industry,
including the steel works, the mines and the docks. They did hard manual
labour _ and a number of them sustained serious injuries in the process.
Consider this translated extract from an interview with Omar Noor Kibar,
which was conducted in 2004:
I was born in Hargeisa in 1937, near the airport. I had no formal
education. I used to manage a restaurant in Hargeisa. I came to this
country in 1957 and worked in a factory in Hull, in the steel industry.
After 3 years, in 1961, I moved to Cardiff and started to work for the
British Steel Corporation. I joined the Merchant Navy in 1968 and left my
last ship in 1974, since I was injured while working. I was up fixing the
crane when I fell down and broke both my hands, injured my head and
lost my teeth. I have not worked since then.
Nearly all of the Somali elders in Wales are from northern Somalia, i.e. the
territory formerly known as British Somaliland. Most of them are from in
or around Hargeisa, Buroa, Arabsiyo or Berbera. For most of its existence
in Wales, the Somali community has only included perhaps half a dozen
different clans _ with the Isaq clan having the largest number of members.
Since the 1990s, the community has become a more diverse group: Cardiff and
Newport are now home to Somalis from the south, e.g. Mogadishu, as well as
the north.
Estimates put the Somali population in Wales at approximately 7,000,
including about 5,000 in Cardiff. Their history and presence, including the
sacrifices they have made in service to the British Motherland, remain largely
unknown. It is not just that Mohmoud Kalinle's image and story have been
rendered virtually invisible and inaudible, it is that a group's history and
presence has been almost totally ignored in academic, mass media and popular
culture _ except when they are the targets of ‘social problem' research or
racist abuse.
Whatever African cultural studies is, I would suggest that its geographical
range should extend beyond the boundaries of the African continent to include
groups like the Somalis in Wales. There are numerous African communities
living outside of Africa _ especially in Europe, the Americas and the Middle
East _ and their histories, memories and cultural appropriations should not be
ignored. I am not referring to the millions who, like me, are descendants of
those who came to the New World via the Middle Passage (although an
African cultural studies informed by a pan-Africanist perspective might wish to
include them) but to more recently formed communities of immigrants and
refugees whose members are primarily first- and second-generation. Since
2001, I have been involved in a project in one such community. This textual
and photographic essay discusses and presents some of the results of that work.

The Somali Elders Project
Africans and Muslims, photography and cultural studies _ these are the subjects and
objects of this intervention.
The Somali Elders Project is a cultural-political intervention combining
humanist portrait photography, collaborative ethnography and oral history.
Based outside of the academy _ in Butetown History &amp; Arts Centre in Cardiff,
Wales _ it is a mode of socially-concerned research, photography and
representation in which previously marginalized voices, images and experiences
are brought to the fore _ with the subjects' active participation in the
process. It is an exercise in cultural democracy that takes seriously the
admonition that all human beings, especially those excluded from power and
privilege by virtue of their class, racial or cultural background, should be
treated with dignity and respect.
This project is about a group of Africans who live in the West who appear
to be both African and Western, Us and Other, at the same time. They are
comfortable with both their native language and culture and with styles
appropriated from the West.
Questions: How, today, does Africa _ its peoples and cultures _ live in The West?
And where, in particular, do these men belong? To Africa? To The West? To a Third
Space?
The people who appear in the images accompanying this text are not from
West or Central Africa _ those areas from which, over a period of some four
centuries, some 10_15 million slaves came to labour in the Americas. That is,
they are not from the Africa that I and most other black people in the West
think of when we use the term ‘Black Diaspora' (which raises the question
of whether received notions of the African diaspora might not need to be
re-examined).
The Somali Elders Project is about photography as a practice within
cultural studies. It is about the politics of representation and the construction
of selves in front of the camera's lens. It is a study, employing text and portrait
photography, of an under-seen dimension of the African diaspora; and it is also
a photo-essay whose object is to both present and to study. This intervention
subverts that habitual tendency in the academy, found even in ostensibly
radical projects like cultural, feminist and post-colonial studies, which
privileges words over images. The photographs here are much more than
mere illustrations to ‘the argument'.
Finally, the Somali Elders Project is an exercise in anti-racist education and
an appreciation of cultural diversity. It is a located intervention _ in a world
where there is currently great difficulty between ‘Islam' and ‘The West'; in a
culture where images of black people still often carry primitivist and racist
connotations; in a city (Cardiff) and society (the UK) where Somalis are held in
very low status. If one hears a racist statement in Cardiff, it is likely to be
about Somalis.
Somalis are a visible population in south Cardiff, as they often socialize on
the streets and other public places. Nonetheless, in mainstream history, art and
culture in the UK, their presence is virtually invisible. The intent of the Somali
Elders Project is to reverse this trend _ to render visible this community, its
history and present. Given Butetown History &amp; Art Centre's commitment to
history from below (see Jordan 2003; also Jordan and Weedon 2000) _ to
foregrounding histories and experiences that have been marginalized and
excluded _ this initiative is particularly appropriate for us. When conceived in
2000, it was anticipated that the Somali Elders Project would result in three
products: an exhibition; a book of photographs and text based on the
exhibition; and an anthology of life stories. The first two products, the
exhibition and related book, are both called Somali Elders: Portraits from Wales/
Odeyada Soomaalida: Muuqaalo ka yimid Welishka. The photographs were taken
by me and the book was authored by myself _ with the assistance of two
Somali researchers, Akli Ahmed and Abdihakim Arwo. The exhibition and
book were launched on Sunday afternoon, 18 July 2004 at Butetown History &amp;
Arts Centre, and the event attracted a large, enthusiastic crowd. The fact that
three of the elders that I photographed _ Said Ismail Ali, Elmi Jama Handulleh
and Mohamed Ali Mohamed _ died before the exhibition and first book were
completed underscores the moral imperative of this work.
I do not claim that the Somali Elders Project is an example of African
cultural studies. However, I do contend that it has direct relevance for such a
project _ and I shall detail that argument later.
The subjects and their self-presentation
Some of the most powerful portraits are those that show their sitters in
old age.
(Shearer West 2004 p. 139)
Most portraits exhibit a formal stillness, a heightened degree of selfcomposure
that responds to the formality of the portrait-making
situation. Either the sitter composes himself [or herself], or the portraitist
does it to indicate the solemnity of the occasion and the timelessness
of the portrait image as a general, often generous statement, summing up
‘a life'. Portraits of people who occupy significant positions in the public
eye _ statesmen, intellectuals, creative artists, war heroes, and approved
champions _ usually bear the gravamen of their ‘exemplary' public
roles; they offer up images of serious men and women, worthy of
respect, persons who should be taken equally seriously by the viewing
audience.
(Richard Brilliant 1991, p. 10)
Look at plate 11. What do you see when you look at this image? How does the
subject present himself to the camera? How does he address you, the viewer? Is
it not as a serious public figure worthy of respect?

