An equal music
A career as an internationally renowned pianist has
helped one gay man ameliorate the ‘terrible light' of
the Church's teaching on homosexuality – teaching
that must change with changing times

The first message of explicit negativity
I heard towards being gay came
from my religious beliefs as I entered
my teenage years in an evangelical
Church. The teaching was that something
growing within me (which was me) was disgusting
and must be kept quiet, cured,
squashed, punished ... anything will do.
Reading my Bible I would fear opening the
scorching pages of Romans 1 or 1 Corinthians
6. These brief passages shine with a terrible
light for a gay person, until we look at
what they aim to illumine rather than at the
light itself.
Just as we can now see clearly the inadequacy
of St Paul's teaching on women or slavery,
and excuse his historical limitations, so
we need not blame him for his lack of understanding
of the concept of same-sex love.
He was looking through a window at firstcentury
Rome and Corinth with first-century
Jewish eyes from a perspective of religious
and cultural separation that had lasted for centuries. It is highly unlikely that
he saw gay couples in faithful, committed
partnerships; and it is certain
that he saw all kinds of orgiastic, abusive
behaviour which would often have
been linked to pagan rites and beliefs.
What else could he have written in his situation?
I became a Catholic at the age of 19 and
the teaching on homosexuality remained
the same, although being unmarried now
became a respectable, even glamorous option.
Priests, nuns and monks were all able
to live safely without the enquiries: “Why
aren't you married?”, “Have you got a girlfriend?”
I even considered the priesthood
myself, partly to avoid having to answer such
terrifying questions. Yet I remained a
musician, accepting the Church's prohibition,
buried under my work, avoiding “occasions
of sin”, destroying certain friendships
before there was any chance of them developing
into anything intimate – in many
ways a happy yet somehow shrunken life.
It was when reading Pope John Paul II's
famous book Love and Responsibility, published
in 1960 when he was an auxiliary bishop
in Krakow, that I first began to think again
about this issue. You cannot offer such a
radiant and dazzling vision of love and
human relationships to your readers, and then
exclude those who happen to have “green eyes”.
Once you have affirmed, as he did controversially
and courageously for a Catholic bishop
of his time, the sacredness of the human
body and its self-gift in the sexual act, you
have opened a floodgate of recognition for
all who have both bodies to reverence and
“selves” to give.
“It is not good that the man should be alone,”
said God in the opening chapters of the Bible
and of human history – the one blemish in
an otherwise unblemished world, where
everything was “very good”. Such an affirmation
of companionship at the beginning
of time is fresh and inspiring still; and, combined
with new discoveries about sexual orientation
in the natural world, it opens up a
radical challenge to previously confident assessments
of the morality of gay relationships.
To share a life of intimacy with another
is the way the vast majority of men and
women, regardless of their gender preference,
are meant to live whole and holy lives.
Such relationships are about more than
making babies. They are about making
love, because to do so is to be fully human,
with sensitive, “musical” hearts attuned to
vibrations that animals may hear but only
men and women can hold. Celibacy is of value
only as an affirmation of what is renounced
– the best given up freely because it is the
best gift one can give. If celibacy is not rare,
and a totally free donation, it has the whiff
of something slightly perverse about it – literally
“contrary to nature”.
We are subject to natural law as part of creation,
but we are also able to contemplate it
and relish it. It is the great epiphany of
reality: what is actually there, not what we
would like to be there, or what our forebears
have told us is there. It can be full of surprises,
and it has no favourites. The one who claims
natural law as an ally in arguing for the sanctity
of life might end up finding it an annoying
foe in a discussion on homosexuality.
When the world in which we live tells a different
story from what we were taught, we
eventually have to break free. It isn't so much
that law changes, but that the Church (from
St Paul onwards) simply has not had the
vocabulary to discuss an issue it neither named
nor understood. (The idea that a person could
actually be homosexual, rather than a badly
behaved heterosexual, has been accepted by
the Church only in the past 30 years or so.)
Law is living and flexible: always growing,
adapting, changing shape; never abandoning
its roots but never rigid either. Christ not
only boiled theology down to the simple statement,
“God is love”, he also distilled the complex
religious laws of his time to love of that
same God and of neighbour as oneself. The
spiritual liberty and simplicity that resulted
from this new, unified vision led, in theory
at least, to the breaking down of the divisive
barriers between men and women, slave and
free, Jew and Gentile. It is tragic that it took
Christians at least 1,900 years even to begin
to explore or live this freedom in practice. The
prison gates were open but we remained inside,
either cowering in the corner or standing
with arms outstretched, blocking the exit.
Both responses came from fear, and both were
betrayals of the Christian message.
Ultimately the only real argument against
homosexual equality is a belief that God has
told us it is wrong. All the other reasons given
(destruction of the family, seduction of the
young, unnatural behaviour, a genetic disorder
like alcoholism) are attempts to find a common,
secular currency to barter for what is
an a priori, religious judgement. But the coins
are fake and are being rendered obsolete by
common sense and daily experience.
Actually I believe that the religious arguments
are wrong too, and that, as with slavery,
the Churches will have to re-evaluate their
teaching on this issue – but that's for another
chapter, indeed another book. That re-evaluation
will probably take decades, but in the
meantime the Churches cannot expect gay
non-Christians in a secular world to abstain
from sexual relationships from their teenage
years up to the end of their lives; and thus
they cannot exclude those same people from
either marriage or a legal commitment and
then complain that such relationships are
unstable. Straight couples are no strangers
to marital collapse, even with the cement of
children and society's affirmation to encourage
them to hold firm, so why should we expect
even higher standards from gays?
To use “musical” as a euphemism for
homosexual is rather flattering
when you think about it. It suggests
a sensitivity, a creativity, an ability
to attune to sound and beauty. Of course it
was originally an ironic, snide use of the term:
a real man might whistle at work, or bawl a
song in the pub after work, but to be touched
or moved by music below the surface seemed
weak, lacking in moral fibre of that tough,
fearless type which was the male ideal.
It is not an accident that music and the
arts were always a tolerant environment for
gay men. It was a world where an appreciation
of the “feminine” was not seen as weakness,
and where strength did not have to
manifest itself in violence and coarseness. (It
also became a safe place for gay people to
flourish among like-minded friends in the
years – not that long ago – when blackmail
and prison were an ever-possible threat.)
All of this is not to suggest that gay people
are inherently more sensitive or artistic
than straights but everyone draws on a central
emotional core in the act of creativity, and
when the normal outlet of intimacy is
blocked, the heart will find alternative ways
to express itself, sometimes with enormous
intensity. At best, art can become a fountain
quenching an inner, passionate thirst; at worst,
it is a form of sheer survival – galoshes against
the puddles.

Home, not so
sweet home
When the Church of England's commissioners
forced through the sale of part of the historic
Octavia Hill social housing estates, they said tenants
would be protected.Now the new private owners
plan to sell the properties on the open market

Mitre Road in Waterloo, south London,
is a street of handsome, pale
brick terraces, the kind of sturdy-
looking homes that suggest
stability and safety in a turbulent city. On each
home is a mark – a sign that would once have
reinforced the sense of stability. For the
mark is that of the Church Commissioners,
the body responsible for the Church of England's
investments.
But on 20 March, that sense of stability came
to an end for the tenants of Mitre Road, when
the commissioners sold the properties – part
of the historic Octavia Hill Estates – to a private/
social-housing consortium. There are
1,000 homes in the estates – in Waterloo, Vauxhall,
Pimlico and Walworth – which for the
past century have housed low-income earners,
families and “key workers” such as teachers
and nurses.
The controversial sale was bitterly contested
by the residents, who were supported by the
local churches and politicians, including
their MPs, and feared huge rent rises and even
of being forced out of their homes. At the time
they were assured by the Church Commissioners,
who were responsible for the sale to
Grainger GenInvest, that this would not
happen.
Now, less than a month after the transaction
was completed, Grainger has admitted
to considering the sale of a substantial percentage
of the estates' homes to cover the cost
of the £167-million purchase. Local MPs have
seen Grainger's “working projections”, which
forecast a possible sale of some 419 properties.
Homes would be sold off at commercial
rates as they became vacant. As much as 40
per cent of the estates would, over time, be
up for grabs.
Ninety-seven per cent of respondents to
a petition on the Waterloo estate opposed
the sale. But if the sale were to go through,
they made plain their desire for a registered
social landlord to take on the Octavia Hill
Estates. This desire chimed with the Church
of England's own recommendation, set out
in its ground-breaking Faith in the
City document 20 years ago, which
said that Church involvement in housing
should be developed in the future through
non-profit- making housing associations. The
commissioners made it clear in reply that it
was their duty to provide maximum returns
on their investments in order to fund the work
of the Church.
Octavia Hill (1838-1912), a co-founder of
the National Trust, devoted her life to improving
the housing of the poor. She managed
the south London estates for the
Church of England. Residents now claim that
the commissioners have betrayed her legacy
and have breached the spirit of a covenant
which protected them. A 1937 agreement
transferred Octavia Hill Estates land from
what was then London County Council to
the commissioners in order to build “flats or
maisonettes suitable for the accommodation
of persons of the working classes [i.e. of slender
means]”. The commissioners maintain
that the covenant expired in the 1970s.
Gary Kirk, the former chairman of the
Vauxhall estate's residents' association, said:
“The Church Commissioners stated many
times that the sale to Grainger GenInvest was
in the best interest of the tenants. How can
the projected sale of a third of the properties
within 10 years in any way be in the best
interest of tenants? These affordable homes
will be lost to the community for ever.”

