Shelley's views on love were intimately tied up with his metaphysical enthusiasms, and Byron also takes a swing at these in Don Juan. Most of its cantos are introduced by at least a few lines of world-weary philosophical musing, and here Byron's sceptical response to Shelley's insistent enthusiasm is significant. Introducing the seventh canto, in which he ‘will take a little touch at warfare', Byron pauses to lament the old problem that ‘all is vanity', and to suggest a temporary remedy: 
When we know what all are, we must bewail us,
But, ne'ertheless I hope it is no crime
To laugh at all things – for I wish to know
What after all, are all things – but a Show?(VII. 2)
In his notes, McGann relates Byron's summing up to Jacques's theatrical metaphor in As You Like It, but lurking in the ‘show' is the more ancient pageant of the flickering shapes on the walls of Plato's cave. Shelley waits anxiously for the moment when he will have ‘unfurled / The veil of life and death'; Byron uses the possibility that all the world's a shadow as an excuse for more hilarity. Shelley, as one might expect, pictures himself in the cave, desperately continuing his quest for Truth: 
In the still cave of the witch Poesy,
Seeking among the shadows that pass by
Some phantom, some faint image; till the breast
From which they fled recalls them, thou art there!
But when Byron decides to address a presiding spirit, it is neither ‘intellectual beauty', nor ‘Power in likeness of the Arve', but a rather more ‘unspiritual God'
Oh, thou ‘teterrima Causa' of all ‘belli' –
 Thou gate of Life and Death – thou nondescript!
Whence is our exit and our entrance, – Well I
 May pause in pondering how all souls are dipt
In thy perennial fountain: – How man fell, I
 Know not, since Knowledge saw her branches stript
Of her first fruit, but how he falls and rises
Since, thou hast settled beyond all surmises.
Some call thee ‘the worst Cause of war', but I
 Maintain thou art the best, for after all
From thee we come, to thee we go, and why
 To get at thee not batter down a wall,
Or waste a world? Since no one can deny
 Thou dost replenish worlds both great and small:
With, or without thee, all things at a stand
Are, or would be, thou Sea of Life's dry Land!(IX. 55-6)
Prudently, Byron does not include the word ‘cunnus' in the quotation from Horace. He does comically make the vagina the ‘gate of life and death' (birth and orgasm), which sets up the toing and froing of the next line: ‘Whence is our exit and our entrance'. As if this Rochesterian indelicacy wasn't enough for the Regency drawing-room, Byron then draws on biblical water-imagery, describing the vagina as the ‘fountain of living waters'. The image of God as a fountain flows throughout the Bible; the Psalmist says ‘For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light', and the Lord says to St John the Divine ‘I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely'. Not only is the fountain an important biblical symbol, but it was also one of Shelley's habitual images for the inaccessibility of the ideal, as Peter Butter has demonstrated. Byron's playful use of divine moisture is not merely jeeringly provocative, or a cheap jibe at one of Shelley's favourite images. He confesses that he knows nothing about man's fall, and allows that he may now only approach understanding through necessarily carnal, embodied eyes. Sexual love is one way to begin to understand divine rapture. The priapic pun on ‘falls and rises' delights in the good-humoured combination of carnal and religious orders of language, and achieves a more humane way of describing our ignorance about the divine than the circumscriptions of the drawing-room would allow. Instead of yearning after a distant Utopia, Byron hints, why not celebrate what's in front of you? 
Byron grapples most explicitly with idealism at the beginning of the eleventh canto. He claims that ‘Bishop Berkeley said there was no matter', and he makes this a cause for celebration: 
What a sublime discovery 'twas to make the
 Universe universal Egotism!
That all's ideal – all ourselves. I'll stake the
 World (be it what you will) that that's no Schism.
Oh, Doubt – if thou be'st Doubt, for which some take thee,
 But which I doubt extremely – thou sole prism
Of the Truth's rays, spoil not my draught of spirit!
Heaven's brandy, – though our brain can hardly bear it.(XI. 2)
Shelley was a great admirer of Berkeley, taking as a central premise in his Essay on Life that ‘nothing exists but as it is perceived'. Byron makes a debating school swerve from individual perception to individual ‘egotism', and calling the world in the eyes of the idealists ‘universal egotism', he again casts a sideways glance at the narcissism of Shelley's regard. But Byron's arch comment on his friend's preoccupation rebounds upon himself. It may only have been a slip of the pen, but in ‘our brain' the plural pronoun governing a single noun makes Byron's sentence read as if his thoughts are also Shelley's, or indeed everyone else's. Egotism here slides easily into the egalitarianism that Byron so mistrusted. In any case, Shelley might well have thought (had he been alive) that his lordship was a fine one to talk. Byron is the poet with the ‘inclination to seek his own image throughout history', seeing himself not only in the figures of Conrad and Lara, but also in Dante and Tasso, and if, in Shelley's words, he had deeply apprehended the ‘nothingness of Life', it is not altogether clear that he had apprehended the nothingness of Lord Byron. 
However, he at least remained sceptical of the revolutionary ambitions that occasionally illuminated his mind. Shelley's metaphysical enthusiasms were always linked to political dreams of the unity and equality of men, and he had imagined what freedom might feel like in his ‘Ode to Liberty': 
One ocean feeds the clouds, and streams, and dew;
One Sun illumines Heaven; one Spirit cast
With life and love makes chaos ever new,
As Athens doth the world with thy delight renew.(ll. 87-90)
Byron remained suspicious of this unifying impulse, convinced that it led only to solipsism. He made comic capital of rhetoric about freedom in canto IX of Don Juan: 
It is not that I adulate the people:
 Without me, there are Demagogues enough,
And Infidels, to pull down every steeple
 And set up in their stead some proper stuff.
Whether they may sow Scepticism to reap Hell,
 As is the Christian dogma rather rough,
I do not know; – I wish men to be free
As much from mobs as kings – from you as me.(IX. 25)
Byron's deprecation of the rabble gives way to fierce exaggeration about the freedom that he would like everyone to share. His hyperbole intimates that absolute freedom is impossible in any society, apart perhaps from the anarchic one imagined in Godwin's Political Justice, and is far from devoutly to be wished. Byron and Shelley were themselves not free from each other: they were bound together by their linked but dissimilar poetic and political aspirations, and the underlying tug of competition between the two was partly responsible for the creative animation of Don Juan. Byron recognised the importance of these bonds, and by extending in this passage absolute freedom to individual relations, he satirises the gospel of revolutionary equality that Shelley had inherited from the Jacobins. 
Above all, Byron tried to temper some of Shelley's ebullient enthusiasm. In 1817 Byron had complained about the gushing ‘entusimusy' of English art-lovers visiting Florence, and he liked such ‘rapturous intensity of feeling' even less in his friend. Admonitions against this trait are scattered throughout Don Juan, and abound in the final cantos: 
However, 'tis expedient to be wary.
 Indifference certes don't produce distress,
And rash Enthusiasm in good society
Were nothing but a moral Inebriety.(XIII. 35)
‘Moral inebriety' is a magnificent clincher. It is imperiously dismissive of Shelley's rapturous intensity, a smart shorthand for the distasteful way that people can be carried away by excitement over their own (usually prospective) virtue. But the phrase can also mean an ‘inebriety' which would be the ‘moral' alternative, an alternative that makes perfect sense for a man who had earlier written ‘Man being reasonable must get drunk' (II. 179). Although it is not the primary meaning, and does not make sense within the syntax, the idea of ‘moral drunkenness' lurks in the phrase, as the sting in the tail of the stanza, to balance rash enthusiasm with a reasonable alternative. With one phrase, Byron both tipsily agrees with Shelley and sobers him up. 
Although Byron often qualifies or openly sneers at Shelley's attitudes in Don Juan, the poem's capacious spirit also includes a more straightforwardly optimistic attitude to Shelley's enthusiasms, such as that for idealised romantic love. It emerges in the fourth canto with Byron's description of the relationship between Juan and his island girl Haidée: 
Each was the other's mirror, and but read
 Joy sparkling in their dark eyes like a gem,
And knew such brightness was but the reflection
Of their exchanging glances of affection.(IV. 13)
The pair sustain and heighten their affection by their looks, even though it is their own image that they see figured forth in the other's eyes: mutual regard enables them to see themselves. Byron recognises, of course, that ‘This is in others a factitious state, / An opium dream of too much youth and reading', but Juan and Haidée are too innocent for that: 
 No novels e'er had set their young hearts bleeding,
For Haidée's knowledge was by no means great,
 And Juan was a boy of saintly breeding,
So that there was no reason for their loves
More than for those of nightingales or doves.(IV. 19)
Although Juan's saintly breeding had not kept him to the straight and narrow in his relations with Julia, the love of Juan and Haidée could be seen as a tribute to the ideal of love expressed by Byron's friend, who put his case rather dramatically with the opening question of ‘On Love': ‘What is Love? Ask him who lives what is life; ask him who adores what is God'.
The solemnity of the scene is heightened by the resemblance that Juan bears to one of Shelley's creations. As Juan is recovering in Haidée and Zoe's tender care, it is clear that he has had a hard time of it: 
For still he lay, and on his thin worn cheek
 A purple hectic play'd like dying day
On the snow-tops of distant hills; the streak
 Of sufferance yet upon his forehead lay,
Where the blue veins look'd shadowy, shrunk, and weak;
 And his black curls were dewy with the spray,
Which weighed upon them yet, all damp and salt,
Mixed with the stony vapours of the vault.(II. 147)
Another young man's poetic alter ego had looked similarly sickly after an ordeal, though his was psychological rather than maritime. This is Shelley's description of the Poet in Alastor: 
And now his limbs were lean; his scattered hair
Sered by the autumn of strange suffering
Sung dirges in the wind; his listless hand
Hung like dead bone within its withered skin[.](ll. 248-51)
Juan, like Shelley's Poet, has been spiritualised by his experience, and has been brought literally and figuratively closer to death. In resembling the Poet, Juan resembles Shelley, and Byron's conversation with Shelley continues into the next stanza: 
And she bent o'er him, and he lay beneath,
 Hushed as the babe upon its mother's breast,
Drooped as the willow when no winds can breathe,
 Lulled like the depth of ocean when at rest,
Fair as the crowning rose of the whole wreath,
 Soft as the callow cygnet in its nest.
In short he was a very pretty fellow,
Although his woes had turned him rather yellow.(II. 148)

