The crucial point is that the rule by which the object is organized is apparent yet not explicitly known: the imagination has picked up on the object's finality, that it exhibits a rule, but the understanding has not grasped it, and so the two faculties can play freely without restraint, at least until the understanding succeeds in grasping the rule governing the object's form, at which time the play loses its ‘free' quality (CJ, p. 222, cf. pp. 295–296). 
Finally, the pure judgement of taste lays claim to intersubjective validity because everyone ought to agree regarding it (CJ, p. 239). This is justified because the harmonious free play of the imagination and understanding is (assuming a common sense) a universal way to generate the feelings of pleasure and displeasure on which we base pure judgements of taste. This implies that the pure judgement of the ugly is a necessary judgement for all when estimating an ugly object. Because we need universal assent regarding the pure judgement of the ugly, we need universal communicability of the displeasurable feeling on which the judgement is based (it is a necessary condition for the possibility of universal assent); and this condition is satisfied by assuming a common sense as mentioned above. 
To summarize: the pure judgement of ugliness must be based on the feeling of displeasure that arises from the harmonious free play of the imagination and the understanding when estimating an object that exhibits an inherent, apparent, yet not objectively known, rule; it must be universally valid for all beings that share our cognitive set-up; and it must be put forward as an exemplary judgement for all who share our cognitive set-up. The pure judgement of the ugly must be structurally identical to that of the beautiful and differentiated only in that it is based on the feeling of displeasure rather than pleasure, feelings that both come about through the harmonious free play of the faculties. 



   II. SHIER'S CHALLENGE 


 
This should be the end of the matter, but there is a major problem: Kant suggests that the harmonious free play of the faculties brings about the feeling of pleasure in all cases when we need displeasure to arise via this same cognitive pathway or mechanism (CJ, p. 222): 
The consciousness of mere formal finality in the play of the cognitive faculties of the Subject attending a representation whereby an object is given [that is, consciousness of a pattern or rule in an object], is the pleasure itself. 
Shier identifies this problem and presents a reductio ad absurdum argument against Kant's aesthetic system, which can be presented as follows: 
1. A judgement of taste must be universally communicable (in order to be universally valid); a judgement of taste cannot be determined by any (objective) concept but rests only on the subject's feeling. 
2. ‘In judgements of taste what is universally communicable is the subject's mental state',5 namely what the subject feels via the ratios of the faculties with one another—in the case of the judgement of taste, this is either pleasure or displeasure—and it is universally communicable due to the sensus communis. 
3. In judgements of taste ‘such a mental state is nothing other than the harmonious free play between the imagination and the understanding'.6 
4. ‘Every judgement of taste must be accompanied in the subject by the state of harmonious free play of the faculties'.7 
5. This harmonious free play between the understanding and the imagination is always pleasurable; ‘pleasure is necessarily bound up with this harmonious free play'. 
6. Therefore, ‘since harmonious free play is always pleasurable, and since all judgements of taste are accompanied by harmonious free play, it follows that every judgement of taste must be accompanied by the feeling of pleasure in the subject', which ipso facto makes every judgement of taste a positive judgement of taste. 
7. ‘Therefore, within Kant's aesthetics, and contrary to the obvious fact of the matter, negative judgements of taste are quite impossible'.
As is clear, Shier has Kant in a nasty bind. The first four premises are fundamental for Kant, as I showed above, and so clearly the worth of Shier's argument rests on premise 5, which does prima facie seem to accord with Kant's own comments in CJ, p. 222. A successful attempt to provide Kant with an account of the pure judgement of the ugly will have to address satisfactorily premise 5: that is the challenge Shier sets. 



   III. THE JUDGEMENT OF THE UGLY CANNOT BE PURE 

 
Instead of facing Shier's challenge head-on, Guyer argues that, for Kant, a judgement of ugliness is not a pure aesthetic judgement at all. Rather, he claims that Kant must ‘understand the undeniable experience of ugliness as an impure aesthetic experience'. Ginsborg concurs: ‘I would argue that there is no such thing, for Kant, as a pure judgment of ugliness. The only examples of ugliness that we find in the Critique of Judgement are of what Kant calls "harmful things" [Schädlichkeiten]'. 
The central premise of Guyer's argument is that Kant's account of the harmonious free play of the imagination and the understanding ‘leaves no room for a negative but purely aesthetic response'.14 It is clear that Guyer considers that the disharmonious free play of the imagination and the understanding must be the negative but purely aesthetic response. He claims that the disharmonious free play of the faculties is impossible as the imagination and the understanding must always be in a harmonious relationship in any cognitive activity. From here he concludes that, since such a disharmonious free play is not possible, no pure negative aesthetic response can arise, and thus no pure judgement of ugliness can be made. 
Guyer then proceeds to account for our undeniable judgements of ugliness: 
judgements of ugliness are not purely reflective aesthetic judgements at all, but are merely sensory or else practical judgements—that is, they involve expressions of our feelings of displeasure at things that are disagreeable in some physiological or psychological way [disgust] or bad or evil in the light of our prudential or moral practical reason. 
Thus, the negative aspect inherent in ugliness is to be contrasted with ‘good' or ‘agreeable' rather than the pure positive aesthetic response. Moreover, Guyer draws our attention to the only examples of ugliness Kant himself provides in the third Critique (‘the Furies, diseases, devastations of war, and the like', CJ, p. 312) to support his explanation. Clearly, claims Guyer, these things are considered ugly by virtue of their content, their evil, horror, and physical effects, rather than a disinterested judgement based on their form. Additionally, he acknowledges that some judgements of ugliness are based on determinate concepts of how a certain object ought to be and the extent to which it meets this ideal. Again, these judgements of ugliness are not pure aesthetic judgements but instead they are cognitive; they are determined by an objective concept and hence are dependent judgements of taste. 
Thus, Guyer claims that, for Kant, ugliness can be explained in three ways: first, it can be a dependent judgement determined by an objective concept; second, it can be a judgement based on a sensory feeling of disgust or revulsion; third, it can be a judgement based on a feeling of moral repugnance. There is, however, no pure judgement of the ugly. 
Unfortunately, Guyer's justification for the central premise is very problematic. His treatment of the necessity of the harmony of the faculties in all cognition is flawed because he confuses the role and function of the transcendental cognitive machinery with that of the empirical cognitive machinery. His rejection of the possibility of the disharmonious free play of the faculties can be summed up with this comment: ‘a state of sheer disharmony between them [the imagination and the understanding] is not consistent with the transcendental unity of apperception'. Now, Kant introduces the transcendental unity of apperception as follows (CP, B131, p. 138): 
It must be possible for the ‘I think' to accompany all my representations; for otherwise something would be represented in me which could not be thought at all, and that is equivalent to saying that the representation would be impossible, or at least would be nothing to me... it says no more than that all my representations in any given intuition must be subject to that condition under which alone I can ascribe them to the identical self as my representations, and so can comprehend them as synthetically combined in one apperception through the general expression, ‘I think'. 
Guyer thinks that the disharmonious free play of the imagination and the understanding would violate the very possibility of having representations in the first place, and so if one did have a representation via this mechanism (namely, a representation of an ugly object) it would violate Kant's principle. But this does not seem to be the case, for this reason: the harmony that is at issue here is not transcendental but empirical, and Guyer seems to have them confused. Let me elaborate on this. 
The transcendental imagination's role in synthesizing raw sense-data into a whole that lasts over time and the (transcendental concepts that are the) categories being applied by the transcendental understanding (the process by which the objects of representation are schematized and given to us prior to [empirical] consciousness) has nothing to do with the harmonious free play or the harmony of cognition with which we are concerned. In our case, the harmony is between the empirical imagination and the empirical understanding; the objects of representation are already before our empirical consciousness with the transcendental machinery having done its work. The workings of the empirical machinery have no bearing on the transcendental unity of apperception or the transcendental roles of the imagination and the understanding, and so the possibility of the disharmonious free play will not contradict Kant's principle. Guyer's justification for his central premise is flawed. 
Moreover, Guyer further confounds things when he claims that all cognition must be determined by definite concepts: 
if our experience of any object always involves the subsumption of an empirical manifold of intuition under a determinate empirical concept formed in accordance with a pure concept of the understanding, how can there ever be any free play of imagination and understanding without a concept?
Again, this claim rests on the confusion between the transcendental and the empirical roles of the understanding. Because of the transcendental understanding's function of placing objects into the framework of the categories (employing the so-called ‘pure concepts of the understanding'), all objects are, in a sense, determined by concepts. But these categories are transcendental in the sense that they characterize all objects of representation, and they are applied before empirical concepts. Most crucially, they do not restrain the empirical imagination in its function as a finality- or rule-detector in any way whatsoever and, since the empirical concepts of the understanding must be empirically derived, that is, gained via experience, unrestrained free play can still arise simply by virtue of the empirical imagination detecting a pattern, a rule, finality, in an object for which the empirical understanding has, as yet, no concept in its possession. The transcendental role of the understanding again has nothing to do with determining empirical judgments, including judgements of taste. Guyer's argument that the judgement of the ugly cannot be pure fails to convince; however, Shier's challenge remains. 



   IV. KANT CAN ACCOUNT FOR UGLINESS 
 
Finding a positive solution to the problem of ugliness in Kant's aesthetics has become a matter of rather urgent concern. Allison writes: ‘the inclusion of space for such negative judgements [pure judgements of ugliness] is criterial for the adequacy of an interpretation of Kant's theory of taste'.22 In this section I shall consider some strategies that have been adopted in efforts to include the pure judgement of the ugly in Kant's aesthetics and demonstrate why they fail to account for ugliness in a satisfactory manner. At the very end of the section I shall introduce some ideas from Gracyk, from which I build my alternative account in the next section. 

