

Whilst the psychological dimension of "taking to a place" can, at one extreme, be figured as a fully irrational desire ("I just saw the place and fell in love with it"), a more subtle determinant—which I have taken as the focus of this essay—is perception: the subject's ability—or not—to achieve the "critical distance" necessary for an act of affiliation with their (re)location. Such "distance" is clearly a precondition for the aestheticization of urban space and place—the conversion of the proverbial "grime" into the "urban sublime"—and, as will be seen in the discussion which follows, remains an elusive luxury for a large number of female subjects in contemporary Britain. 



   Spheres of Location 

 
The Street
There are two streets in Manchester that non-British readers of this journal may well have heard of: one is the "Coronation Street" of soap-opera fame; the other is "The Curry Mile." Whilst the latter is a "real-life" tourist destination for visitors to the city (as well as the title of the recent novel by Zahid Hussain (2006)), the former is a hyperreal fantasy of contemporary, working-class urban living which, in its early years (the 1960s), confined its action quite literally to this single street. Coronation Street was, in effect, a row of terraced houses, a pub ("The Rover's Return") and the corner shop. That such a restricted location can play host to story lines as epic and, indeed, tragic, as many of those featured in this forty-year-old soap is, of course, testament to the fact that the local, the domestic, and the "everyday" should never seen as simply parochial. 
With regards to the Manchester writers identified by our project, "the street" figures as a highly emotive site of home and displacement for both male and female authors and for both white and black communities. Indeed, the street—or rather the demolition of the street—underlines the point that urban migration cannot be thought about simply in terms of the groups and individuals who come to the city from elsewhere; migration—in its totality—must be seen to refer to the local as well as the transnational movement of peoples and its trauma understood in terms other than the stereotypical "culture shock." 
Although just one of several northern, industrial British cities that suffered the same fate, Manchester's post-war slum-clearances have achieved notoriety both in terms of their scale and the speed with which they were executed. It was in the 1950s—also the period when the immigration of Commonwealth citizens was reaching its peak—that the city's authorities first faced up to the extent of their housing crisis (Frangopulo 1977; Panayi 1999). Whilst the notorious "back-to-back" terraced housing had ceased to be built a century earlier (1844), it was now estimated that a third of the city's dwellings were unfit for human habitation and, in 1963, over 80,000 homes were scheduled for demolition. Once this process began, families were exported to alternative housing (other estates or the new, mid-rise tower blocks) in their tens of thousands (28,000 in a single "eviction" in the case of Hulme) and families, friends, and communities torn asunder (Haslam, xi). Needless to say, it was the white, working-class and newly established immigrant communities that were the frontline victims of this "redevelopment" and its scar is widely felt in the city's artistic output: from the songs of the legendary post-punk band, Joy Division, to the work of numerous writers. Moreover, as testament to the deeply traumatic nature of the demolitions (which many of these writers experienced as children), one trope, in particular, repeats itself: the street that was there one day and gone the next.3 
Livi Michael, the writer whose novel Their Angel Reach (1994) I shall be attending to in detail in the next section, has also written a short story dramatizing the impact of slum clearance entitled "Robinson Street"(1999). Framed by an opening and closing in the present in which the narrator tries to grasp the complete annihilation of her street ("Everything has changed: it is full of blank spaces where the houses used to be..." (1994: 23)), the story captures ghost-like female voices from the past whose narratives mix expressions of classed and gendered solidarity (these are women, and families, who looked out for one another in a big way) with uncompromising accounts of physical hardship, exploitation and classed and gendered abuse (the persistent threat of "the master"). This said, the speaker's narrative is still purposefully drenched in nostalgia for a world that is not only lost to time but to redevelopment: 
Everything has changed: it is full of blank spaces where the houses used to be, where grass grows now, interrupted by dirt, cobbles, tarmac, metal canisters and council flats, built sideways on to the street... It is possible to stand in one of the open spaces that used to be Robinson Street, Bin Street, Cartwright's Buildings, and look straight through to the main road and the old school beyond, where the path used to wind up to the old Hall... (23) 
The paradox we are dealing with here is thus one that discovers in the "blank space" of a-street-that-once-was a powerful sense of home and belonging entirely absent in the present. Whether this emotional reflex is anything more than nostalgia (that is, a fantasy of something that might have been but never really was) is, of course, difficult to say. However, the writings and interviews on the subject can leave us in little doubt that the bulldozing of Manchester's working-class districts (three times in thirty years in some instances) has left a substantive scar on the Mancunian psyche. With an irony that, on the surface at least, appears thoroughly postmodern, "home" for many "Manc" citizens is best understood as a memory: a name—Robinson Street—without a place attached. 
Julie Farrand's short story, "The Dragon on the Wall" (1994), meanwhile, is just one example of what the street appears to have become for Manchester's female residents in more recent times. Although very obviously narrated through the lens of a middle-class outsider (whose isolation is partly the consequence of a nervous breakdown), this is a text which draws a line between the home and the street in a way that seems indicative of a good deal of modern city living. From the safety of her kitchen window the narrator of Farrand's story observes the street beneath her thus: 
It's a wasteland out there. Full of bin liners that have been ripped apart by the dogs, and all the rubbish spilling out onto the cobbles. I had a go at cleaning it up once. I found a syringe lying on the ground underneath a pile of rusty cans and decaying food. I imagined somebody creeping along there late at night and shooting up in the darkness outside my back gate. It gave me the shivers, so I left it all to carry on mouldering. (1994: 9) 
In common with many other Manchester writers, Farrand and her narrator have an eye for the sordid details of urban life, encapsulated here by the syringe and the overflowing bin-liners. In contrast to the sublime exhilaration that writers, from Baudelaire onwards, have discovered in the gusty, grimy street corner (Wilson 1991: 54–5; Parsons 2000: 183), Farrand's narrator—whilst arguably working within an aesthetic register—finds only a visceral reminder of her own abjection. This is a waste-space that constitutes fear and loathing rather than freedom and, most disturbingly of all, it is just outside her back gate. Therefore, although, in the course of the story, the narrator's backyard becomes a mediating space for her re-connection with the world (it is here that she befriends a young boy with a toy dragon), we never lose the sense that the streets are potentially threatening and dangerous to any woman seeking to live amongst them on her own. Walking through the smart city centre is one thing (Farrand 1994: 16), laying down roots in one of the districts is another: 
I sit out on the steps by the backyard when it's nice, and get a bit of sun. It really catches it in the yard in the afternoons. I had some pansies in a tub by the gate, but the cats dug them up and pissed in the pots. There aren't many flowers and trees around here. Only the rubbish blooms in the spring, and you can catch a waft of it when the breeze is blowing. Some days I feel I've been fossilised in a layer of dirt. (9–10) 
The forces that bind this female subject to her urban environment are clearly ones of abjection—figured as a complex process of projection and introjection between the city and herself—rather than affiliation. 
The Districts
As one of Britain's largest conurbations, it is not always easy to know exactly where Manchester begins and ends. Moreover, historically and culturally, the remapping of the region has been highly contentious, with the invention of "Greater Manchester" in 1973 offending the citizens of many assimilated towns and villages. In this section, I consider two novels from the early 1990s set in the "inner" and "outer" districts of Greater Manchester: the first, Karline Smith's Moss Side Massive (2000 [1984)]; the second, Livi Michaels' Their Angel Reach (1994) (whose action is located in the imaginary "village" of Marley, perched somewhere between the outer limits of Greater Manchester and the Pennines). For a range of reasons (most of them socio-economic), the majority of the characters who people these two texts are very seriously "bound" to their districts without ever experiencing this as a positive affiliation. Before exploring why this should be the case, I begin—by way of contrast—with an extract from Michael Bracewell's short story "Blackley, Crumpsall, Harperhey" (1999)—which depicts these districts of North Manchester as testaments to the "urban sublime": 
The clouds of a late November storm have been blown to white remnants, high in a pale blue sky. Winter is here; the day is held in freezing stillness. Sunday lays sorrow on the heart; all the cobbled back alleys are empty. Tall grey bins have been left upturned at crazy angles, and some stacked waste timber, swollen with damp, is catching the pink light of the afternoon sun. A mongrel dog, its coat the colour of cigarette ash ... is trotting towards the main road—where shattered glass glints around the edges of a telephone box, and the low sweep of vivid turf makes a child's drawing of the new estate. This is north Manchester, cut from Collyhurst to Crumpsall by a tapering valley in miniature, which is obscured by scrub and brown saplings ... (114–15) 
And so it goes on... with an aestheticism so intense that sci-fi writer Jeff Noon was compelled to make it the basis for a cheeky dance-style "remix" (published by Ra Page in the same volume (126–135)). Yet for all its invitation to parody, I confess that I was blown-away by the sheer beauty of this story's descriptions of the urban landscape when I first read it. Here, at last, was a view of the city that rendered daily features of urban life—the houses, the streets, the bins, the detritus—sublime rather than abject and, by implication, expressed love for, and affiliation towards, the carefully labeled districts concerned.Thus, although the story that lies embedded within these descriptions is an especially brutal one (a teenage boy witnesses his mates set fire to an injured swan), the location is communicated with a sense of awe and wonder: qualities, I would suggest, that are lacking—and for good reason—in the female-authored texts to which I now turn. By whatever means, Bracewell—a successful novelist and journalist of "mainstream" national repute—has achieved enough critical distance on his home patch to cut it with the best of the literary flâneurs. 

