This is not all that's wrong with Brottman's account. For Freud ‘ideas', ‘instincts' or ‘impulses' are subject to repression, not ‘desire'. The word is a Lacanian one. What it designates does not quite have the role in the Oedipal economy that Brottman gives it. For Lacan it is as much a facilitator as an object of repression. By representing her as prohibited or rather by representing her at all, the castration threat permits the child to see the mother as separate from, or other than him, which allows him to desire her and also to see that she might desire someone else (which is one of the meanings of ‘the desire of the Other'). Prior to this, he cannot want what, being inseparable from him, is not beyond him to want (this is what being in the Imaginary involves). Castration allows a manifestation of desire that was formerly not representable and hence not repressible. Desire is thus the condition of the possibility of repression as much as its object. All sorts of implications follow from this, including the negativity and dialecticism of desire, which Brottman entirely misses. Instead, she conveys Lacan's explanation of Oedipality through a simplistic version of Freud's. One is compelled to ask why, if she can't properly distinguish between different accounts, she doesn't just use Freud's? The answer has to do with her reasons for using Lacan, which aren't quite the ones she gives. 
Brottman says she wants to employ Lacan's ideas to analyse a contemporary ‘low' cultural form: pornography. She rightly points out that consumption of porn has increased during the last 20 years. Rather questionably, she attributes this to ‘fear of AIDS' rather than, say, the expansion of the porn industry, which, like the increase in drugs trade, has been facilitated by global economic (and capitalistic) growth. In any case, Brottman claims that pornography is a part of ‘low' culture that requires re-evaluation. It has been unthinkingly condemned, notably by feminists. Lacanianism can redress this. The strengths and weaknesses of both critical positions can be taken into account such that ‘Lacanian theory may be transformed into a feminist pro-pornography critique'. 
There's nothing very new about this idea. Psychoanalysis has been used by feminists to question and develop feminism for longer than the two decades Brottman mentions. Neither is it new to provide revisionary feministic and psychoanalytic analyses of pornography, as Linda Williams and Pamela Church-Gibson have. Yet Brottman largely ignores this history and this work and concentrates her attention on 1970s and 1980s feminists like Gloria Steinem and Andrea Dworkin. She charges them with making a questionable distinction between bad pornography and good ‘feminist "erotica" '. Brottman demurs this and feminism's ‘fixed binary oppositions' in favour of ‘the idea of a more fluid movement between pornography and erotica'. 
This is not really psychoanalysis at all, but cod deconstruction, the default position for a lot of badly theorised cultural criticism. Not that deconstruction is irrelevant to Brottman's argument, which is so shoddily constructed as to be crying out for it. To begin with, her ascription of a distinction between ‘bad' porn and ‘good' erotica to feminism is quite haphazard. Surely this distinction is more accurately describable as a liberal than a feminist one, or at least as a liberal feminist one (in which case Steinem and Dworkin are referred to inappropriately). More importantly, Brottman employs a version of this distinction herself when she lionises the ‘classic', ‘character-driven' porn films of the 1970s while dismissing the anonymity and repetitiveness of contemporary porn, which she says ‘is about as sexually arousing, for most people, as looking at slabs of meat in a slaughterhouse'. Her own observation about the current popularity of porn, of course, disproves this and suggests that she makes aesthetic distinctions about it of exactly the sort that her book is meant to question. An opportunity is missed here. There really is an interesting question, even an interesting Lacanian question, to be asked about why much contemporary pornography, with its lack of narrative and character development, relatively low production values and apparent absence of aesthetic sensibility is so popular. Perhaps, like reality TV, it holds one in the grip of a jouissance, an apprehension of the real that is properly irreducible to the sort of narratological and other formal concerns bought so inappropriately to it by Brottman. However, Brottman's Lacanianism, like her taste in porn, sits securely in the 1970s and 1980s, preoccupied with questions of ‘narrative' and ‘gender' structure, which, though not unimportant, are well-worn enough to need fresh perspective if they are to yield anything new. Otherwise, Lacan's place in her argument looks bogus. He seems stuck in alongside ‘post-feminism', ‘the attack on the coherent self' and a single reference to Derrida in order to provide the theoretical box ticking that much US cultural criticism seems to require. 
Elsewhere, more attention is paid to the detail of Lacan's theory. The Journal for Lacanian Studies (JLS) remains an important vehicle for the transmission of his key ideas and a useful register of the degree of attention currently afforded each of them by Lacanians. In the last few years the latter seem to have been concentrating a great deal more on Lacan's later work, particularly on the notions mentioned above in relation to pornography: jouissance and the real. Shirley Sharon-Zisser's ‘Shakespeare's A Lover's Complaint (JLS 3:iii[2005] 271–94) and the letter of Feminine Jouissance in the Envelope of Sense' obviously has the former of these notions in its title, and places it up front in other respects too. Sharon-Zisser's contention is that, despite having originally been printed alongside his sonnets, Shakespeare's narrative poem A Lover's Complaint has nevertheless been ignored or denigrated by critics. She attributes this to a discomfort on their part at the feminine jouissance at play in the text. This effects a ‘cultural foreclosure' that has left the poem unanalysed and unappreciated. As a piece of Lacanian academic literary criticism, Sharon-Zisser's paper covers the ground it should. She has clearly done enough research on and thought creatively enough about both Shakespeare and Lacan to make a convincing case about overlap between their concerns. Yet her mode of conveying this restricts her address to two particular types of addressees—academics and psychoanalysts and Lacanian ones at that. Unlike, say, Leader, she feels no need to communicate Lacan's ideas to anyone who does not already understand a good deal about them or is daunted by their presentation in a dense and relatively jargon-heavy manner. As is often the case with Lacanians, Sharon-Zisser's style is vaguely reminiscent of Lacan's own. It is less brilliant but no less subject to lapses of logic and rigour. Contradictions that are not quite justifiable by an invocation of the inconsistency of unconscious thought (which Lacan sometimes used to justify his own intellectual obfuscation) peep through the textual surface. Sharon-Zisser asks whether ‘the feminine, omphalic real-ness intricated within the archaic phallus in Lacan's thinking in Seminar V (could) be part of what necessitates the phallus's veiling in the psychic world of the subject of the unconscious, the subject increasingly conquered by the signifier?' While we're straining to work out exactly what the question means we might easily lose sight of another one about the question itself: why should a veiling of the phallus in the unconscious ever become necessary when the unconscious is a sort of veiling by definition? 
Dominique Hecq's ‘The Other Side of Psychoanalysis: Of the (Im)possible' (JLS 3:iii[2005] 247–57) also contains anomalies but is mostly clearer and keener to explain itself than Sharon-Zisser's. It concentrates on Lacan's seminar from 1969–70: L'Envers de la Psychanalyse (The Other Side of Psychoanalysis), particularly on the theme of impossibility that instructs the formulation of psychoanalysis contained in it. Since psychoanalysis, for Lacan, explains other sorts of practices like university work and hysteria, this impossibility pervades them too. Such practices are implicated in the logic and structures of the ‘four discourses', which are ways of thinking and speaking about human relations that place us in them in particular ways. The first and arguably most important of these, which Hecq expends most time and energy explaining, is ‘the discourse of the master'. This amounts to a re-articulation of Hegel's dialectic of Master and Slave (Lacan's work is rife with re-workings of others' ideas, which doesn't necessarily devalue it but does put some Lacanians' claims for his genius into question). Before referring to Hegel, though, Hecq, following Lacan, helpfully shows that psychoanalysis (as Freud first pointed out) is an ‘impossible' practice. She partly does this by invoking what Lacan calls ‘the impotence of truth' which I would explain as follows. The impotence concerned has to do with the fact that psychoanalysis seeks a sort of truth (contrary to common uninformed opinion of him, Lacan always maintained this), but a limited one. Psychoanalytic truth is borne out of phantasy, which it the meaningful interpretation of. In Lacanian terms, the fact that such interpretation is meaningful puts it in the Symbolic, that linguistic and discursive dimension of existence in which subjective experience can be symbolised, articulated and communicated inter-subjectively. Prior to being elaborated and/or interpreted in the Symbolic what is there can't be articulated and therefore understood. It is of the order of the phantasmatic image rather than that of the communicable symbol and is accordingly thought of by Lacan as Imaginary. Now the transformation of Imaginary into Symbolic psychical material, which is the aim of psychoanalysis, is significant but doesn't place it securely in reality. I may know how I feel and even be able to say it yet this does not necessarily help me ‘adapt' to reality or make me more ‘realistic' (to think it does would be to partake of the delusion that Lacan attributed to the ‘ego psychology' derived from Anna Freud's work and developed by his own analyst, Loewenstein). The psyche can understand itself and bear pain through articulation of it but it is not and cannot be the judge or exemplar of what is real (this is even true of the psychoanalyst's psyche, which should thus not serve as exemplary for the patient's). From this point of view, as Lacan put it, ‘The impossible is the real' and the third term of Lacan's key terminological triad The Real, becomes visible and explicable (although not, of course, completely comprehensible). Psychoanalysis is impossible in so far as it promises anything that can override the Real, which is, properly speaking, beyond the psyche's control. As Hecq shows, the ‘four discourses' are, among other things, attempts to realise this impossible aim. The ‘discourse of the master' does this most obviously. In suppressing the slave (or his analogue, say the worker), the master (or say the boss) unrealistically, thinks he can get the slave to recognise him as such. He doesn't understand that to do so deprives the slave of the humanity necessary for him to recognise someone else as something significant. It is precisely this recognition from the slave that the master needs to free him from the impossible role he plays as master, to which he is enslaved. Mastery thus involves a sort of stupidity that leaves the subject powerless in the very enactment of his greatest phantasy of power. Hecq employs the dialectical approach that this sort of insight involves to explore both psychoanalytic aspects of power and structures of power in psychoanalysis. 
Before passing on from JLS, I would like to briefly mention a review article contained in it by Angela Hunter (JLS 3:iii[2005] 304–12). This is an assessment of Reading Seminar XX: Lacan's Major Work on Love, Knowledge and Feminine Sexuality edited by Suzanne Barnard and Bruce Fink (2002). The book reviewed is a good one and contains high quality essays on Encore (the seminar concerned) by the likes of Fink, Colette Soler, and Renata Salecl. Hunter's accounts of the essays concerned are unfailingly clear, accurate and sensitive to the genuine contributions they make to understanding of a difficult but fascinating seminar. She should be commended for her excellent work of summary and exposition. 

