


   Strauss, Hofmannsthal, and Dance 

 
Hofmannsthal had long admired the profound physicality of dance; indeed, his so-called Sprachkrise had seen him spurning the lyric poetry of his youth in favor of a form of theater characterized by an admixture of drama, gesture, ritual, myth, scenery, and music, thereby echoing Baroque spectacle rather than Wagnerian, music-heavy splendor. Though careful to avoid a Bayreuth-styled aesthetic, Hofmannsthal clearly came to be informed by the Wagner-inspired collective creations of the Ballets Russes, for whom ballet acted as a regenerative medium in both an artistic and a spiritual sense. Moreover, the protean nature of dancer-choreographer Vaslav Nijinsky (with whom Hofmannsthal, Harry Graf Kessler, and Strauss, among others, would later collaborate on the Josephslegende) was an attribute that Hofmannsthal particularly admired. 
Thus, for Hofmannsthal, nonverbal modes of expression were of paramount importance to his theatrical vision, especially in his opera libretti for Strauss. From Elektra's tragic entreaty "Be silent and dance!" to the presentation of the rose in Der Rosenkavalier to the symbolic, prenuptial breaking of the glass in Arabella (1930), he never failed to elicit the most suitably illustrative, yet purely instrumental music from his willing collaborator. 
While he may have shared some of Hofmannsthal's thoughts on dance, Strauss's own interest in ballet considerably predated the 1920s and was to remain a focus for the composer into the 1940s. Though not usually considered a ballet composer—"much less a balletomane," as Wayne Heisler Jr. points out—Strauss instigated or pursued several ballet projects, wrote or had a hand in writing dance scenarios during deliberation with choreographers before and during the compositional process, and set up performances of dance featuring his own music and that of others. As well as a whole host of minor and unfinished projects, Strauss's ballet collaborations included, aside from Josephslegende, the Vienna Ballet's 1923 Ballettsoirée, choreographed by Heinrich Kröller; Schlagobers (Whipped Cream, 1924), with choreography once again by Kröller for the Vienna Ballet; and Verklungene Feste: Tanzvisionen aus Zwei Jahrhunderten (Faded Celebrations: Dance Visions from Two Centuries, Munich 1941), in collaboration with the conductor Clemens Krauss and the choreographer-dancers, Pino and Pia Mlakar.
The first scenario presented to Strauss by Hofmannsthal was actually for a ballet (Der Triumph der Zeit [The Triumph of Time], ca. 1900) and not an opera. Moreover, Strauss had already attempted the (unsuccessful) completion of several ballet projects, beginning in 1895, to scenarios from figures such as Otto Julius Bierbaum, Frank Wedekind, and Richard Dehmel. However, the most important of these projects (in addition to being that which came nearest to fruition) was Die Insel Kythere (The Island of Cythera), a self-penned, three-act ballet-pantomime based on Antoine Watteau's Embarquement pour Cythère (1719) with a general nod also toward the paintings of Boucher and Fragonard. As he himself informed the poet, Strauss's principal reason for rejecting Hofmannsthal's initial overture was that he was already working on Kythere. 
According to Willi Schuh, the unfinished Kythere, which highlights Strauss's early interest in pre-Romantic classicism (here, the rococo française) as much as his determination to escape Wagner's legacy, offers tantalizing glimpses of an idiosyncratic neoclassical style, a fact underlined by the later use of its sketch material in parts of Feuersnot and, in particular, Der Rosenkavalier, Der Bürger als Edelmann, the opera in Ariadne auf Naxos, as well as in Josephslegende and Schlagobers. In terms of Strauss's career trajectory, Kythere crucially points to an early creative encounter combining antiquity, dystopia, and sardonicism before his collaboration with Hofmannsthal, which suggests that the composer's (explicitly) "neoclassical," irony-laden works (such as Rosenkavalier, Ariadne, and Der Bürger als Edelmann) were not purely the result of their partnership but, rather, the logical outcome of earlier tendencies. 
However, it would be disingenuous to claim that Strauss's artistic interest in myth or his penchant for parody were dependent on Hofmannsthal; indeed, reference to his youthful setting of the third stasimon (verses 1384–97) of Sophocles's Elektra (ca. 1881), his Burleske (1886) for piano and orchestra—in which he caricatures Brahms and Wagner and thus the claims of both musical romantic classicism and the New German School—and other, more recognizably parodistic works such as Also sprach Zarathustra, Till Eulenspiegel, and his second opera, Feuersnot (1901), should be enough to dispel such notions. But the very compatibility of myth and parody should not be overlooked in the process, nor the fact that Strauss's Weltanschauung first became apparent in a nascent dance piece. That he chose Watteau as his focus was no accident either, if incongruous, given the latter's considerable vogue in fin-de-siècle France and its coexistence with the first stirrings of neoclassicism, typified in its early stages by a distinctly anti-Romantic (and decidedly anti-German) tone. 
Strauss apparently correlated all three: dance, nostalgia, and an element of subversion. Indeed, the composer's oft-quoted statement to Hofmannsthal from 1916 ("After all, I'm the only composer nowadays with some real humour and a sense of fun and a marked gift for parody. Indeed, I feel downright called upon to become the Offenbach of the 20th Century... . Long live the political-satirical-parodistic operetta!") bespeaks less of an approach predicated on the production of lowbrow humor and more of one that, to use Wayne Heisler's words, epitomized "a mordant critique pointed beyond the proscenium arch." That Strauss carried out such a critique partly through ballet while simultaneously critiquing the aesthetic claims of that genre is the connecting thread between his early ballet collaborations. Whether or not he pursued such an approach in the reworked Ruinen von Athen is a question that probes the development of his aesthetic and which remains, at least in terms of this introductory survey, a moot point. 
Given his five-year tenure as codirector of the Vienna Staatsoper, with a fine ballet corps, it is, on the surface, not surprising that a wily and resourceful composer such as Strauss would have renewed his interest in music for dance in the early 1920s. This preoccupation with dance, and ballet, in particular was one of the reasons for the virtual hiatus in Strauss's personal and working relationship with Hofmannsthal during the period 1918–23 (from the song cycle Krämerspiegel to his semi-autobiographical opera Intermezzo). But the source of that impetus was in reality much more visceral. Not unlike Hofmannsthal, Strauss drew direct inspiration from his "unforgettable impressions" of Diaghilev's Ballets Russes, gleaned during the troubled first run of performances of Josephslegende in 1914. 
The composer's re-engagement with dance led him to collaborate with others, most notably Heinrich Kröller, on a number of dance productions for the Vienna Ballet. The Strauss-Kröller era thus saw the Austrian premiere of Josephslegende (1922); Karneval (1922, with a scenario by Hofmannsthal and music by Schumann arranged for orchestra by Strauss); Ballettsoirée (1923, with music by François Couperin, Ravel, Rameau, and Johann Strauss II), Schlagobers (1924); Ruinen von Athen (1924); and a revised version of Gluck's Don Juan (1924), comprising the composer's 1761 score with material taken from his operas Alceste and Armide, also arranged by Strauss.
With one exception, namely Schlagobers, Strauss here acted not as a composer per se, but as an arranger. As shall be seen vis-à-vis Ruinen, Strauss acted as an interlocutor between the various figures involved in its realization, much in the manner of Diaghilev. Moreover, his collaboration with Kröller in the revamping of Gluck's Don Juan—departing from the original by beginning with a choreographed prelude, altering the second scene so as to include self-conscious dance episodes (à la early eighteenth-century opéra-ballet), and by supplying a lengthy ballet intermezzo-in the same year as the similarly revised Ruinen von Athen enriches our understanding of the nature of the latter's performance score. 
While practical and artistic reasons may account for the period sans Hofmannsthal, by 1918 Strauss had become disenchanted with large-scale post-Romanticism as epitomized by Die Frau ohne Schatten (1917). With its sprawling allegory, heavy symbolism, and often agitated counterpoint, the work represents, on the one hand, the apogee of post-Romanticism and, on the other, the irrelevance of that legacy for proponents of the anti-Romantic attitude that soon prevailed in some areas of postwar German art and society. In search of a new "road,"30 Strauss found a particularly fertile option in ballet. 



   The Genesis of Ruinen von Athen 

 
Although the first concrete mention of an arrangement of Beethoven's music for the Staatsoper in the Strauss-Hofmannsthal correspondence initially concerned Salvatore Viganò's ballet Die Geschöpfe des Prometheus (1801) alonea task to which Hofmannsthal replied he would apply himself "with all seriousness"the idea had been mooted beforehand. Indeed, this is underlined in an unpublished letter from Strauss to Alfred Roller dated 17 July of that year, in which Strauss relayed that he had "asked Hofmannsthal whether or not he would like to turn Beethoven's Die Geschöpfe des Prometheus (by using Die Ruinen von Athen) ... into a pretty new script." Although Die Ruinen von Athen initially delivered a mere "action-framework" for Die Geschöpfe des Prometheus (as one commentator has put it), through Hofmannthal's influence it gradually overtook the latter in importance. In a letter to Strauss, Hofmannsthal wrote that a new, "stand-alone" version of Ruinen would be "a difficult and at the same time a most attractive task: I imagine a kind of ballet pantomime but with choruses, perhaps even with arias. It will have to be something which does not fly in the face of the original intention." 
A "ballet pantomime" with "choruses" and "arias," while recalling French Baroque opéra-ballet, also clearly negated the essentially non-verbal, communicative element of Hofmannsthal's idealized world of pure gesture; but his obvious preference for arrangement over possible re-composition reflected overriding concerns about retaining the integrity of the original Beethoven work. Strauss's concerns, however, centered on its brevity; he considered it too short to warrant a staged performance on its own. 
Hofmannsthal's letter of 15 April 1922 continued thus: "I have a date to meet Alwin, perhaps together we can bring it off." He referred here to Karl Alwin, who was to play a pivotal role in the selection and integration of separate numbers from Prometheus and Ruinen in Hofmannsthal's eventual amalgam. As Alwin later recalled: 
[Strauss] often discussed the plan with ballet master Kröller and I; he and Kröller wanted to bring in Beethoven's early ballet The Creatures of Prometheus as an interlude in the Ruins, as the text of the Ruins of Athens is too short, and the ballet offers too few possibilities. Strauss always spoke so enthusiastically of the E-flat major March [from Die Ruinen von Athen], that it signified the music's summit. It resulted in a meeting with Hoffmannsthal (sic) and [Alfred] Roller, where Strauss stressed over and over again that we ought to save this Beethoven work for the stage. 
Strauss's determination paid off, and Table 1 outlines the eventual make-up of the reworked Ruinen von Athen vis-á-vis its parent works. 



 
While Kröller and Strauss merely articulated what the composer had suggested to Hofmannsthal a year previously, it suggests that the ballet master had noticed the distinct similarities of both source scenarios in terms of content independent of Strauss. Moreover, Kröller was already intimate with Beethoven's Prometheus, having choreographed music from it as Bacchusfest in Frankfurt and Munich (a production that was revived in Vienna in 1927). August von Kotzebue had written the epilogue Die Ruinen von Athen for the opening of a new theater in Pest in 1812, detailing how the goddess Minerva (Athene) returns to Athens after a thousand years to find that its cultural heritage has perished under the Turks. Through Mercury, she discovers in Pest the only place where culture and wisdom still flourish. In Beethoven's Prometheus, the protagonist "rescues the human race of his time from ignorance, refines it through knowledge, and raises it to a state of civilization," as described in a contemporary newspaper report after the work's premiere in 1801. 

