As Bradstreet situates herself between nations, praises Queen Elizabeth, and redefines the trope of Sidney as the model of Englishness, she consequently imagines a space for the female poet to assert herself into a collective identity. 
(d) Articles
In ‘Spiritual Autobiography and Radical Sectarian Women's Discourse: Anna Trapnel and the Bad Girls of the English Revolution' (JMEMS 34[2004] 405–38), Maria Magro explores how sectarian ‘feminized discourses', contradictions, and notions of the self allowed women to not only participate in radical oppositional politics, but also develop various authorial voices. Focusing on Anna Trapnel, Magro argues that this feminized form contributed to both a ‘counter-public' and the formation of the early novel. From a less secular perspective, Ellen A. Macek discusses Catholic women's relationships with their ‘spiritual fathers' in ‘"Ghostly Fathers" and their "Virtuous Daughters": The Role of Spiritual Direction in the Lives of Three Early Modern English Women' (CathHR 90[2004] 213–35). Examining the biographies of Margaret Clitherow and Dorothy Lawson, and the writings of Mary Ward, Macek discusses how these women's personal convictions often conflicted with political and religious authority and subverted gender expectations. 
Paul Trolander and Zeynep Tenger provide much insight into the critical practices and dynamics of manuscript culture in ‘Katherine Philips and Coterie Critical Practices' (ECS 37[2004] 367–87). Examining Philips's correspondence, Trolander and Zeynep argue that, contrary to critical assumptions, women were involved in forming critical assessments since manuscript circles not only had established critical practices, but such critical discourse also served complex social, literary, and political functions. In ‘Do Manuscript Studies Have a Future in Early Modern Women Studies?' (ShakS 32[2004] 63–5), Margaret J.M. Ezell briefly traces the developments in manuscript studies in relation to women's texts, arguing that the future of manuscript studies will challenge scholarship by complicating notions of how literature and authorship are defined and classified. 
In ‘"Injoying of true joye the most, and best": Desire and the Sonnet Sequences of Lady Mary Wroth and Adrienne Rich' (ESC 30[2004] 49–66), Madeline Bassnett compares Adrienne Rich's Twenty-One Love Poems to Wroth's Pamphilia and Amphilanthus. Though Rich's sonnet sequence reflects the tensions felt by a twentieth-century century lesbian and Wroth portrays the anxieties derived from an early modern woman publishing about heterosexual love, both authors rework the Petrarchan form to express forbidden desire. 
(e) Margaret Cavendish
Though Margaret Cavendish was discussed alongside other authors in numerous books this year, scholars will also be pleased to see many interesting texts that focus entirely on her. This year saw James Fitzmaurice's edition of Sociable Letters, a collection of writings in letter format that provides remarkably detailed, varied, and often wry commentary on a wide range of aspects of seventeenth-century culture. At times the text reads like letters composed by actual early modern women, yet some letters are much more like essays in the tradition of Bacon and Montaigne. Fitzmaurice argues that ‘an on-going series of observations about life as it was lived in the seventeenth century gives the volume its power'. Characteristic of Cavendish, the volume discusses a variety of topics such as marriage, medicine, science, war, peace and English and classical literature. Though some of the characters are fictional, others are actual people hidden behind initials and anagrams, providing the volume with some added ‘spice'. The edition also provides an extremely useful appendix of letters to situate the volume in context of seventeenth-century culture. Interestingly, appendix A, ‘The Context of Family', includes Cavendish's love letters to William Cavendish, along with his poems in reply. It also contains letters written by Elizabeth Cavendish Egerton, Cavendish's stepdaughter, and Christiana Cavendish, Cavendish's cousin by marriage. In order to further contextualize women's letter-writing, appendix B includes love letters by Dorothy Osborne and Aphra Behn. Appendix C provides samples from Angel Day's The English Secretary, since Cavendish may have been influenced by Day's popular collection of correspondence, particularly because like Cavendish, some of the letters are outlandishly comic. Since some of Cavendish's letters are also essentially essays, appendix C further includes Francis Bacon's ‘Of Marriage and the Single Life'. Overall this edition, which retains original spelling and punctuation, and also includes a useful introduction, chronology, and bibliography, provides a highly recommended resource for early modern scholarship. 
Scholars will be pleased to see the excellent collection of essays from the Fifth Biennial International Margaret Cavendish Conference held in 2003, published as a special issue of EMLS, and edited by Lisa Hopkins, Emma Rees, and Gweno Williams. The conference was entitled ‘Margaret Cavendish and her Contexts', and the essays contextualize her writings from diverse perspectives. The effects of Continental, Catholic Europe on Cavendish while she was in exile from Interregnum England are explored by Sara H. Mendelson in ‘Concocting the World's Olio: Margaret Cavendish and Continental Influence' (EMLS 14[2004] 1.1–34). Mendelson argues that, in stark contrast to left-wing English Protestant understandings of art, Cavendish was influenced by the Catholic preference for ‘conspicuous consumption' which was associated with a religious aesthetic of baroque excess. Catholicism is also discussed by Erna Kelly in ‘Playing with Religion: Convents, Cloisters, Martyrdom, and Vows' (EMLS 14[2004] 4.1–24). Kelly argues that both The Convent of Pleasure and The Religious not only comment upon marriage and government, but also reveal that, although Cavendish was sceptical of religion, she had much knowledge of Catholicism and was possibly attracted to it, since her texts emphasize convents, cloisters, martyrdom, and vows. 
The influence of Cavendish's husband on her writings is examined in two articles in the collection. In ‘Happy Families and Learned Ladies: Margaret Cavendish, William Cavendish, and their Onstage Academy Debate' (EMLS 14[2004] 3.1–14), Alexandra Bennett argues that Cavendish's The Female Academy actively replies, engages with, and even satirizes the representations of organized female education in her husband's play The Varietie. This public disagreement with his position demonstrates that she was determined to present herself as his equal rather than his acquiescent follower. The textual interactions between Cavendish and her husband are also explored by James Fitzmaurice in ‘The Intellectual and Literary Courtship of Margaret Cavendish' (EMLS 14[2004] 7.1–16). Examining their love letters, Fitzmaurice discusses how the two authors interacted as writers and thinkers, demonstrating that a literary and intellectual dialogue between equals began during their courtship. This correspondence explored their mutual interest in metaphysical poetry and the connections between painting and poetry, ideas which are also developed in Cavendish's later writings. 
The influence of Ford and of Shakespeare on Cavendish is explored in three articles in the collection. In ‘Crime and Context in The Unnatural Tragedy' (EMLS 14[2004] 6.1–12), Lisa Hopkins argues that The Unnatural Tragedy is influenced by Ford's 'tis Pity She's a Whore and The Fair Maid of Bristow. However, unlike Ford, Cavendish's play is also influenced by her family history demonstrating that the construction of meaning is not an isolated phenomenon, but a product of social circumstances of the author. The similarities between 'tis Pity She's a Whore and The Unnatural Tragedy are also explored in Marguérite Corporaal's ‘An Empowering Wit and an "Unnatural" Tragedy: Margaret Cavendish's Representation of the Tragic Female Voice' (EMLS 14[2004] 12.1–26). Corporaal argues that Cavendish reworks Ford's plot and challenges previous patriarchal representations of female voice and silence in tragedy. Her tragedy is ‘unnatural' because it undermines tragic generic conventions that marginalize and silence women. The influence of Shakespeare's fools on Cavendish's dramatic writings is examined in Lesley Peterson's ‘"Defects Redressed": Margaret Cavendish Aspires to Motley' (EMLS 14[2004] 8.1–30). Peterson argues that Shakespeare's fools are kindred spirits with his cross-dressing women, who dress, speak, and negotiate their liminal positions with those in power in similar ways. Cavendish employs comparable strategies to those of her ‘foolish' female characters, using physical and rhetorical motley, cross-dressing, and ‘unreasonable' speech to simultaneously uphold and challenge patriarchy. 
Alison Findlay examines Cavendish's drama in ‘"I hate such an old-fashioned House": Margaret Cavendish and the Search for Home' (EMLS 14[2004] 11.1–14). Examining Cavendish's plays in the context of her lost childhood home, and the changing aristocratic culture in relation to traditional country estates and new town houses, Findlay argues that Cavendish's homes are also an exploration of changing ideas regarding a woman's place. In the significant article, ‘Fighting the Kingdom of Faction in Bell in Campo' (EMLS 14[2004] 5.1–25), Oddvar Holmesland argues that, although Bell in Campo emphasizes female separatist self-realization, the text also paradoxically explores unifying, mutual companionship. Reflecting her natural philosophy and ideas from the classics, the text demonstrates Cavendish's dialectical quest for mediation between ideological positions and gender roles. Balance, reciprocity and combinations, particularly between genders, induce a wholeness of knowledge and reflect a more natural and unified state. 
Cavendish's scientific theories are explored in four articles in the collection. In ‘The City of Chance, or, Margaret Cavendish's Theory of Radical Symmetry' (EMLS 14[2004] 9.1–29), B.R. Siegfried innovatively discusses how Cavendish's approach to the classical ideal of the city in relation to nature preserves singularity, human variability, and chance, allowing ‘radical particularity' and liberty in knowledge. Cavendish's approach is comparable to the contemporary scientific concept of symmetry and offers a radical alternative to the deterministic laws that were developing in seventeenth-century science. In ‘"My Spirits long to wander in the Air ...": Spirits and Souls in Margaret Cavendish's Fiction between Early Modern Philosophy and Cyber Theory' (EMLS 14[2004] 10.1–27), Miriam Wallraven analyses spirits and souls in Cavendish's fiction and poetry in relation to early modern science and twentieth-century theories of virtual reality and cyborgs, particularly Donna Haraway's Cyborg Manifesto. Like cyborgs, Cavendish's concept of spirit/body hybrids creates an enhanced and utopian type of humanity by which to explore post-gendered virtual realities related to transformations in spatial and temporal perception. In ‘Gender Subversion in the Science of Cavendish' (EMLS 14[2004] 13.1–34), Lisa Walters explores how Cavendish's theory of nature appropriates aspects of various scientific traditions, yet simultaneously disrupts and redefines the patriarchal assumptions underlying their epistemologies. Cavendish's science not only subverts the sex binaries and categories implicit within the construction of knowledge, but her scientific theories of matter, atoms and multiple worlds further challenge hierarchy of all kinds. The significance of Cavendish's correspondence with the eminent Constantijn Huygens are examined in Nadine Akkerman and Marguérite Corporaal's ‘Mad Science Beyond Flattery: The Correspondence of Margaret Cavendish and Constantijn Huygens' (EMLS 14[2004] 2.1–21). Interestingly, the letters demonstrate that Cavendish participated in and influenced the scientific debates of her time, and Akkerman and Corporaal further explore the significance of her books being incorporated into Huygens's library and the university library of Leydon. An interesting appendix is attached which includes several of the letters. 
Elizabeth Spiller traces the development of Cavendish's attitude towards reading in texts such as Philosophical Letters, Observations and Blazing World in chapter 4 of her Science, Reading, and Renaissance Literature: The Art of Making Knowledge, 1580–1670. Though scholars may dispute Spiller's claim that Cavendish did not have a reading audience, Spiller nonetheless discerningly situates Cavendish's text in context of Hobbes, Descartes, and Hooke, arguing that Cavendish creates powerful readers who are necessary to the production of knowledge, challenging the New Science and its notion of passive, silent readers. 
Jonathan Goldberg provides a fascinating analysis of Blazing World in ‘Margaret Cavendish, Scribe' (GLQ 10[2004] 433–52). Exploring Cavendish's professed bad handwriting, Goldberg argues that misreadings, disjunctions, unintelligibility and self-referentiality obstruct comprehension between self and other which is both different and the same, mirroring the scribal relation between the Empress and Cavendish in Blazing World. These ideas further parallel Cavendish's philosophy of nature, which understands the subject within a self-replicating, social totality, opening possibilities of female–female eroticism in a natural sociality. In ‘Material Cavendish: Paper, Performance, "Sociable Virginity"' (MLQ 65[2004] 49–68), Jeffrey Masten draws attention to the notes pasted on to the edges of Cavendish's 1668 plays. Masten argues that such notes reveal a performance that discloses complex tensions between singular female authorship and collaborative textual production based on companionate marriage, a conflict that reflects and builds upon similar complexities in her queer dramatic plots and communities. 

