3  Potential carbon savings from bioenergy 
Overview 
29. We begin by examining the potential of bioenergy—biomass, biofuels and biogas—to contribute to the UK's effort to reduce its climate change impact. Quantifying the carbon saving potential of any source of bioenergy is a complex process and the end result is influenced by a range of factors which are in themselves difficult to evaluate as emissions are incurred over the life cycle of energy generation and use. We call for further work to allow policy makers to take informed decisions on bioenergy, based on accurate calculations of the environmental benefits of the various sources of bioenergy. 
30. During our inquiry we were made aware of a number of important developments in bioenergy technology, principally 'second generation' biofuels for road transport and synthetic kerosene for aviation. We call on the Government to increase its investment and intensify its research into new production processes and hitherto neglected areas, particularly the use of biomass for heat, and the use of different parts of the same energy crop for different purposes. We recognise, however, that 'first generation' biofuels from traditional crops are currently the only biofuels that are available on a commercial scale. 
Biomass for heat and electricity 
31. Research by the Energy Saving Trust has found that "biomass heating could reduce household carbon emissions by 3% or around 720,000 tonnes".[39] WWF has also emphasised the advantages of using biomass, in particular that it can be stored and then used when needed.[40] 
32. Evidence from Sheffield Hallam University and the Low Carbon Vehicle Partnership shows that the greatest percentage greenhouse gas savings can be gained through the gasification of biomass to produce electricity, and the burning of woodchip to generate heat, as set out in Table 1. This is supported by the Biosciences Federation and the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 1: Potential greenhouse gas savings from a range of bioenergy technologies compared with their conventional fossil fuel equivalents
Electricity generation
Data source: Defra[41]from: 'Carbon and energy balances for a range of biofuels options', Sheffield Hallam University 2003; and 'WTW evaluation for production of ethanol from wheat', Low Carbon Vehicle Partnership, 2004 
33. There are several barriers to increasing the uptake of biomass for producing heat and electricity, despite its apparent superiority over biofuels in terms of potential carbon savings. These barriers are described by the Renewable Energy Association (REA): 
the significance of biomass in contributing to our carbon abatement targets, our climate change targets and also, increasingly, to the question of fuel security has simply failed to be recognised and given the significance that it probably deserves … there is an inflexibility when it comes to biomass in that it does not recognise some of the other benefits … in being able to present base load capacity at the end of transmission lines. It helps reinforce the system and so on. Those benefits are not valued in it.[42] 
34. In its submission to our inquiry Powys County Council focuses on the untapped potential of biomass for heat, citing "a general lack of awareness of the opportunities and a seeming fixation on electricity. Even where woodfuel, or other biomass for combustion crops, have entered the thinking of government it has usually been in the context of generating electricity."[43] 
35. Current Government policy focuses on renewable electricity generation at the expense of the prospects for the development of renewable heat. We note that in its response to the Biomass Task Force Report the Government has undertaken to increase the use of biomass heat and electricity. We recommend that the Government build on this commitment by setting out clear and quantifiable targets for biomass heat in its forthcoming Biomass Strategy. We further recommend that the Strategy redress the balance between biofuels, renewable electricity and renewable heat, to reflect the greater potential carbon savings offered by biomass heat. 
36. Reflecting on the conclusions of the Biomass Task Force, and acknowledging that the Government has already published its response to the Task Force report, we are disappointed that the Government has failed to take the opportunity offered by the Energy Review properly to address the issue of biomass heat, and has only committed to producing the Biomass Strategy "over the coming year". Given the urgent need for concrete measures to support biomass heat, we should not have to wait until 2007 for the Biomass Strategy, and recommend that the Government make clear in its response exactly when it anticipates publishing this strategy, and further suggest that it does so at the earliest possible opportunity. 
Marine biomass 
37. The Biosciences Federation and Royal Society of Chemistry are enthusiastic proponents of the potential benefits of marine biomass—seaweed—as a source of bioenergy. They highlight research by the Scottish Association for Marine Science which demonstrates that seaweed—which is easily cultivated and can increase in mass by up to 10% per day—sequesters carbon. The research also suggests that producing marine biomass could have a beneficial impact on biodiversity by removing nitrogen from seawater, thus mitigating the effects of sewage effluent or nitrogenous waste from fish farms, and could be coupled with offshore wind farms around the coast of Great Britain.[44] 
38. Seaweed is already farmed for food in large quantities in China, Japan and the Philippines. Japanese research proposals put forward in 2005 suggested that vast nets of fast-growing seaweed could also be a valuable source of bioenergy. The seaweed would also absorb CO2 while it was growing. However, the Japanese research proposal suggested that the equivalent of £2.8 billion would be needed to implement the project at full scale.[45] 
39. Earlier research into the potential of seaweed as a source of renewable energy was conducted in the US in the 1970s as part of its response to an energy crisis. Although the amount of biogas produced by mass of kelp was found to be greater than many other sources of biomass, the research project fell foul of passing ships, winter storms and grazing fish. Later research confirmed the potential of marine biomass as a source of energy, but again the project was deemed to have been unsuccessful, owing to a lack of communication between engineers and biological scientists. Funding for the project—some $20 million—was terminated in 1986.[46] Early research into the commercial viability of marine biomass as a source of energy, conducted in the US in the 1970s, was also fraught with difficulty and was ultimately deemed to have been unsuccessful. 
40. Dr Kelly, of the Scottish Association for Marine Science, notes that on the global scale seaweed mariculture is a thriving industry, with 11.6 million tonnes produced in 2002—equivalent to a value of US$6.2 billion. Whilst the vast majority of this is for food, Dr Kelly points out that "the technology for the large scale culture, harvest and processing of seaweeds is well advanced". Trials have found seaweed to be a good source of biogas, and Dr Kelly argues that further research into using anaerobic digestion (see below at paragraph 78) of seaweed to produce methane as a renewable source of energy should be undertaken.[47] 
41. The Biosciences Federation and Royal Society of Chemistry state in their submission that "the opportunity to expand the possibilities presented by bioenergy into the substantial marine resource governed by the UK should not be overlooked". [48] In its oral evidence English Nature struck a note of caution, emphasising the significance of the environmental impact of an increase in cultivation of energy crops. English Nature acknowledged that further research into the potential of marine biomass was needed, but insisted that this should not be undertaken at the expense of research into land-based biomass production.[49] 
42. We agree with the Biosciences Federation and Royal Society of Chemistry that the potential of marine biomass as a source of energy should not be overlooked. We recommend that the Government conduct a scoping study to investigate the potential for and anticipated carbon savings from the use of marine bioenergy, and to establish the likely up to date costs associated with developing this technology. We emphasise, however, that any research in this field must be carried out in addition to—and not instead of—research and development into land-based bioenergy production. 
Biofuels 
UK transport emissions 
43. In 2004, 51.3 million tonnes of petroleum were used for transportation fuels,[50] which loosely equates with CO2 emissions of more than 40 MtC.[51] UKPIA asserts that "due to their low cost, availability, and ease of use petrol and diesel will remain the dominant road transport fuels globally to 2030 and beyond".[52] Shell notes that the UK road transport sector is almost entirely dependent on petroleum products as its energy source.[53] 
44. Research by the UK Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research shows that the transport sector is the largest source of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions in the UK. Road transport alone accounts for 21% of total CO2 emissions in the UK.[54] The Government's Energy Review 2006 found that between 1990 and 2000, CO2 emissions from road transport grew by 8%, even though the average fuel efficiency of new cars has improved by 10% since 1997. This increase in emissions comes despite advances in hydrocarbon fuel formulations and an increase in the use of diesel. Transport is also the only sector in which emissions are predicted to be greater in 2020 than in 1990.[55] 
45. The 2003 Energy White Paper indicated that in order for the UK to meet its domestic targets, a 5-10% reduction in CO2 emissions from road transport in the UK would be required by 2020.[56] UKPIA argues that this reduction can be achieved through a combination of new technology and improved fuel economy from conventionally fuelled vehicles, as well as an eventual need for lower carbon fuel sources and "major change in consumer choices/behaviour".[57] Currently biofuels are the only source of renewable power commercially suitable for road transport. 
Potential carbon savings from biofuels 
46. Bioenergy is often said to be carbon neutral, on the basis that the carbon released on burning the fuel is equal to the carbon removed from the atmosphere when the crop is growing. However, carbon savings are affected by agricultural practice, production and processing methods, and transportation of the feedstock.[58] Consequently, the carbon savings offered by biofuels may be reduced to varying degrees by the emissions incurred over the lifecycle of the fuels. Critics of bioethanol have argued that the energy used in its production—by machinery, fertilisers, transport and the fermentation process—can be greater than the energy actually contained in the resulting fuel.[59] 
47. Such claims are vigorously disputed. The potential greenhouse gas savings from different biofuels are summarised in Table 2, below. 
Data source: Defra from 'Carbon and energy balances for a range of biofuels options', Sheffield Hallam University 2003; and 'WTW evaluation for production of ethanol from wheat', Low Carbon Vehicle Partnership, 2004[60] 
48. However, the Renewable Energy Association (REA) argues that considerable care needs to be taken in comparing the results of different studies conducted to ascertain the potential reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from any one biofuel.[61] The European Commission recently compared studies which had been conducted to determine the potential carbon savings from biofuels. The Commission's analysis showed considerable variation in savings according to the methodology used and assumptions made. This is supported by a recent study commissioned by the Government, the findings of which are summarised in Table 3, below. 
Data source: E4tech, 'UK carbon reduction potential from technologies in the transport sector' for the UK Department for Transport and Energy Review team, May 2006 
49. In July 2005 the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced the establishment of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change. Led by Sir Nicholas Stern, the review will examine, among other things, "the costs and benefits of actions to reduce the net global balance of greenhouse gas emissions from energy use and other sources, including the role of land-use changes". The report to Government is due to be published by autumn 2007.[62] 

