The Drug Interventions Programme (DIP):
addressing drug use and offending through ‘Tough Choices'

Key implications
This paper examines the way that the Drug Interventions Programme (DIP) engages and directs Class A drug misusers from the point of arrest or charge to the point of treatment, and examines their offending levels before and after identification by DIP.

The Drug Interventions Programme was introduced in April 2003 with the aim of developing and integrating measures for directing adult drug-misusing offenders into drug treatment and reducing offending behaviour. The research has a number of findings that have implications for policy makers and others involved in the area of drugs, crime and harm reduction and in particular the use of interventions that are targeted at underlying factors driving criminal behaviour. Indications are that offending levels reduced following contact with DIP. Methodological limitations (the absence of a control group) mean that this does not represent a full outcome evaluation and accordingly it has not been possible to calculate how much of the observed change in offending was due to DIP.
What the data do show, comparing offending levels pre and post DIP contact, is that offending levels in the six months following DIP were lower than in the six months before DIP.

? The overall volume of offending by a cohort of 7,727 individuals was 26 per cent lower following DIP
identification.
? Around half of the cohort showed a decline in offending of around 79 per cent.
? There was a subgroup of around one-quarter for whom offending increased following DIP contact.
The research supports the approach of using the criminal justice system as one route for getting drug misusers into treatment.
? Rates of entry into treatment for DIP referrals were higher than for previous arrest referral programmes.
? Levels of retention in treatment for DIP entrants equalled those of non-criminal justice route entrants to treatment.
The research also provides evidence about the role of semicoercive approaches to improve engagement in programmes.
? The implementation of ‘Tough Choices' and the introduction of a sanction for those who failed to attend an assessment with a drug worker has led to lower levels of attrition from the DIP programme than when less coercive measures were in place.

Research scope
This paper outlines how individuals who test positive for heroin, cocaine or crack cocaine in the custody suite were engaged by the Drug Interventions Programme (DIP) and directed to the point of drug treatment, and how well DIP managed to retain individuals at various stages in the process. It also examines whether the implementation of Tough Choices from 1 April 20061 changed the characteristics of people coming through DIP and whether it improved the retention of drug users in the programme. Finally it describes the offending patterns of those testing positive before and after they are exposed to DIP. Two cohorts were examined. These consist of all positive testers in DIP intensive areas in England during two time frames.
? The ‘Testing on Charge' cohort pre-dates Tough Choices and consists of 7,727 individuals who tested positive at the point of charge during the period 1 July to 31 October 2005 and were successfully matched to the Police National Computer (PNC).
? The ‘Testing on Arrest' cohort consists of 11,015 individuals who tested positive at the point of arrest
during the period 1 April to 30 June 2006 and were successfully matched to the PNC. This time period covers three months where Tough Choices was fully implemented and running countrywide. The cohorts were matched to the PNC, the Drug Interventions Record (DIR) and the National Drug Treatment Monitoring System (NDTMS). Full criminal histories and treatment entry figures were accessed to explore the relationship of DIP to offending and treatment.

Offending patterns
A reduction in offending is the key outcome required of the Drug Interventions Programme. This report shows that offending levels (as measured by offences for which individuals are convicted) following DIP contact are lower than prior to DIP contact. The extent to which the reduction can be clearly attributed to DIP is limited as the design did not include a comparison group not going through DIP. Nevertheless, after compensating for sampling bias:
? the overall volume of offending by a cohort of 7,727 individuals was 26 per cent lower following DIP
identification;
? Around half of the drug misusers who come into contact with DIP through the custody suite showed a decline in offending of around 79 per cent in the six months following DIP contact;
? offending levels increased following DIP contact for around a quarter of positive testers.
Impact of Tough Choices on cohort characteristics:

? Before the implementation of Tough Choices, the Testing on Charge cohort was around 80 per cent male, 80 per cent White with a mean age of 30. The Testing on Arrest cohort was similar, though with a small increase in the oldest and youngest age groups.
? The Testing on Charge cohort had an average of 5.7 proven offences in the three years before their positive test. The Testing on Arrest cohort had an average of 4.1 proven offences in the same period.
? Nearly one-quarter of the Testing on Charge cohort was made up of ‘high crime causing users' (HCCUs); this proportion was lower following Tough Choices (17%) for the Testing on Arrest cohort, although actual numbers of HCCUs coming through had risen by around 30 per cent.
? Serious offenders made up 36 per cent of positive testers before Tough Choices and 32 per cent following Tough Choices. Prolific and other Priority Offenders (PPOs) made up six per cent and fi ve per cent of the Testing on Charge and Testing on Arrest cohorts respectively. Numbers of both offender types increased.
? Following Tough Choices there was a greater proportion of individuals who had few (from 49% to 62%) or no (from 10% to 15%) proven offences in the three years prior to
cohort entry.

Progress through DIP

The typical DIP process would include movement along a path: Positive Test ‡ Contact ‡ Assessment ‡ Care Plan ‡ Treatment Attrition was an early challenge for DIP, particularly between test
and assessment. Progress through DIP has improved following Tough Choices.
? Seventy-seven per cent of the Testing on Arrest cohort received an initial contact from a drugs worker within 28 days, compared to 53 per cent before Tough Choices.
? Ninety-three per cent of those available8 for assessment received one within 28 days, up from 77 per cent before Tough Choices.

? Thirty-five per cent of all available positive testers received a care plan within 60 days of their test, compared to 28 per cent before Tough Choices.

Treatment entry levels

? Of those with a known care plan referral to specialist treatment (structured community based or residential treatment) 55 per cent of the Testing on Charge cohort and 47 per cent of the Testing on Arrest cohort were found to have entered treatment within 12 weeks of care plan.
? DIP compares favourably with previous drug arrest referral programmes where around 25 per cent of those referred to treatment were recorded as entering treatment (e.g. Oerton et al. (2003), Millar et al. (2002)).

Treatment retention levels

? Retention in treatment rates for DIP clients were good both before and after Tough Choices: overall retention at 12 weeks was 79 per cent for the Testing on Charge cohort and 74 per cent for the Testing on Arrest cohort.
? DIP compares well with national retention rates for noncriminal justice referrals; retention for non-criminal justice system (CJS) clients at 12 weeks was 76 per cent (for 2006–07).

Implications
The findings are relevant for interventions aimed at tackling criminal behaviour associated with drug misuse.
? Indications are that offenders reduced their offending following contact with DIP.
? The criminal justice system can be an effective route for getting drug misusing individuals into treatment.
? Use of semi-coercive approaches such as Tough Choices can improve engagement in intervention programmes compared to non-coercive approaches.

Further work required
? The overall picture shows that DIP was associated with declines in offending for the larger part of drug misusers coming through the custody suite. However methodological limitations (i.e. the lack of a comparison group) mean that the authors cannot with certainty ascribe these changes in offending behaviour to DIP. Further research is required to provide a fuller understanding of these findings.

Work should be carried out to identify those who have successfully continued through DIP as well as
those who have not completed DIP journeys, and establish why DIP is associated with good outcomes for some individuals and not for others.
– Work should be carried out with practitioners to augment existing centrally held data with additional
evidence from case studies in the fi eld and local data.
– Work should be carried out to explore the circulation of individuals through DIP and the intensity of
treatment journeys to establish how many times individuals pass through DIP and the frequency of their contact and the impact of this on outcomes/offending.

Context

Introduction

This paper presents the findings of an analysis of the pathways of individuals testing positive for heroin, cocaine or crack cocaine in custody suites in England under the Drug Interventions
Programme (DIP).
The purpose is to provide information to policy makers, practitioners and researchers about how DIP channels individuals to the point of drug treatment and how successfully DIP retains individuals throughout the process. The report also examines whether implementation of ‘Tough Choices' from
1 April 2006 changed the characteristics of people coming through DIP and improved retention of drug users. Finally it describes offending patterns before and after DIP. The report aims to identify key issues, provide evidence where it is available and to outline areas for further research.

Research questions

How good is DIP ‘grip'?

A key question for policy makers and practitioners is how well DIP manages to engage and retain drug misusers, how many it delivers to the point of treatment, and how well these individuals
are retained in treatment.

For example, during the early phase of DIP (2003–2005) it became clear that a key stage of attrition was at the point of assessment (at that time voluntary). Individuals who had tested positive often failed to turn up to their voluntary assessments. The implementation of Tough Choices sought to address this by making attending an assessment a compulsory requirement, with sanctions imposed for non attendance.

What does the DIP cohort look like?

Another key question for policy makers and practitioners is the composition of the DIP target group. Who is being targeted, and what kinds of offending are they responsible for? Tough Choices moved the point of test forward to post-arrest rather than postcharge. How has this altered the composition of the DIP cohort?

How is DIP related to offending?

The aim of DIP is to deliver drug misusers to the point of treatment, to broker treatment and support services for them and support them beyond, with the ultimate aim of reducing offending. How does exposure to DIP interact with offending behaviour? What is the offending behaviour of those who engage in treatment?

The Drug Interventions Programme

The Drug Interventions Programme was introduced in April 2003, with the aim of developing and integrating measures for directing adult drug-misusing offenders out of crime and into drug treatment.
The programme brings together a number of agencies including the police, the courts, the Prison and Probation Services, treatment providers, aftercare support services, government departments and Drug Action Teams (DATs). The purpose is to provide tailored solutions for drug misusers who commit crime to fund their drug use (particularly Class A drug users) from arrest, court, sentencing and prison through to post-prison and post-treatment situations. Its principal focus is to reduce drug-related crime by engaging with drug users and moving them into appropriate treatment and support.
