PART 3 ASSESSMENT OF MISUSE OF DRUGS 
9 Initial assessment following testing for presence of Class A drugs 
(1) This section applies if— 
(a) a sample is taken under section 63B of PACE (testing for presence of Class A drug) from a person detained at a police station, 
(b) an analysis of the sample reveals that a specified Class A drug may be present in the person's body, 
(c) the age condition is met, and 
(d) the notification condition is met. 
(2) A police officer may, at any time before the person is released from detention at the police station, require him to attend an initial assessment and remain for its duration. 
(3) An initial assessment is an appointment with a suitably qualified person (an “initial assessor”)— 
(a) for the purpose of establishing whether the person is dependent upon or has a propensity to misuse any specified Class A drug, 
(b) if the initial assessor thinks that he has such a dependency or propensity, for the purpose of establishing whether he might benefit from further assessment, or from assistance or treatment (or both), in connection with the dependency or propensity, and 
(c) if the initial assessor thinks that he might benefit from such assistance or treatment (or both), for the purpose of providing him with advice, including an explanation of the types of assistance or treatment (or both) which are available. 
(4) The age condition is met if the person has attained the age of 18 or such different age as the Secretary of State may by order made by statutory instrument specify for the purposes of this section. 
(5) In relation to a person (“A”) who has attained the age of 18, the notification condition is met if— 
(a) the relevant chief officer has been notified by the Secretary of State that arrangements for conducting initial assessments for persons who have attained the age of 18 have been made for persons from whom samples have been taken (under section 63B of PACE) at the police station in which A is detained, and 
(b) the notice has not been withdrawn. 
(6) In relation to a person (“C”) who is of an age which is less than 18, the notification condition is met if— 
(a) the relevant chief officer has been notified by the Secretary of State that arrangements for conducting initial assessments for persons of that age have been made for persons from whom samples have been taken (under section 63B of PACE) at the police station in which C is detained, and 
(b) the notice has not been withdrawn. 
(7) In subsections (5) and (6), “relevant chief officer” means the chief officer of police of the police force for the police area in which the police station is situated. 
10 Follow-up assessment 
(1) This section applies if— 
(a) a police officer requires a person to attend an initial assessment and remain for its duration under section 9(2), 
(b) the age condition is met, and 
(c) the notification condition is met. 
(2) The police officer must, at the same time as he imposes the requirement under section 9(2)— 
(a) require the person to attend a follow-up assessment and remain for its duration, and 
(b) inform him that the requirement ceases to have effect if he is informed at the initial assessment that he is no longer required to attend the follow-up assessment. 
(3) A follow-up assessment is an appointment with a suitably qualified person (a “follow-up assessor”)— 
(a) for any of the purposes of the initial assessment which were not fulfilled at the initial assessment, and 
(b) if the follow-up assessor thinks it appropriate, for the purpose of drawing up a care plan. 
(4) A care plan is a plan which sets out the nature of the assistance or treatment (or both) which may be most appropriate for the person in connection with any dependency upon, or any propensity to misuse, a specified Class A drug which the follow-up assessor thinks that he has. 
(5) The age condition is met if the person has attained the age of 18 or such different age as the Secretary of State may by order made by statutory instrument specify for the purposes of this section. 
(6) In relation to a person (“A”) who has attained the age of 18, the notification condition is met if— 
(a) the relevant chief officer has been notified by the Secretary of State that arrangements for conducting follow-up assessments for persons who have attained the age of 18 have been made for persons from whom samples have been taken (under section 63B of PACE) at the police station in which A is detained, and 
(b) the notice has not been withdrawn. 
(7) In relation to a person (“C”) who is of an age which is less than 18, the notification condition is met if— 
(a) the relevant chief officer has been notified by the Secretary of State that arrangements for conducting follow-up assessments for persons of that age have been made for persons from whom samples have been taken (under section 63B of PACE) at the police station in which C is detained, and 
(b) the notice has not been withdrawn. 
(8) In subsections (6) and (7), “relevant chief officer” means the chief officer of police of the police force for the police area in which the police station is situated. 
11 Requirements under sections 9 and 10: supplemental 
(1) This section applies if a person is required to attend an initial assessment and remain for its duration by virtue of section 9(2). 
(2) A police officer must— 
(a) inform the person of the time when, and the place at which, the initial assessment is to take place, and 
(b) explain that this information will be confirmed in writing. 
(3) A police officer must warn the person that he may be liable to prosecution if he fails without good cause to attend the initial assessment and remain for its duration. 
(4) If the person is also required to attend a follow-up assessment and remain for its duration by virtue of section 10(2), a police officer must also warn the person that he may be liable to prosecution if he fails without good cause to attend the follow-up assessment and remain for its duration. 
(5) A police officer must give the person notice in writing which— 
(a) confirms that he is required to attend and remain for the duration of an initial assessment or both an initial assessment and a follow-up assessment (as the case may be), 
(b) confirms the information given in pursuance of subsection (2), and 
(c) repeats the warning given in pursuance of subsection (3) and any warning given in pursuance of subsection (4). 
(6) The duties imposed by subsections (2) to (5) must be discharged before the person is released from detention at the police station. 
(7) A record must be made, as part of the person's custody record, of— 
(a) the requirement imposed on him by virtue of section 9(2), 
(b) any requirement imposed on him by virtue of section 10(2), 
(c) the information and explanation given to him in pursuance of subsection (2) above, 
(d) the warning given to him in pursuance of subsection (3) above and any warning given to him in pursuance of subsection (4) above, and 
(e) the notice given to him in pursuance of subsection (5) above. 
(8) If a person is given a notice in pursuance of subsection (5), a police officer or a suitably qualified person may give the person a further notice in writing which— 
(a) informs the person of any change to the time when, or to the place at which, the initial assessment is to take place, and 
(b) repeats the warning given in pursuance of subsection (3) and any warning given in pursuance of subsection (4). 
12 Attendance at initial assessment 
(1) This section applies if a person is required to attend an initial assessment and remain for its duration by virtue of section 9(2). 
(2) The initial assessor must inform a police officer or a police support officer if the person— 
(a) fails to attend the initial assessment at the specified time and place, or 
(b) attends the assessment at the specified time and place but fails to remain for its duration. 
(3) A person is guilty of an offence if without good cause— 
(a) he fails to attend an initial assessment at the specified time and place, or 
(b) he attends the assessment at the specified time and place but fails to remain for its duration. 
(4) A person who is guilty of an offence under subsection (3) is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks, or to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale, or to both. 
(5) If a person fails to attend an initial assessment at the specified time and place, any requirement imposed on him by virtue of section 10(2) ceases to have effect. 
(6) In this section— 
(a) the specified time, in relation to the person concerned, is the time specified in the notice given to him in pursuance of subsection (5) of section 11 or, if a further notice specifying a different time has been given to him in pursuance of subsection (8) of that section, the time specified in that notice, and 
(b) the specified place, in relation to the person concerned, is the place specified in the notice given to him in pursuance of subsection (5) of section 11 or, if a further notice specifying a different place has been given to him in pursuance of subsection (8) of that section, the place specified in that notice. 
(7) In relation to an offence committed before the commencement of section 281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (c. 44) (alteration of penalties for summary offences), the reference in subsection (4) to 51 weeks is to be read as a reference to 3 months. 
13 Arrangements for follow-up assessment 
(1) This section applies if— 
(a) a person attends an initial assessment in pursuance of section 9(2), and 
(b) he is required to attend a follow-up assessment and remain for its duration by virtue of section 10(2). 
(2) If the initial assessor thinks that a follow-up assessment is not appropriate, he must inform the person concerned that he is no longer required to attend the follow-up assessment. 
(3) The requirement imposed by virtue of section 10(2) ceases to have effect if the person is informed as mentioned in subsection (2). 
(4) If the initial assessor thinks that a follow-up assessment is appropriate, the assessor must— 
(a) inform the person of the time when, and the place at which, the follow-up assessment is to take place, and 
(b) explain that this information will be confirmed in writing. 
(5) The assessor must also warn the person that, if he fails without good cause to attend the follow-up assessment and remain for its duration, he may be liable to prosecution. 
(6) The initial assessor must also give the person notice in writing which— 
(a) confirms that he is required to attend and remain for the duration of the follow-up assessment, 
(b) confirms the information given in pursuance of subsection (4), and 
(c) repeats the warning given in pursuance of subsection (5). 
(7) The duties mentioned in subsections (2) and (4) to (6) must be discharged before the conclusion of the initial assessment. 
(8) If a person is given a notice in pursuance of subsection (6), the initial assessor or another suitably qualified person may give the person a further notice in writing which— 
(a) informs the person of any change to the time when, or to the place at which, the follow-up assessment is to take place, and 
(b) repeats the warning mentioned in subsection (5). 

