The DEO has delegated responsibility from the Principal Establishments
Officer and the Head of Department for a range of human resource issues
within their department, including human resource planning and health and
safety. DEOs also represent their department on various Whitley committees
and on the Human Resources Group.
Where appropriate, DEOs may delegate some of their operational HR
responsibilities to Departmental HR Officers (DHROs). Similarly, Departmental
Safety Coordinators (DSCs) may assist DEOs on Health and Safety matters
and Departmental Training Officers (DTOs) on training issues. Conversely,
some of the duties set out in this guidance may not have been delegated to
DEOs, for example matters relating to staff more senior than themselves.
1.4 Human Resource Management &amp; Development
Directorate (HRM&amp;D)
The Human Resource Management &amp; Development Directorate (HRM&amp;D)
provides a comprehensive HR policy and learning and development service to
all departments of the House. Its functions include the provision of advice on human resource management and development issues.
HRM&amp;D and the Pensions Unit are located on the 3rd floor of 7 Millbank.
1.5 Trade Unions
The recognised Trade Unions (TUs) in the House of Commons are consulted by
management prior to the introduction of any change to conditions of service.
Another function of the unions is to provide advice to their members and
represent them, on request, in their dealings with their employer. It is therefore in your interest to join the appropriate union at the earliest opportunity further details are given in Chapter 8.
The Trade Union Side Administrator (TUSA) has an office at 2 The Abbey
Gardens (Room G7) ? 5611.

CHAPTER 2: YOUR EMPLOYER
2.1 Chapter aims
This chapter is designed to help you to:
- understand the legal basis of the administration of the House
- see where you fit within the organisation
- get to grips with names and terminology.
2.2 Our legal status
The House of Commons Administration Act 1978 states that the pay banding,
pay and conditions of service of staff must be kept ‘broadly in line' with the Civil Service (although the House is not part of the Home Civil Service).
There is scope for varying these to fit the requirements of the House.
In general, you have the same rights to equal opportunities and employment
protection under the Employment Rights Act 1996 etc. as other employees in
the UK. Some legislation, even if not binding on the House, is usually applied as if it were binding, so ensuring that staff are not disadvantaged compared with ‘outside' employees.
2.3 Your contract
The conditions of service of staff of the House are covered either by general
legislation (such as equal opportunities, taxes etc.) or by the House of Commons Management Code. The code follows the principle of keeping conditions
‘broadly in line' with the Civil Service. Most of the material in the code is
covered in this handbook but if you would like more information you can refer
to the relevant section of the code, which is available from your DEO.
2.3.1 Hours of work
Your hours of work are set out in your Letter of Appointment.
2.4 Management of the House of Commons Service
This section describes the main management groups and summarises the
responsibilities of some of the senior officers of the House.
2.4.1 House of Commons Commission
The Commission is the executive body responsible for the administration of the House of Commons. It is responsible for the overall staffing of the House
including the number of people employed and their pay and conditions.
The Commission is made up of the Speaker (who chairs the meetings),
the Leader of the House, a Member of the House nominated by the Leader
of the Opposition and three back bench Members appointed by the House.


2.4.2 Board of Management
Under the authority of the House of Commons Commission, the Board provides
strategic management and coordinates all matters affecting more than one
department. The Board of Management is composed of the heads of the six
departments of the House (see below) with the Clerk of the House as Chairman.
2.4.3 Human Resources Group
This is an interdepartmental body, which carries out planning and coordination on human resource issues on behalf of the Board of Management. It is chaired by the Director of Finance and Administration and composed of the Departmental Establishment Officers (DEOs) and up to two other representatives from each department who attend as and when required.
2.4.4 Departments of the House
Clerk of the House
The Clerk's Department provides specialist professional and administrative
services related to the procedure of the House. It provides advice and services to the House, the Speaker and the Deputy Speakers, to the Committees appointed by the House, and to individual Members.
The Commission has appointed the Clerk of the House as Chief Executive and
Accounting Officer. As Accounting Officer he is responsible for the money
provided by Parliament for the service of the House.
Head of Department: Clerk of the House
Locations: Palace of Westminster and 7 Millbank
Serjeant at Arms
The Serjeant at Arms Department provides ceremonial, security and
housekeeping services for the House. The Department also includes the
Parliamentary Estates Directorate (PED) and Parliamentary Works Services
Directorate (PWSD), which together are responsible for the maintenance of the
Parliamentary Estate.
Head of Department: Serjeant at Arms
Main locations: Palace of Westminster, PED and
PWSD are located at 1 Canon Row
Library
The Library Department provides research, analysis and information services for the House of Commons. Its major responsibility is to serve Members. It also provides services for the staff of the House to assist with the performance of official duties.
Head of Department: Librarian.
Main locations: Palace of Westminster, 1 Derby Gate, Norman Shaw North,
Norman Shaw South and Portcullis House.

Finance and Administration
This Department provides HR and finance services for the departments and
staff of the House. It is also responsible for the payment of salaries and
allowances to Members, health, safety and welfare services, corporate learning and development and diversity issues.
Head of Department: Director of Finance and Administration
Locations: 3rd 4th and 7th floors of 7 Millbank.
Official Report
This Department is responsible for the recording and publication of all
Parliamentary proceedings in the form of official reports. These reports are
generally known as ‘Hansard'.
Head of Department: Editor of the Official Report
Locations: Palace of Westminster and 5th floor of 7 Millbank.
Refreshment
The Refreshment Department provides meals and other refreshments to
Members and staff and other people who work on or visit the Parliamentary
Estate. It also provides banqueting services and manages the souvenir kiosks.
Head of Department: Director of Catering Services
Main locations: Palace of Westminster, 7 Millbank, 1 Parliament Street
and Portcullis House.
2.4.5 Office of the Clerk
The Office of the Clerk supports the work of the Clerk of the House in
administration business, supports the Clerk in House business with a Private
Secretary function, provides the Secretariat of the Board of Management and the Audit Committee, helps coordinate the work of the Board of Management and
the Finance and Services Committee in serving the Commission, and is
developing strategies to improve the quality of information about the work and the administration of the House of Commons available to Members, House
staff, the public and media. It was set up in 2000 in accordance with the
recommendations of a review of management and services.
Headed by the Head of the Office of the Clerk
Location: Palace of Westminster and 7 Millbank.
2.4.6 Parliamentary Information and Communications Technology service
The new joint Parliamentary Information and Communications Technology
service (PICT) has recently been established to provide Members and staff of
the two Houses with a unified ICT service. PICT's purpose is to work closely
with the business and Members to understand and define their ICT requirements
and to deliver them through the development and operation of a safe and
secure parliamentary infrastructure, hardware and business applications, and
the training, support and education of its customers.
Head of Service. Director of Parliamentary ICT (D-PICT)
??Main locations: 7 Millbank with other work areas throughout the
Parliamentary Estate.
2.5 Officers of the House
Some staff need access to the same areas of the Parliamentary Estate as
Members of Parliament to carry out their duties. These people (usually in
senior posts in Band A and above, and some other staff whose work requires
them to have access) are designated ‘Officers of the House'. A list of all
Officers is available from the Serjeant at Arms Department.
2.6 Types of appointment
Your appointment may be permanent, temporary, for a fixed period, full time or part time. The main types of appointment are:
Permanent: This appointment is of indefinite duration and can only be
terminated by notice or retirement. The person appointed has been selected
through open competition and has satisfied requirements regarding
qualifications, experience, health, character etc. Those with permanent
appointments automatically qualify for the pension scheme.
Temporary: These appointments rarely last longer than one year. It is not
necessary for the person appointed to have been recruited through open
competition.
Fixed term appointments: These appointments are made for a limited period,
which normally does not exceed four years. They are made either where the
work is for a limited duration (usually more than six months) or where there
are exceptional reasons for appointing someone to a continuing post for a
limited period, for example where there are no career possibilities. Fixed term appointments may be converted to permanent status if this possibility was specified in the recruitment advertisement. Fixed term appointments are
pensionable.
Casual appointments: These appointments are made without the need for open
and fair competition and with no agreed working patterns. Casual workers
are called in as and when required and are not obliged to accept an offer to
work, nor is the House obliged to offer any work. Casual appointments are
usually pensionable.


Secondment: Secondees are not House employees and continue to be subject
to the terms and conditions of their employer and are paid directly by them.
Reappointment: (see paragraph 14.2.1).
The status of your appointment is shown on your letter of appointment.
2.7 Probationary period
Your employment at the House of Commons is subject to a probationary period,
the length of which will be stated in your letter of appointment. At present
the probationary period for permanent and fixed term employees is nine months.
During this period your performance is assessed at intervals of six and nine
months to ensure that you are suitable for continued employment. Your conduct
and attendance record will also be taken into account in this assessment.
You will be given any necessary advice and guidance to help enable you to meet the job requirements.
2.7.1 During the probationary period
If you have problems with your work, your manager will speak to you and, if
your performance is below the acceptable standard, may give you an informal
warning. You will be given reasonable time and support to improve. Please
let your manager know if you are having difficulties.
In exceptional circumstances your probationary period may be extended if
your performance is below expectations or you have a lot of sick leave.
If your attendance or performance gives cause for concern, your manager
will bring it to your attention and if there is insufficient improvement, the
procedures for managing performance and attendance (? Chapter 5 paragraph
5.15) will be applied; however, the timescales may be of a shorter duration
than for an established member of staff. If appropriate, your manager will
advise you to seek help from your doctor or from the Welfare Officer, if you
have a health, personal or domestic problem.
2.7.2 Confirming your appointment
After 6 months service, and at the end of your probationary period, your
manager will hold an interview with you, to confirm that you meet the
requirements of the job and that your conduct and attendance have been
satisfactory. This information will be passed to HRM&amp;D. If all is satisfactory at the nine month stage you will receive a letter confirming the appointment.

