For Sir William Hamilton (1730–1803), curiosity about nature inspired observation. To observe was not to perceive passively but to undertake particular practices of focused attention and detailed description, the two activities required of a vigilant eyewitness.1 Hamilton's activities produced accounts that allowed others to share his observational experiences. These physically embodied acts of attention and description rendered curiosity, not just curious phenomena, mobile. Experiences of nature then moved far beyond the consciousness of the original observer, as they were repeatedly transformed from letters into oral spectacles, journal articles, extracts, reviews and luxury publications.
This essay analyses how practices of attention and description were re-created for various audiences in the second half of the eighteenth century. One way of thinking about this in historical writing has been the notion of a "virtual witness' – someone in whose mind an image is produced that obviates the necessity for him or her to become a direct witness. Multiplying witnesses requires various social, literary and material technologies, as Steven Shapin and Simon Schaffer have described in relation to seventeenth-century experimentalists.2 By Hamilton's time the Royal Society had an institutionalized mechanism for the consideration and reproduction of knowledge claims. But the ways in which technologies for reporting experience were incorporated into its material, oral, formal and informal practices have been little studied.3 More significantly, accounts of the creation of virtual witnesses have tended to imply a homogeneous, passive audience. They assume that with a single effective mechanism, the number of witnesses to any phenomenon can be multiplied indefinitely.
I expose a different story, based upon physical encounters between active recipients and techniques of persuasion. The movement of witnessing tools was materially constrained, such that natural and experimental observations circulated through numerous social and physical spaces only because they were given diverse manifestations. Taking the experience of witnessing beyond the observer's immediate community therefore required that particular audiences undertake autonomous acts of translation and redistribution. By tracing the course of Hamilton's embodied acts of description, this essay engages with communications history. The communications circuit proposed by Robert Darnton rightly identifies many factors, besides authorship, that govern any reading experience.4 It therefore explains certain unintended consequences of written activity. But by placing "the readers' at the end of a line of processes, albeit with a dotted loop back to the start of that line, this account fails to recognize the intermediate contributors as readers and active interpreters in their own right. While publishers, printers, shippers and booksellers are granted agency, they are denied autonomy. The result is a deterministic model in which circulating texts alter greatly in form and little in content. However, as Richard Yeo has shown for Enlightenment encyclopedias, the structure and format of books can shed precious light upon the very nature and organization of knowledge.5 I endorse and give evidence for the claim that "literature … belongs to a culture in which media of all sorts – printed, written, oral and visual – interconnect'.6 With this approach, I hope to win a more constructive role for the history of material literature within the history of science.
My focus is the relationship between the material form and social location of Hamilton's observations. Although many entities came to embody and re-create Hamilton's initial experience of witnessing, each displayed them in significantly different ways. As they circulated and were consumed, they all made the same acts of attention and description available to new audiences, but the physical interaction through which each operated was unique. Beginning with the earliest surviving record of his observations, I study Hamilton's correspondence from 1766 to 1780 and examine why the recipients of certain letters decided to communicate them further. I follow these selected letters to the Royal Society where, read aloud at weekly meetings, they became focal points of attention at a sociable London club. Next, I trace the translation of Hamilton's experiences into articles for Philosophical Transactions and the new avenues of circulation that this brought. My attention then turns to the magnificent Campi Phlegraei: Observations on the Volcanos of the Two Sicilies (1776) and its Supplement (1779). This exceptional publication dramatized his observations in new ways and altered their appeal once again. Finally, case studies reveal Campi Phlegraei as far more than a "witness replicator'. Through this book, Hamilton's embodied curiosity became a curious object in itself.
Writing letters
Sir William Hamilton was posted as British Envoy to Naples from 1764 to 1800. As soon as he arrived he was captivated by Vesuvius. The mountain's flames, fumes and fireworks attracted many travellers on the Grand Tour. These travellers' gripping tales aroused interest across Europe in the causes of volcanic action. Eruptions and earthquakes were generally linked either to open caverns where vapours could accumulate or to deposits of flammable rock. Combustion required underground air or water or both and, once triggered, would force molten lava to the surface in an explosion. Some located the heat source near the centre of the Earth, while others contended it was towards the summit of a cone. Neither account threatened the established view that volcanoes had a relatively superficial impact on their environment, limited to events documented by human records. The Earth had only existed for a few thousand years and would exist for just a few thousand more.7 Reluctant to engage immediately with these theoretical debates, Hamilton took every chance to see the signs of volcanic action for himself by spending many hours on the often inhospitable slopes of Vesuvius, reaching the crater more than sixty times.8 Believing that describing the world was a necessary part of observing it, he carefully documented what he found.
After a lifetime full of diplomatic, social and literary activity, the work for which Hamilton is now best remembered consists of a handful of letters written to members of the Council of the Royal Society on the topic of volcanic phenomena.9 In them he used words and pictures to narrate the eruptions of Vesuvius, discuss lavas and compare landforms, emphasizing his direct engagement with nature throughout. Initially he wrote, "I shall confine myself merely to the many extraordinary appearances that have come under my own inspection, and leave their explanation to the more learned in natural philosophy.' Gaining confidence in later letters, he began interpreting his findings. From the huge quantities of lava that could reach the surface during an eruption, he concluded that a volcano's source lay deep underground. According to his examination of the strata, volcanic cones grew through the accumulation of layers of ash and lava flows, separated by soil deposits. The landscape was in a continual state of flux, so large and inactive volcanoes provided evidence of events "so very ancient as to be far out of the reach of history'.10 To contemporary readers these were controversial claims, but over time they became accepted truths.
My interest here lies less with Hamilton's personal beliefs and sensations than with the material embodiments he employed to create virtual witnesses. His letters were persuasive because they enabled specific distant readers to experience for themselves the observations he had made on a Neapolitan mountainside. By designing certain letters to be read aloud to the Royal Society and then published in Philosophical Transactions, he also influenced the further distribution of this witnessing experience. To identify the practices of writing and reading, through which his letters acquired significance, I locate them within a web of learned correspondence before focusing upon their detail.
Despite his distant location, Hamilton's diplomatic work and amateur interests demanded that he remain connected with London life through the movement of various publications, packages, guests and letters.11 Hamilton was a prolific collector of objects including archaeological fragments, statues, vases, jewellery, gemstones, books, paintings and drawings.12 His assortment of rocks and soils therefore suggests natural history was one of many overlapping pursuits. The contemporary explorations of Pompeii and Herculaneum yielded relics of human and natural origin, which sat side by side in his collections. Documenting the excavations helped him to become a prominent antiquarian at a time when studying ancient cultures was complementary to investigating the Earth's past. Through classical scholarship, Pliny's first-century account of Vesuvius became a constant source of reference for his own. As a connoisseur and active patron of landscape art, Hamilton was well positioned to employ its visual methods on his volcanic project. Maintaining his collections involved extensive networks of excavators, dealers and museums, many of whom became audiences for his work.
Hamilton developed his passion for volcanoes through the Royal Society of London, of which he was elected Fellow (FRS) in 1766.13 Although a member of several London clubs, including the Society of Antiquaries and the Dilettanti, it was with the Royal Society that he became most actively involved. Over the years before returning to London in 1800, he had contacts with several senior members, including the Earl of Morton (president of the Royal Society (PRS) 1764–8), Mathew Maty (secretary to the Royal Society 1762–76), Sir John Pringle (PRS 1772–8) and Joseph Banks (PRS 1778–1820). Matters of correspondence ranged widely. For example, Maty arranged by letter for his son, on the Grand Tour, to enjoy Hamilton's hospitality in Naples.14 Correspondents expressed concerns about Catherine, Hamilton's ailing first wife, and conveyed news of mutual acquaintances, including Hamilton's nephew, Charles Greville, himself a Fellow. Natural history was not the only topic discussed in Hamilton's contacts with Fellows, nor was mention of volcanoes restricted to these correspondents. Stephen Sullivan, an aspiring British diplomat, criticized Hamilton's enthusiasm: "[you] might have had Spain long ago but [you] was then too immers'd in Volcanoes to bear the idea of quitting Naples'.15 So natural history was one of a wide range of subjects about which learned men simultaneously conversed in letters.

The scholarly letter of this period was a hybrid of personal and public, composed with a particular reader and a general audience in mind.16 This duality was manifested in the form, content and circulation of Hamilton's accounts. Some mentions of volcanoes met only the attention of the initial recipient. For instance, Hamilton's letters to Greville include various comments about his volcanic rock collections, observations and beliefs. We have no evidence to suggest these were communicated further.17 Meanwhile, some of Hamilton's letters were relayed by the Royal Society to its extended membership. Between these two extremes stood a debate about what was intended for, desired by and suited to circulation within and beyond the society. By studying archived manuscripts, I have identified key factors that determined the audience for Hamilton's letters.
The researches of any correspondent were only conveyed to the Royal Society at their recipient's discretion. Maintaining good communicative links involved so many letters that selectivity on the part of recipients was induced by sheer volume. It was also encouraged by closely intermingled passages of general and personal interest. Hamilton was keenly aware that the power to choose and deliver reports, upon which a good reception could depend, rested firmly in London. Accordingly he asked Maty, "should you find this memoir in its present state too tedious … to pass on to our respectable Society, you will make only such extracts from it as you shall think will be most agreeable and interesting'.18 Short extracted passages from Hamilton's letters were often communicated when another of his letters was being read in full. For instance, when Morton presented an account describing the 1767 eruption of Vesuvius, he followed it with previously undisclosed letter extracts that Hamilton cited in support of his developing views.19 The meaning imposed on old passages by Hamilton's later references rendered them fit for new readers.
Despite the recipient's power of decision, Hamilton was able to influence the distribution of his work. To recognize his persuasive techniques we must follow Bruce Redford's claim that "the eighteenth-century letter is a performance … an “act” in the theatrical sense'.20 Although each of Hamilton's letters initially seems to concern only the addressee, they were individually and collectively structured to give some of their number an extended audience. Throughout, Hamilton achieved a smooth and unaffected appearance of epistolary grace.

