Introduction
The social stigma of intellectual inferiority ascribed to some
groups within society, such as African Americans and women, has
been hypothesized to be a significant contributor to their poor performance
on tests, and this in turn may reinforce this perception of
intellectual inferiority (Aronson et al., 2002). As it is believed that
these individuals are under extra pressure to succeed due to their
fears that they will confirm the stereotypes held about them, this
phenomenon is called stereotype threat (Steele and Aronson,
1995). Reducing the salience of these stereotypes reduces individuals'
concerns that they might confirm the stereotype and
improves performance. For example, Steele and Aronson (1995)
found that African American students performed significantly
worse than white students on a (standardized) test when the test
was presented as a diagnosis of their intellectual abilities but not
when it was presented in a neutral way. Similarly, women who
were led to believe that a test had been biased against them performed
worse than women who believed it was a gender neutral
test (Spencer et al., 1999). Stereotype threat has also been
demonstrated in other ethnic groups (e.g. Gonzales et al., 2002),
the economically disadvantaged (Croizet and Claire, 1998), homosexual
men (Bosson et al., 2004), clinical populations with head
injury (Suhr and Gunstad, 2002), the elderly (Levy, 1996), and
even psychology students (Croizet et al., 2004).
These studies suggest that stereotype threat creates an additional
burden that interferes with cognitive ability. Increased
anxiety has been observed in some, but not all, studies of stereotype
threat and reducing anxiety reduces the impact of stereotype
threat (Spencer et al., 1999). Stereotype threat also reduces
working memory capacity, which suggests a cognitive mechanism
by which an individual's performance on a complex cognitive
task may be impaired (Schmader and Johns, 2003). Taken
together, these findings suggest that individuals experiencing
stereotype threat have a higher mental workload. Croizet and colleagues
(2004) demonstrated that heart rate variability was
decreased in psychology students experiencing stereotype threat,
suggesting that this threat had a psychophysiological effect. As
heart rate variability is a useful measure of mental workload that
is independent of performance outcomes, this demonstrates that
individuals under stereotype threat have a higher mental workload.
Many studies of ecstasy users have demonstrated that they
have poorer performance on a variety of cognitive tests relative to
non-ecstasy using controls (e.g. Morgan, 1999; Thomasius et al.,
2003), though this is not always found to be the case (e.g. Simon
and Mattick, 2002; Dafters et al. 2004). The hypothesized cause of
these cognitive deficits is MDMA-induced serotonergic neurotoxicity
(e.g. Parrott, 2001), a phenomenon detected after MDMA is
repeatedly administered to non-human animals (e.g. Miller and
O'Callaghan 1994; O'Loinsigh et al. 2000; Morley et al. 2004).
The relationship between ecstasy use and cognitive function is
widely reported in the media (e.g. "Ecstasy leaves gaps in the
memory', Guardian, UK 15/1/2004), and by government
sponsored drugs education campaigns (e.g. Talk to Frank
(www.talktofrank.co.uk) in the UK and NIDA Club Drugs in the
USA (www.clubdrugs.org)), and therefore disseminated throughout
the general population (Cole et al., 2002a; Green, 2004). It is
conceivable that this dissemination of information about brain
damage and memory deficits may be creating stereotypes about
intellectual inferiority in the minds of ecstasy users. If this is the
case, then it is possible that ecstasy users may be experiencing
stereotype threat when they participate in experiments that they
believe to be testing their memory. A direct test of this hypothesis
would be to replicate previous stereotype threat experiments
where the stereotype (such as intellectual inferiority in African
Americans (Steele and Aronson, 1995)) is primed prior to the test
in order to produce performance decrements. To do this, experimental
participants would need to be primed with information that
ecstasy use causes brain damage that leads to permanent memory
deficits in users. This priming should have no effect on the performance
of non-ecstasy users (relative to those who are not
primed). However, ecstasy users should show poorer memory
scores after being primed than ecstasy users who are not primed,
as they are experiencing stereotype threat.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the possible contribution
of stereotype threat to ecstasy users' performance on measures
of verbal memory, working memory and executive function
that have frequently been employed in studies of ecstasy users, by
comparing test performance in ecstasy users and controls primed
with information supportive of the link between ecstasy use and
brain damage and ecstasy users and controls given information that
does not support this link. It was hypothesized that ecstasy users
would perform worse than controls in the prime condition while
the two groups would perform similarly when not primed.
Methods
Subjects
Sixty-eight unpaid volunteers (aged 18–36) were recruited by
means of posters across the University campus and city centre,
Internet advertisements, the "snowball' technique and the key
informant access method, which are all standard methods of
recruitment for this type of research. People were excluded from
study participation if they reported their first language was not
English, current or past use of prescribed psychiatric medication,
lifetime diagnosis of a psychological or affective disorder and lifetime
diagnosis of a psychological or affective disorder in an
immediate family member. Current users of heroin or crack
cocaine would also have been excluded but none were recruited.
Subjects were allocated to one of four sex matched groups
(n_17/group), according to self-reported drug history and experimental
condition (see below). Polysubstance misusers who
reported lifetime use of ecstasy were classed as ecstasy users,
which is standard for this type of experiment. Both controls and
ecstasy using groups had abstained from using any substance for a
mean of 10.3_5.9 and 7.1_0.9 days respectively. All control
subjects were alcohol users with experiences of illicit substances,
but who did not report a lifetime use of ecstasy. All participants
self-reported being drug free on the day of testing but this was not
objectively verified due to lack of funds. Written informed consent
was obtained from all volunteers and the study proceeded with the
approval of the Research Ethics Committee of the University of
Liverpool.
Questionnaire design
Substance use assessment A questionnaire, similar to that used
in our previous work (e.g. Sumnall et al., 2004) collected a variety
of substance use related information, including lifetime and last
month prevalence and frequency, and simultaneous polysubstance
misuse. Additional questions relating to the previous month were
included as indicators of current substance use. Whilst use of a
wide variety of substances was assessed, more detailed information
was requested for alcohol (number of units drunk/week;
number of episodes/week), cannabis (number of joints
smoked/week; number of episodes/week) and ecstasy (number of
tablets taken/episode). The questionnaire also included items
regarding volunteer's beliefs about the effects of drug use on
memory and psychopathology, and whether they believed media
reports about drugs. These measures were included to act as attitudinal
covariates in other analyses. Naloxone was included to
identify subjects who falsely reported their drug use. Participants
who reported the use of naloxone would be removed from the
study as their self-reported drug use would be deemed unreliable.
Substance use disorder and psychopathology Problematic substance
misuse and self-reported levels of anxious and depressive
symptomatology were measured with the Alcohol Use Disorders
Identification Test (AUDIT; Babor et al., 2001), the Severity of
Dependence Scale for cannabis (SDS-Cannabis; Swift et al.,
1998), the Drug Abuse Screening test (DAST; Skinner 1982) and
the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS; Johnston et
al., 2000).
The AUDIT is a ten item screening and research questionnaire
for early detection of harmful alcohol use, with subscales assessing
patterns of alcohol consumption, drinking behaviour, adverse
reactions and problem drinking. The AUDIT assesses current
drinking behaviour and discriminates between hazardous and nonhazardous
drinking. The SDS-Cannabis was derived from the original
SDS (Gossop et al., 1995) by Swift and colleagues (1998)
and has excellent psychometric properties. There is a strong
association between SDS score and those behavioural patterns of
substance use indicative of drug dependence (Gossop et al., 1995).
The DAST is a quantitative indicator of problematic use for
substances other than alcohol and tobacco for non-medical
purposes.

Cognitive tests
Volunteers were required to complete the prose recall task from
the Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test battery (RBMT; Wilson
et al., 1985), Digit Span (Weschler, 1981), and the Controlled
Oral Word Association (COWA) task (Troyer et al., 1998).
The RBMT prose recall test is a short and reliable measure of
everyday memory, used to measure immediate and delayed recall.
A brief news story is played from an audio CD, and the subject is
required to recall words and ideas immediately after presentation,
and then after a 20 minute delay. Forward and backward digit span
was taken from the revised Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale
(WAIS-R). In this task, subjects are required to repeat progressively
longer sequences of numbers in both forwards and backwards
directions. The COWA task assessed verbal fluency and
required the generation of words beginning with the letters F, A
and S in individual 1 min periods. Three scores were generated:
the total number of words; clusters, which are words beginning
with the same first two letters, words differing by only a vowel
sound, rhymed or were homonyms; and switches, which are the
number of shifts between clusters. Frequent switching between
clusters reflects optimal verbal fluency performance (Troyer et al.,
1998).
Procedure
Before completing the questionnaire and cognitive tests, volunteers
were provided with a study information sheet, which served
as the stereotype threat manipulation. Half of the participants (17
ecstasy users and 17 controls) received the prime version, which
stated that there was strong evidence linking ecstasy use and
mnemonic dysfunction. The remaining participants (17 ecstasy
users and 17 controls) received the no prime information, which
asserted that there was no conclusive evidence supporting a link.
The manipulations were also verbally reinforced by the experimenter
(KM) after the subject had read the information sheet. Volunteers
then completed the questionnaire and the cognitive
assessments. Heart rate was recorded with a commercially available
monitor before and after the experimental sessions in order to
assess physiological responses to task performance (Boots Plc,
UK). After completing all of the tasks, participants were
debriefed, the purpose of the experiment was explained to them,
and they were informed that they had been misled as part of the
procedure and given accurate information about the long-term
effects of controlled drug use.
Statistical analysis
Differences in drug use parameters were examined with one-way
ANOVA and chi square tests. Two-way ANOVA with planned
comparisons was used to examine the effects and interactions of
ecstasy use, priming status and gender on test scores. Change in
heart rate was examined with repeated measures ANOVA. Backwards
stepwise linear and logistic regression was used to explore
demographic, drug use, attitudinal, test and scale variables. Relationships
between self-reported drug use parameters were further
analysed by Spearman's correlation with a modified Bonferroni
correction applied to significant results to control for type I statistical
errors (Jaccard and Wan, 1996). A significance level of p_0.05
was set for all tests and data were analysed using SPSS v 12.
Results
It was found that 83.8% of all participants believed that drug use
caused memory loss and 76.5% that drug use caused psychiatric
problems, like depression. Table 1 displays substance use parameters
reported by the four groups. A higher proportion of ecstasy
users reported a lifetime use of amphetamine, cannabis, cocaine,
ecstasy and LSD than control subjects, although there were no differences
in drug use between primed and unprimed ecstasy users
(see Table 1 for _??. Furthermore, both groups of ecstasy users
reported more frequent use of cannabis and a greater number of
episodes and joints smoked in the previous week; more frequent
use of, and fewer days of abstinence from, cocaine; and more frequent
use of LSD (although only the primed ecstasy group
reported use in the last month) (see Table 1 for F and P values).
The frequency of ecstasy use per month was found to correlate
positively with monthly use of amphetamine (r_0.772,
p_0.001), monthly use of poppers (r_0.801, p_0.001),
monthly use of cocaine (r_0.403, p_0.05) and the number of
ecstasy tablets taken per episode (r_0.744, p_0.001).
Drug use. 
