Knowledge management issues and development processes in small- and medium-sized enterprises
The importance of intangible assets for business competitiveness in the knowledge economy is growing (Bounfour, 2003). Reasons include: the dematerialisation of manufacturing activities as businesses invest more in developing and managing products rather than manufacturing them; the rapid growth and industrialisation of services activities; the growth of 'co-production' in value creation and the role of intangibles in cooperation; and, the general emergence of knowledge as a major source of competitive advantage. Businesses need to identify their core capability, and develop and manage a business model that enables their requisite knowledge to be created and used to best effect. Assessing and managing the configuration of intangible assets for strategic readiness is one of the major management challenges of the time (Kaplan &amp; Norton, 2004).
These issues and their associated development processes may be different within small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) compared with larger organisations. With regard to the key issues in these contexts, knowledge management (KM) objectives in larger (bureaucratic?) organisations have often been defined essentially as knowledge capture and sharing issues, and approached with an information technology mindset (Applehans et al., 1999). There has also been some (separate?) recognition of the overall knowledge creation/renewal processes within larger organisations and this is often approached through an HRM/OD mindset (Swan et al., 1999). The barriers for KM developments in organisations have also been considered (Ruggles, 1998; KPMG consulting, 2000). In studies of larger firms, barriers are considered to frequently lie in cultural issues of knowledge sharing (Von Krogh et al., 2000). KM issues within smaller firms have increasingly been argued to be different from their large firm counterparts (Beijerse, 2000; Lelic, 2002). Beijerse (2000) analysed KM practices in small firms and suggested that small firms may manifest lower levels of KM recognition, and fewer strategic, tactical and operational initiatives than businesses as a whole. Lelic (2002) suggests that 'KM implementation faces several unique barriers in smaller businesses' (p. 12) including SMEs not having the vision for KM development, thinking only in terms of what is tangible — cashflow, market share, etc. and not having knowledge capture, access and re-use processes well thought through or embedded in daily practice. Evaluations of small firm practices have suggested lack of investment in IT systems (Kautz &amp; Thaysen, 2001; McAdam &amp; Reid, 2001) as a major constraint in KM. On the other hand, the potential competitive advantages of KM may be more profound in a small firm (Sparrow, 2001a). The need for knowledge renewal is particularly acute in SMEs (Martin et al., 2002).
The KM development process may also be different in organisations of different sizes. Research in larger organisations has developed assessments of KM readiness. Gottschalk &amp; Khandelwal (2004) identify elements of a stage model in KM development. Key antecedents have been investigated (Janz &amp; Prasarnphanich, 2003). Choi &amp; Lee (2003) have highlighted dynamic, system-, human-oriented, and passive KM development styles among firms. Siemieniuch &amp; Sinclair (2004) have shown how deeper and broader aspects of organisational culture and practices can contribute towards the approach towards KM. The KM development processes in SMEs operates differently from those in larger firms. Once an SME has committed to developing KM practices, implementation may be approached in many different ways, but always within severe resource constraints. The development process of KM practices in smaller firms as a whole, has been argued to need to be more holistic (Sparrow, 2001a). Because of the centrality of owner managers in most aspects of business decision making, attention needs to be paid to the role of many facets of their thinking including, their utilisation of semantic understanding, episodic knowledge, skills, tacit feel and unconscious interpretations in their reasoning, mood, and creativity (Sparrow, 1998). Because of the higher level of interdependency between practices within SMEs and the narrower margins for error in their business survival, SMEs may need to address uncertainty management, strategic and operational management requirements; engage technological/systems, business and organisational developments; and consider their knowledge-in-use, knowledge system, knowledge renewal and knowledge-economy management capabilities (Sparrow, 2001a).
Heterogeneity of SMEs in KM development
While SMEs may face different KM issues and different KM development processes from larger organisations, there is some evidence of heterogeneity in KM within SMEs. Sparrow (2001b) identified three alternative approaches that can emerge from facilitated KM development initiatives. These were 'investigative/diagnostic', 'KM development event' and 'emergent' constructions of KM development. The three conceptions differed in terms of both vision/objectives and development. Table 1 summarises the broad differences between the three alternative approaches.
Table 1 - Different SME approaches towards facilitated KM development (after Sparrow et al., 2001).
 


Table 1 highlights the fact that different SMEs may approach facilitated KM development in different ways. For example, a business may emphasise strategic as opposed to operational development. It may emphasise technological development as opposed to business development or organisational development (team functioning, etc.). It may emphasise its knowledge systems rather than knowledge renewal practices, etc. The study suggested that these preferences for emphases can be bound up with the negotiated nature of the consultancy and facilitation process. Lelic (2002) presents some anecdotal evidence that there may not be 'any great degree of homogeneity in how smaller businesses approach the discipline' (p. 13). It can be hypothesised that SME capabilities configure in complex ways to define their own different approaches to KM. The extent to which different knowledge considerations are emphasised in their current practices may combine to reinforce specific and distinct approaches towards KM development. There is evidence from research into SME development from fields other than KM that would suggest that different SMEs may approach KM in different ways. Carter et al. (2000) for example, highlight fundamental general differences in SME growth orientation. Sparrow &amp; Bentley (2000) report how stylistic differences among owner managers in risk management impinge upon SME development. With regard to KM development, the current study followed a period of extensive case study work with SMEs. That work suggested that there may be some fundamental differences within SMEs that were associated with different approaches towards KM. The current study uses a statistical approach to examine some of inter-relationships between knowledge practices in SMEs and attempts to identify broad configurative patterns that may characterise distinct approaches towards KM development among smaller firms.
Top of page 
Methodology
KM Audit Tool
Understanding of KM practices in small firms can be secured in many ways. Qualitative research can access many of the dynamics of developments within particular firm contexts. There can be value in extending such work to explore generalisability and pattern. KM work within SMEs has often adopted a qualitative research epistemology. Action research in particular has been used to good effect. The action research paradigm seeks to engage with participants as they encounter issues from successive action steps that they take with a view towards highlighting key principles that seem to be evidenced. A number of accounts of the principles of this approach have been produced (e.g. Shelton, 2001; Sparrow, 2001b). In addition, the nature of the KM facilitation process itself has been explored (Shelton, 2002). In the course of the SME development work, a framework for exploring issues in small firms was developed (Sparrow, 2001a). The Knowledge Management Centre within the University of Central England worked over a period of 4 years with small firms to support KM development. Facets of knowledge practices that were found to figure in specific case development were gradually accumulated. The significance of particular combinations of characteristics/practices was increasingly appreciated. A knowledge-based system (report writer) was developed to provide initial feedback to businesses upon likely next steps in KM development based upon their responses to a series of questions. Iterative evaluations were conducted with the system to assess readability and usability with on-line and paper-based self-completion versions together with versions involving mediation by a business adviser. The KM Audit tool was finalised in 2001. The tool is considered to be comprehensive and valuable. It has not, however, been the subject of assessments of inter-rater or test–retest reliability. The questions explored four aspects of KM development: knowledge-in-use, the knowledge system, knowledge renewal and knowledge economy management capability (Sparrow, 2001a). A total of 60 different facets of KM practices are considered using 5-point rating scales. A summary of the broad topics is provided in Table 2. The scales used in the questionnaire are presented in Table 3.
Table 2 - The item coverage of the KM Audit tool.


Table 3 - The rating scales used in the KM Audit tool.


The KM Audit tool is felt to cover the most significant aspects of knowledge practices for assessing KM development need. It examines relative strength of knowledge areas and the comprehensiveness of internal analyses undertaken. It examines the hallmarks of the knowledge system. Attention is paid to knowledge renewal and organisational learning. It is noteworthy that the tool also considers the ability of the business to manage the developments needed to enhance KM practices. A key finding in earlier research with SMEs is the evidence for a linkage between the knowledge skills and attitudes of owner-managers and/or their small management teams in the subsequent success of SME development initiatives. Business support services are often segmented on the basis of these characteristics (Atherton &amp; Lyon, 2001). The KM Audit tool includes assessments of businesses to manage KM development.
Sampling
The definition of an SME adopted in the study was the one developed by the EU. The company must have less than 250 employees, an annual turnover on no more than  40 Million or a total balance of  27 Million, and fulfil the condition that less than 25% of the company is owned by a large company.
The responses from 33 case study SMEs were utilised for this study. The cases were drawn from a larger database of contacted organisations. They were responses only from smaller organisations and all were private concerns. The businesses were from the West Midlands region of the UK. The businesses were not a random sample of the region's businesses. They were felt to constitute a useful cross section. Extensive efforts were made in the course of the wider research project to secure access to businesses in most economic sectors in the region. They included businesses from manufacturing, hotels and restaurants, and business services SIC sectors. The sample did not include, agriculture, fishing, mining or quarrying or the public service and utility sectors of the UK economy.
Administration
The responses to the questionnaire were given by the owner-managers of the SMEs. In common with other mediated questionnaires, the KM Audit tool was used within a wider diagnostic context. Interviews were held with owner-managers about the business's history and aspirations alongside completion of the Audit. Any ambiguity in questions was addressed by the business adviser. Additional discussion was often held upon an issue beyond the simple obtaining of a rating scale response from the owner-manager.
Analysis and findings
SPSS v12 was used to undertake a hierarchical cluster analysis of the responses from the 33 SMEs. Cluster analysis of small sets of small firms has been found to be a useful approach towards identifying meaningful differences in small firm thinking and action (Kotey &amp; Meredith, 1997). One-way analyses of variance (and post hoc multiple comparisons of means analyses) were calculated to identify any significant differences in the specific KM practices between the identified clusters of organisations.
Four major clusters were apparent from the analysis. The clusters represented alternative emphases of businesses with regard to knowledge management development. The KM scores for each of the four groups of businesses are detailed in Table 4.
Table 4 - The KM Audit scores for the four groups of businesses.

One-way ANOVA comparisons were computed for each item in the questionnaire to compare the four groups. Table 4 summarises the differences between the four sets of businesses using the major questionnaire sub-divisions. Statistically significant differences (P&lt;0.05) were identified for 44 of the 60 items (i.e. 73% of items). It is clear that SMEs may not be best viewed as an homogeneous group in terms of their KM practices. There is differentiation among groups of businesses in the majority of regards.

