.
Atom Transfer Radical Polymerization
Although atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) has been found to be a useful technique for the synthesis of glycopolymers, as with NMP, the majority of the syntheses have involved the use of protected glycomonomers.[54-70] Narain and Armes successfully synthesized glycomonomers [Fig. 3(5,6)] via ring-opening of either glucono- or lactobiono-lactone with 2-aminoethyl methacrylate, thus removing the requirement for protecting group chemistry. Polymerization of these monomers was achieved in varying ratios of MeOH/H2O using the common CuBr/bipy catalyst system with either a PEGylated or aldehyde-functional initiator. When high MeOH/H2O ratios are used, polymerizations proceed to high conversions in approximately 15 h at ambient temperatures and give polymers of controlled Mn and low polydispersities. Reaction times are reduced drastically on addition of water; polymerizations in water alone reach near completion in under 1 h, albeit at the expense of some control.[71-73] 

Figure 3. Example monomers used in the synthesis of glycopolymers via atom transfer radical polymerization.
[Normal View 18K | Magnified View 46K]
Finn et al. have polymerized commercially available 2-(D-glucosyloxy)ethyl methacrylate (7) as a mixture of anomers, using the same catalytic system in combination with an azido-functional initiator that allows end functionalization of the resulting polymer via Huisgen's 1,3 dipolar cycloaddition (click) reaction with an alkyne (vide infra).[74] Most recently, Vázquez-Dorbatt and Maynard polymerized 2-(2-acetamido-2-deoxy--D-glucosyloxy)ethyl methacrylate (8) using a CuBr/Me6-TREN catalyst with a biotinylated alkyl bromide initiator. Polymerizations are controlled, displaying a linear evolution of Mn with conversion, however the observed Mn values were always higher than expected suggesting that initiation is inefficient.[75]
Reversible Addition-Fragmentation Chain Transfer Polymerization
Reversible addition-fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization[76] is the most recent CRP technique to have garnered widespread use, its tolerance to a wide range of reaction conditions and functionalities making it suitable for the polymerization of an almost limitless range of monomers. Such tolerance makes it understandable that RAFT has quickly become common in the polymerization of otherwise challenging monomers. Glycopolymer synthesis was first achieved using RAFT by Lowe et al.[77] Glucosyl methacrylate 7 was polymerized under aqueous conditions with (4-cyanopentanoic acid)-4-dithiobenzoate (CPADB, 9; Fig. 4) as the chain transfer agent (CTA) and 4,4-azobis(4-cyanopentanoic acid) (ACPA, 10) as the initiator; a slightly basic reaction medium was required to aid solublity. Polymerizations were seen to proceed in a controlled manner, displaying pseudo first order kinetics and a near linear relationship between Mn and conversion; values of Mn are also very near to theoretical values at lower conversions, but deviate as polymerizations near completion. Further evidence for the level of control is seen in the values of Mw/Mn, which remain below 1.07 throughout the polymerization. Chain extension and block copolymer formation [with 3-sulfopropyl methacrylate (SPMA)] were demonstrated using poly(7) as a macro-CTA (Mn = 14.2 kDa; Mw/Mn = 1.07). In both cases the reactivation of the thiocarbonylthio groups appears quantitative, with no detectable low molecular weight peak in the SEC, however polydispersities increased above 1.5 and some high molecular weight termination products were seen. When SPMA was used for macro-CTA synthesis (Mn = 35 kDa; Mw/Mn = 1.04) and, in turn, used for polymerization of 7, the final copolymer retained its low polysdispersity (final polymer Mn = 68.2 kDa; Mw/Mn = 1.18). 

Figure 4. Examples of the monomers and chain transfer agents used in synthesis of glycopolymers via RAFT polymerization.
[Normal View 27K | Magnified View 71K]
Davis and coworkers[78] synthesized methacryloyl monomers, featuring 1-O-methyl -D-gluco- and manno-pyranosides (11 and 12, respectively), using an enzymatic lipase-catalyzed synthesis; consequently, the methacrylate is attached to the 6-position of the sugar. Polymerizations were run using the same CTA/initiator combination as Lowe et al.,[77] however the CTA and initiator were dissolved in EtOH prior to addition. The use of EtOH aids the solubility of the CTA and initiator without resorting to the use of a base and thus reduces the rate of CTA hydrolysis. After a short inhibition period, polymerizations were seen to proceed with pseudofirst order kinetics and molecular weights that increased linearly with conversion, albeit with values lower than those predicted; polydispersities were consistently low throughout. Block copolymers with HEMA and 7 were demonstrated with little increase in PDI.[79][80] The same group used a similar method for the synthesis of a glucopyranose-substituted vinyladipoyl monomer (13), which was subsequently polymerized using both dithiocarbamate (14) and xanthate (15) CTAs in water and MeOH, respectively. In both cases, polymerizations gave products with low polydispersities, particularly when MeOH was employed, however conversions were extremely low at 27 and 14% for the aqueous and methanolic systems, respectively.[81] The same monomer was used by Stenzel et al. for the synthesis of glycostars by polymerization in the presence of a tetrafunctional xanthate (16); polymerizations were performed in DMAc at 70 °C using ACPA as the initiator. As was seen with linear polymers, conversions were low, reaching only 35% after 4 h and a limiting conversion of 50% after 9 h. Molecular weights were seen to increase with conversion but were higher than predicted, for any given conversion. This could be attributed either to the use of SEC with inappropriate calibration or to the occurrence of side reactions.[82] The same group also polymerized N-acryloyl D-glucosamine (17) using mono- and trifunctional trithiocarbonate CTAs. Linear polymers and thermoresponsive block copolymers with NIPAM were synthesized and in most cases polymerizations reached good conversion (&gt;70%) in under 7 h with good control over molecular weight and polydispersity. However, the presence of some low molecular weight material in the block copolymers was detected, suggesting that chain extension was not quantitative. Initial attempts at glycostar synthesis used polar aprotic solvents to allow homogeneous dissolution of both CTA and 17; in these cases, control over the polymerization was limited. To gain greater control, block copolymer stars were synthesized by sequential polymerization of 2-hydroxyethyl acrylate (HEA) and 17; the short HEA block improved the solubility of the CTA in an aqueous EtOH solvent for the polymerization of 17. As expected, Mn was found to increase with conversion, but the correlation was not linear, with values being higher than expected at low conversion, then lower above approximately 50% monomer consumption; polydisperities were quite low (1.3-1.6) but not as low as those of linear polymers.
Stenzel and Huck have recently described the synthesis of thermoresponsive glycopolymer brushes via RAFT.[83] They immobilized a trithiocarbonate CTA on a silica substrate via the Z-group and synthesized homo- and block copolymers of N-isopropyl acrylamide and N-acryloyl glucosamine. Polymerizations were achieved by submerging the trithiocarbonate-functionalized substrate in a solution of the appropriate monomer, ACPA and a small quantity of free trithiocarbonate; the free RAFT agent having previously been shown to suppress termination reactions when the polymers are unattached from the surface, resulting in a greater degree of control. The molecular weight of the polymer in solution increases linearly with conversion, agreeing closely with theoretical values. Similarly, the brush thicknesses, as measured by ellipsometry, increased with monomer conversion.[84]
Spain et al.[85] have recently demonstrated the polymerization of an anomerically pure glycomonomer, 2-(-D-galactosyloxy)ethyl methacrylate (GalEMA, 18), for the synthesis of glycosylated nanoparticles, by using polymerization conditions similar to those of Davis et al.[78] GalEMA was polymerized in 4:1 H2O:EtOH in the presence of 9 and 10 at 70 °C to give near complete conversion (&gt;95%) in under 2 h; polymers were of low polydispersity (&lt;1.2) and had predictable molecular weights.
POSTPOLYMERIZATION GLYCOSYLATION
Nature produces glycopeptides by post-translational modification, that is to say the carbohydrates are added after the protein has been biosynthesized. However, for the synthetic chemist it is generally accepted that the most efficient method for producing glycopolymers is by the use of functional monomers, as discussed previously.[86] Conducting reactions on a presynthesized polymer backbone tends not to lead to 100% functionalization, giving an inhomogeneous sequence within the chain. There are, however, reports of this methodology being applied to the synthesis of glycopolymers, such as in the glycosylation of PVA by Takasu et al.,[87][88] or of copolymers of acrylamide and N-acryloyloxysuccinimide described by Whitesides and coworkers.[89] When complete functionalization is not required, these methods can be sufficient. Postpolymerization modification approaches avoid the complex reaction and purification procedures often associated with carbohydrate monomer synthesis; thus, it remains as an attractive option for glycopolymer synthesis. The preparation of a reactive scaffold from a simple monomer, which can then be used to create a wide range of glyco-functionalized polymers through highly efficient reactions, is therefore a desirable target.
Click Reactions
In 2001, Sharpless and coworkers[90] introduced the idea of click reactions, which represent a family of high yielding, efficient reactions that require little (if any) purification and can preferably be conducted in aqueous conditions at ambient temperature with high functional group tolerance. The most exciting reaction to be highlighted was the Huisgen dipolar cycloaddition[91] between an azide and a terminal alkyne, in the presence of a Cu(I) catalyst. This remarkable reaction occurs readily at room temperature, in often quantitative yields to give a stable triazole ring. The utility of click reactions in bio-organic chemistry has subsequently been demonstrated for a range of carbohydrates.[92-94]
Because of the instability of azides, application of this methodology to the preparation of functional polymers is most likely to be successful via the use of alkynyl monomers (Fig. 5). However, the ATRP of propargyl methacrylate (19) results in PDIs &gt; 3 at 50% conversion, attributed to transfer of the radical to the alkynyl moiety. Hence, investigations instead were focused on the azido monomer, (20) which, when incorporated into a polymethacrylate, was capable of reacting with alkyne substrates in high yields.[95] (An important observation is that ROMP is tolerant to both these monomer classes[96] but has not been used yet for glycopolymer synthesis via click methods). The use of trimethylsilyl- (TMS) protected alkynes prevents these side reactions, and has since been applied by Haddleton and coworkers[97] to give well-defined glycopolymers bearing, quantitatively, galactosyl and mannosyl chain functionality from the corresponding protected or unprotected glycosyl azides (Scheme 2). There was no noticeable increase in PDI upon functionalization, even when two different glycosyl azides were added to give heterogeneous side chains; biological activity was confirmed by concanavalin A (Con A) binding assays. Hawker and coworkers have also successfully prepared asymmetric dendrimers from unprotected azido-sugars and alkyne terminated dendrimers.[98] Single peaks were obtained in MALDI-tof mass spectrometry, proving a single molecular species was present. The resulting materials contained both recognition (carbohydrate) and detection (fluorophore) agents for hemagglutination inhibition. The group later extended this to include carbohydrate coupling in their simultaneous and cascading method of post polymerization modification, resulting in polymers with multiple functionalities, which is only possible with extremely efficient coupling reactions.[98] 

Figure 5. Huisgen's (3 + 2) cycloaddition, or click, reaction and examples of monomers that give rise to clickable polymers.
[Normal View 12K | Magnified View 25K]


Scheme 2. Polymerization and click glycosylation of TMS protected propargyl methacrylate as demonstrated by Haddleton[97] et al.
[Normal View 20K | Magnified View 51K]
Riguera et al. have used the opposite strategy of coupling unprotected alkynyl sugars to the terminal azide residues of 3rd generation gallic acid - triethylene glycol dendrimers, which bear 27 end groups (Fig. 6).[99] -D-Fucoside and mannosides along with -D-lactoside were coupled to the exterior with over 90% yields. The use of ultrafiltration expedited the process, in keeping with the click philosophy. PEG-dendritic block-copolymers were also synthesized using the same methodology, in conjunction with high yielding, peptide coupling reactions.[99] 
Glycosylated, dendronized silica particles were made in the same manner for bio-selective chromatography.[100] This clicking strategy can also be applied to immobilized substrates, exemplified by reaction with alkyne-terminated self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on gold.[84] It has been used to make a novel series of triazole monomers, which as yet have not been employed to prepare glycomonomers.[101] An alternative (1,3-dipolar) cycloaddition reaction using nitrile oxides with norbornadiene[102] was found to be less efficient for the production of novel glycomonomers for living ROMP polymerization, highlighting the astonishing efficiency of the Huisgen's reaction.
Reineke and coworkers[103] have used a click polymerization strategy[104] to produce glycopolymers in which carbohydrates are incorporated into the backbone (Scheme 3). Diazido-trehalose was coclicked with a dialkyne, surprisingly giving PDIs below 1.3. This gives water soluble materials which do not aggregate, are biodegradable, and can bind to DNA. 

