A Temporary Exposure through
the Loch Lomond Readvance End
Moraine/Ice-Contact Delta Complex
near Drymen, Stirlingshire
DAVID J. A. EVANS* &amp; STUART B. WILSON**
*Department of Geography, Durham University, Durham, UK
**Envirocentre, Glasgow, Scotland
ABSTRACT This paper reports on a temporary exposure through the flat-topped segment of the
outermost Loch Lomond Readvance moraine near Drymen. The sediment sequence comprises four
lithofacies associations that document the deposition of fine-grained sediments in coalescent
subaqueous grounding line fans into Glacial Lake Blane (Blane Valley Laminated Silts). The
occurrence of isolated lenses of matrix-supported gravel (cohesionless debris flows) and evidence of
hydrofracture filling, deformation and faulting in the top of the lake sediments all record the advance
of glacier ice over the proximal face of the ice-contact fans. This confirms previous interpretations of
the outermost Loch Lomond Readvance moraine ridge near Drymen as a subaqueous ice-contact
depositional centre that was locally glacitectonically stacked by glacier overriding.
KEY WORDS: End moraine, ice-contact delta, Glacial Lake Blane, glacitectonics
Context: Loch Lomond Readvance Moraines around Drymen
The moraines that encircle the south shores of Loch Lomond (Figure 1) have long
been recognised as the limit of a glacier Readvance during the Loch Lomond Stade/
Younger Dryas, (Jack, 1874; Bell, 1892; Renwick &amp; Gregory, 1909; Rose, 1980,
1981). The moraines can be traced from the west shores of the loch, where they
penetrate into the valleys of Glen Finlas and Glen Fruin, into the Vale of Leven and
then along the northern slopes of the Kilpatrick Hills before descending into the
Blane Valley to the east of Drymen. Along most of their length the moraines consist
of multiple ridges up to 7 m high and 40 m wide, and have been interpreted as
subaerially deposited push moraines (Rose, 1981). However, the most prominent
and complex moraines occur in the area to the east of Drymen, where they comprise
predominantly flat-topped ridges interpreted as coalescent subaqueous fans and icecontact
Gilbert-type deltas, deposited into Glacial Lake Blane to a maximum
altitude of 65 m OD (Rose, 1981, 1989; Benn &amp; Evans, 1996; Phillips et al., 2002;
Evans et al., 2003; Evans &amp; Rose, 2003). At least three main ridges, each comprising
subaerial and subaqueous elements, occur between Drymen and Gartness,
spectacular exposures through the ice-contact deltaic sediments having been made
available by quarrying of the inner ridge at Drumbeg (Rose, 1981, 1989). Detailed
studies of exposed sediments in the inner ridge at Drumbeg quarry revealed that
subaqueous fan and delta deposition was followed by oscillations of the glacier
margin as recorded by glacitectonic structures and a glacitectonite-subglacial till
Figure 1. Summary of Quaternary stratigraphy in the south Loch Lomond basin based on key
locations. Inset map shows locations of key stratigraphic sites, Loch Lomond Readvance
moraines and the extent of Glacial Lake Blane (after Rose, 1989). The Gartacharn Farm site is
marked by the asterisk
Drymen End Moraine Exposure 
continuum (Benn &amp; Evans, 1996; Phillips et al., 2002, 2003; Hiemstra et al., 2003;
Benn et al., 2004).
Although the flat-topped nature of large parts of the outermost ridge suggests that
it too was deposited as a series of subaqueous fans that prograded to form coalescent
ice-contact deltas up to an altitude of 65 m OD at the Loch Lomond Readvance
maximum, extensive exposures through the ridge sediments have previously been
restricted to those at Gartness where the ridge is more undulatory and lies below the
maximum lake level of 65 m OD (Rose, 1980, 1981, 2003). At this location Rose
(1980, 1981, 2003) describes the glacitectonic disturbance of pre-Loch Lomond
Readvance sediments, specifically the Clyde Beds (Lateglacial Interstadial marine
sediments) and Blane Valley Laminated Silts (Glacial Lake Blane sediments). The
localised homogenisation of these sediments has resulted in the deposition of the
Gartocharn Till on the proximal slopes of the outer ridge. Rose (2003) reports that
the outer ridge comprises Blane Valley Laminated Silts along its flat-topped segment
between Finnich and Drumhead; this demonstrates an ice-contact subaqueous origin
with sediments prograding to lake level at 65 m OD along a large part of the former
ice margin. At Drumhead the ridge changes abruptly from a 65 m flat-topped feature
to a steep-sided moraine composed of sand and gravel (Figure 2). It can be traced
onto the hillside to the north at Upper Blairmore where it is composed of diamicton,
reflecting a change in the local source materials for moraine construction.
In 2004 a temporary exposure through the upper sediments in the flat-topped
segment of the outermost ridge was made available to accommodate foundations for
a building at Gartacharn Farm (NS 496877; Figures 1 and 3). This research note
reports on the sedimentology and structures identified during the short period of
exposure, allowing further elaboration on the former depositional environment at
the Loch Lomond Readvance maximum.
Figure 2. View from the west of the outermost Loch Lomond Readvance moraine/ice-contact
delta ridge, showing the abrupt change from a flat-top to a sharp ridge at Drumhead
Sediments and Structures at Gartacharn Farm
The exposure at Gartacharn Farm consists of more than 3 m of undisturbed crossstratified
fine sand (lithofacies association/LFA 1) overlain by up to 2 m of heavily
contorted, cross-bedded laminated sands, silts and muds (LFA 2; Figures 4 – 7). The
cross-bedded laminated sands and silts of LFA 2 become more dominant up section,
constituting a general coarsening-upward sequence. A poorly sorted gravel lens
(LFA 3) with highly contorted limbs occurs in the uppermost 0.40 m of the contorted
sands and silts (Figure 4). Crude upward-coarsening in the gravel lens is apparent
where the larger clasts form an openwork structure. The section is capped by an
easterly thinning bed of massive, matrix-supported diamicton (LFA 4), which is clast
poor and possesses a matrix similar to the underlying muds of LFA 2. ThisDmmthins
from 0.40 m at the western end of the exposure and wedges out 3 m to the east, on the
middle of the ridge. Sub-vertical diapirs composed of mud with minor beds of silt and
sand also cross cut the contorted sand and silt laminae of upper LFA 2 (Figure 5).
These diapirs occasionally penetrate the overlying Dmm and appear to have
originated as clastic dykes injected into upper LFA 2 in response to fluid escape
from the more muddy part of lower LFA 2. Isolated, steeply inclined reversed or thrust
faults and conjugate fault patterns or Riedel shears were observed in the upper 50 cm
of LFA 2 (Figures 6 and 7), but occur only on the western part of the exposure. These
structures indicate compressional deformation that has been applied from the west.
Interpretation of the Sediments and Structures
The sedimentary sequence exposed at Gartacharn Farm, specifically the crossstratified
sands of LFA 1 and laminated sands, silts and muds of LFA 2, has all
Figure 3. View looking south along the crest of the ridge at Gartacharn Farm, with temporary
exposure in foreground
the characteristics of Rose's (1981, 2003) Blane Valley Laminated Silts, which
were deposited in an ice-proximal subaqueous environment at the margin of
Glacial Lake Blane. The lack of Gilbert-type deltaic bedding similar to that
Figure 4. Composite vertical profile log of the temporary exposure at Gartacharn Farm. Facies
codes after Evans &amp; Benn (2004)
Figure 5. Heavily contorted sands, silts and clays of upper LFA 2 and gravel lenses of LFA 3
containing vertical diapirs of mud with minor components of sand and silt laminae (outlined
by black broken lines). The laminae occur as intraclasts in the mud matrix of the diapirs. Some
diapirs penetrate the capping diamicton
348 D. J. A. Evans &amp; S. B. Wilson
Downloaded By: [University of Lancaster] At: 11:46 7 December 2007
observed in the ridge at Drumbeg quarry to the west indicates that deposition
of LFA's 1 and 2 was in a series of coalescent subaqueous grounding line fans
fed by meltwater efflux from the Lomond Glacier snout when discharges were
Figure 6. Example of massive, matrix supported gravel lens with crudely developed upward
coarsening trend. Note the contorted limbs of the lens and the occurrence of deformed sand,
silt and clay laminae around the lens and in the vicinity of a steeply inclined reverse fault to the
right of the exposure
Figure 7. Steeply inclined reversed faults and conjugate fault patterns or Riedel shears (black
broken lines) in the sand, silt and clay laminae of upper LFA 2
Drymen End Moraine Exposure 349
Downloaded By: [University of Lancaster] At: 11:46 7 December 2007
relatively low. The higher discharges typical of advanced glacier recession are
recorded by the gravelly foresets and topsets that overlie cross-bedded sands in
the ice-marginal ridges to the west. The introduction of coarser materials to the
ridge at Gartacharn Farm is recorded by the influx of poorly sorted gravel lenses
(LFA 3) towards the top of LFA 2. Crude upward coarsening in LFA 3 is typical
of deposition by cohesionless debris flows and may record the scouring of LFA 2
sands and silts by debris flows derived from the glacier snout as it moved over
the site.
The direct impact of glacier ice at the site is recorded by the contorted bedding
and thrust faults and Riedel shears in upper LFA 2. This compressional
deformation is interpreted as evidence of glacitectonic disturbance of the icemarginal
ridge due to the stress induced by the advance of the Lomond glacier
lobe as it flowed out radially from Loch Lomond into the Blane Valley. As the
glacier moved over the western side of the ridge it folded and faulted the icecontact
glacilacustrine sediments and produced elevated local groundwater
pressures so that hydrofractures were initiated in upper LFA 2. These
hydrofractures were filled by the muds of lower LFA 2 and some sandy material
ingested from the walls of the fractures (cf. Rijsdijk et al., 1999). Because the
glacitectonised sediments are found only on the proximal side of the ridge it is
suggested that ice advanced into the proximal face of the ice-contact fan but did
not completely override it. That the LFA 4 Dmm, interpreted here as a subglacial
till derived predominantly from underlying muddy sediments, wedges out at the
centre of the ridge adds further support to this interpretation. The characteristics
of the Dmm and its relationships to underlying glacitectonised materials are
similar to those of Rose's (1981, 2003) Gartocharn Till (cf. Hiemstra et al., 2003;
Benn et al., 2004; Evans &amp; Hiemstra, 2005) and it is therefore regarded as the
stratigraphic equivalent at this site. The decreasing thickness of the till and
underlying glacitectonic structures in an easterly direction reflects a thinning submarginal
shear zone.
Synopsis
The temporary exposure in the outer ice-marginal ridge at Gartacharn Farm
confirms previous reconstructions of glacial sedimentary environments in the area.
The sediments and structures record ice-proximal subaqueous deposition in a series
of coalescent grounding line fans, which at this site graded to the 65 m OD upper
level of Glacial Lake Blane. Evidence of cohesionless debris flow activity towards the
top of the lake sediments, together with glacitectonic structures and hydrofracture
fills lying beneath a diamicton on the western side of the ridge, indicate that the icemarginal
ridge was partially overridden by the eastern margin of the Lomond
Glacier at the Loch Lomond Readvance maximum. This confirms Rose's (2003)
proposals that the outermost Loch Lomond Readvance "moraine' is composed of
locally sheared lake sediments. The change in ridge surface morphology at
Drumhead, immediately to the south of Gartacharn Farm, indicates a subaerial
push moraine origin, where lake sediments were bulldozed above the lake surface. A
modern example of a similar glacial depositional environment is that of Hagavatn in
Iceland (Bennett et al., 2000).
References
Bell, D. (1892) On a glacial mound in Glen Fruin, Dumbartonshire, Transactions of the Geological Society
of Glasgow, 9, pp. 345 – 354.
Benn, D. I. &amp; Evans, D. J. A. (1996) The interpretation and classification of subglacially deformed
materials, Quaternary Science Reviews, 15, pp. 23 – 52.

