1. Introduction
Detailed knowledge of membrane properties is becoming increasingly important as nanofiltration matures into new areas of technology and researchers attempt to better understand the fundamentals. For example, the development of polymeric solvent resistant nanofiltration (SRNF) membranes has attracted much attention and enabled several potential applications in the processing of organic solvent streams [1], [2], [3] and [4]. Although precise transport mechanisms across the convection–diffusion spectrum are an ongoing topic of debate, it is generally accepted that polymer swelling plays a significant role in determining levels of flux and rejection [2], [5] and [6]. 
Most previous efforts to quantify the swelling of nanofiltration membranes have followed the approach of Ho and Sirkar [7] whereby the weight difference between a dry and solvent impregnated polymer sample is determined. Stafie et al. [8] used the method with specially prepared “thick films” of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and measured swelling approaching 205% for hexane-solute (oil or PIB) systems. Vankelecom et al. [9] used “slabs” of PDMS with t-butanol solvent to demonstrate 70% swelling in the unrestrained state, but only 29% swelling when a sample was clamped. The same authors also report that tetradecane solvent previously sorbed within PDMS could be removed using an applied 10 bar pressure and then restored in a reversible manner upon release of the pressure and re-immersion in the solvent. Yoo et al. [10] used four variants of hydroxyl-terminated PDMS in the form of 20 mm × 10 mm × 1.5 mm blocks to measure swelling in the presence of pure solvents as well as binary and ternary mixtures. Of most relevance are the data for pure n-hexane, n-heptane and cyclohexane solvents, where swelling ratios in the region of 4 were noted (i.e. 300% expansion). Geens et al. [11] also showed significant swelling with a range of solvents where prior to testing the selective top layer from three hydrophilic polymer membranes was removed using liquid nitrogen. In contrast, Piccinini et al. [12] describe an alternative, and relatively complex, technique where a quartz spring microbalance was used to simultaneously measure solubility, diffusion coefficient and swelling for a solvent/polymer combination of acetonitrile/polyetherurethane. 
The current authors have taken an approach to determinations of swelling that does not require the weighing of a sample. A commercially available inductive probe was used to directly measure the lateral swelling of PDMS layers on composite membranes both with and without an imposed pressure. 
2. Experimental
2.1. Membrane and solvents
All swelling experiments used samples of a flat sheet polyacrylonitrile (PAN)/PDMS composite membrane supplied by GKSS Forschungszentrum (see Fig. 1). The PAN substrate had a quoted thickness of 40 ?m, although SEM micrographs suggested a manufacturing tolerance of up to ±10%. Membranes with a nominal PDMS layer thickness of 10 ?m were available to the authors. The hydrophobic PDMS, which achieves the separation in SRNF, was radiation crosslinked during manufacture and a typical sample exhibited a thickness tolerance of ±0.5 ?m as determined by SEM. The radiation crosslinking precluded the use of a conventional gravimetric method for swelling determination, as a block of PDMS treated in such a way would not exhibit the same degree of crosslinking as a thin PDMS layer from a composite membrane. 
Fig. 1. SEM micrograph of a composite PAN/PDMS membrane. 
The solvents shown in Table 1 were used in the swelling experiments. These are representative of the alkane, aromatic and alcohol solvents that some of the authors have previously investigated in SRNF experiments [13], [14] and [15] and span a range of polarity, and thus potential swelling capability, as evidenced by the quoted solubility parameter (?). In many cases, a solvent was used in its pure state, however, for a smaller number of experiments appropriately proportioned mixtures of alcohol with either xylene or heptane were generated. All solvents had initial purities in excess of 99% and were obtained from Sigma–Aldrich, Fisher Scientific or Shell Global Solutions. 
Table 1. 
Lateral expansion (swelling) of PAN and PDMS/PAN composite membranes in pure solvents with zero applied pressure; standard deviation of measurements are shown in brackets 
a At least, four measurements.
b At least, nine measurements. 
2.2. Apparatus and procedure
Membrane swelling was determined using the apparatus shown schematically in Fig. 2a and b. Referring to Fig. 2a, in an experiment with no applied pressure, a 2 cm × 2 cm square of PAN or composite membrane was placed in a short, flat-bottomed, round dish. A 10 mm diameter spacer was placed on top of this sample to prevent direct, and potentially sensor damaging, contact between the measurement probe and the subsequently introduced solvent. The extent of swelling was determined using a freshly calibrated Mahr P2004 M inductive probe connected to a Millitron S1840 electronic column gauge; this arrangement essentially comprises a sensitive dial comparator and is more normally used by metrologists to determine the eccentricity of rotating components. The probe was rigidly mounted in a standard 820 N, screw adjustable, comparator stand that was also able to accommodate the flat-bottomed dish. The probe/gauge combination had a manufacturer quoted resolution of 0.1 ?m, a displacement range of 4 mm and required a force of 1 N to induce a detectable linear movement of the measurement tip. Whilst the probe could be considered to impose a small pressure on a sample, this was taken to be negligible for the current purpose. 
Fig. 2. Schematics of apparati for measurements of membrane swelling (a) no applied pressure (b) with applied pressure. Legend: (1) comparator stand; (2) overall height adjustment via screw adjustment; (3) flat-bottomed round dish; (4) spacer; (5) membrane or substrate sample to be tested; (6) inductive probe; (7) measurement tip (linear movement); (8) connecting cable; (9) electronic gauge column; (10) optional interface to PC; (11) cantilever bar; (12) weight; (13) support frame and bearing mount for cantilever bar. 
Referring to Fig. 2b, using a modified apparatus comprising of an additional support frame and a cantilever bar that pivoted about a bearing mount in one end, it was possible to impose a pressure upon a test sample. The cantilever bar was arranged to rest horizontally between the inductive probe and the spacer. By adjusting the distance between the sample and pivot, and/or adding weight to the free end of the cantilever bar, it was possible to vary the applied pressure and values up to 20 bar were investigated. 
In a typical swelling experiment, the pure PAN or composite membrane sample was mounted dry in the flat-bottomed dish, the requisite spacer was positioned and, if necessary, a pressure was imposed by adding weight to the cantilever bar.1 The measurement probe was then lowered to contact either the top of the spacer or the cantilever bar. With the probe reset to zero, 5–10 ml of solvent was quickly added to the dish to completely immerse the sample whence swelling started immediately. Sixty seconds was typically allowed for a sample to reach an equilibrium thickness in the solvent(s) before the final displacement measurement was taken; preliminary experiments showed that a time of 5–10 s was required in the absence of any imposed pressure. When mixtures of solvents were investigated it was necessary to shroud the measurement area in order to minimise changes in composition by component evaporation. As only a limited supply of membrane was available to the authors it was necessary to re-use some of the tested samples that had not been previously exposed to an applied pressure. Following an experiment, such membranes were vacuum dried for 30 min to remove any residual solvent and then left overnight to re-acclimatise to atmospheric conditions. In this way, membranes were restored to their original state, as evidenced by repeat swelling experiments under otherwise identical conditions. 
3. Results and discussion
Experiments were performed to assess the capability and limitations of the new apparatus by determining the swelling of PAN and the PAN/PDMS composite membrane in both pure solvents and mixtures of solvents. In all cases, repeat measurements were required to give a level of data consistency. For the PAN substrate alone, at least four repeats were performed, whereas with the PAN/PDMS composite, this was raised to at least nine repeats for all the data reported in Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Fig. 5, Fig. 6 and Fig. 7. When evaluating swelling of the PDMS layer in a composite membrane it was assumed that dimension changes in the PAN layer were the same as determined in a corresponding experiment with the PAN alone. The test samples, as assessed by visual inspection at the end of an experiment, were completely wetted. 
Fig. 3. Swelling of the PDMS layer in a PAN/PDMS composite membrane as induced by pure solvents. 
Fig. 4. Swelling of the PDMS layer in a composite PDMS/PAN membrane for two pure solvents over a range of applied pressures. 
Fig. 5. Swelling of the PDMS layer in a composite PDMS/PAN membrane for two alkyl solvent/ethanol mixtures. 
Fig. 6. Swelling of the PDMS layer in a composite PDMS/PAN membrane with xylene/alcohol mixtures. 
Fig. 7. Swelling of the PDMS layer in a composite PDMS/PAN membrane for xylene/ethanol mixtures over a range of applied pressures. 
3.1. Pure solvents
Table 1 presents typical results of experiments with no applied pressure using the apparatus shown schematically in Fig. 2a. The data demonstrate the ability of the apparatus to quantify swelling and comprise average values for sample expansion/shrinkage and respective standard deviations for the displacement measurements; the latter are also representative of the ranges obtained in all experiments. 
When the PAN backing alone was tested with low polarity solvents such as n-heptane and xylene there was no change in lateral dimension. However, with higher polarity (alcohol) solvents some shrinkage was observed, the extent of which was seemingly dictated by the solubility parameter (?) of the solvent once a threshold value of ? had been exceeded. Experiments using the PAN/PDMS composite showed appreciable swelling with all tested solvents. For low polarity solvents, the extent of swelling was exclusively dictated by expansion of the PDMS layer, whereas with the highest polarity solvents shrinkage of the PAN layer became progressively more comparable to expansion of the PDMS layer. 
It is worth noting that measurements with the PAN/PDMS composite membrane were generally more difficult to perform consistently, and potentially influenced by two factors. Firstly, for a given experiment sequence, e.g. with one pure solvent, 10 distinct membrane samples were typically chosen at random in order to facilitate repeat measurements. Secondly, a limitation of the new technique is that only displacement from a starting point (i.e. the non-swollen state) can be measured rather than absolute sample thickness during swelling. Bearing in mind the variability in PAN thickness and the PDMS thickness imparted to a membrane during manufacture, these two factors combine to introduce scatter to a measured value. In some cases, the standard deviation in measurements was significant compared to the average value, and for methanol in particular sufficiently large to render the absolute result unreliable at this stage of apparatus development. 
Although the results presented in Table 1 and Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Fig. 5, Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 should be viewed within the context of overall accuracy, the standard deviations of measurements appear to be comparable to those reported by Stafie et al. [8] using the Ho and Sirkar method [7] and demonstrate the potential of the new technique for membrane characterisation. Moreover, the new method offers several advantages including the ability to test membranes in their manufactured state, in a variety of physical arrangements (e.g. clamped, with/without imposed pressure) and the potential to determine transient measurements of swelling (e.g. as solvent progressively wets a membrane or as solvent composition is altered). 
The relationship between ? and swelling of the PDMS membrane layer is plotted in Fig. 3. For solvents with ? values in the range 14.3–15.3 MPa0.5, the average expansion of the PDMS layer increased from 148 to 169%, where the latter represents the peak value. Over the region ? = 15.3–23.6 MPa0.5, the solvent polarity increases to induce progressively less swelling in the PDMS layer and for i-propanol, the average expansion was limited to 14%. 

