1. Introduction
In February 2005 the City of Edinburgh Council's proposals for congestion charging in Edinburgh were rejected by city residents in a referendum (City of Edinburgh Council, 2005). Of those voting in the referendum, 74% voted against the proposals. With 69% of City of Edinburgh residents on the Electoral Register voting in the referendum, a high turnout was achieved. This paper investigates newspaper response to the Edinburgh congestion charging proposals prior to the referendum, over the time period of a European funded project, PRoGR€SS (June 1998–May 2004). 
Many urban road pricing proposals, including those for Edinburgh, have not been implemented. There is an increasing need to overcome low public and political acceptability of road pricing strategies (Schade and Schlag, 2003). Motorists tend to perceive congestion charging as a tax, both unfair that they have to pay for something that previously they had for free and coercive as they have few, if any, practical alternatives (Harrington et al., 1998). Acceptability of road pricing varies over time from the initial proposals through to the introduction of a scheme. It is acknowledged that acceptability falls before scheme introduction (when the public realise that they have to pay and do not like the design) but then rises after introduction (when the public can see that it works). Road pricing schemes in Norway have been implemented, despite acceptability values showing a more negative than positive opinion amongst the public at the time of scheme implementation (Tretvik, 2003). 
Public acceptability towards the congestion charging proposals declined in Edinburgh over the four public consultation phases (Cain and Jones, 2002 and Cain and Jones, 2003). In 1999, there was approximately 60% support and 30% opposition for the charging principle identified in Consultation Phase I "Edinburgh's transport choices'. In 2002, the level of support had fallen, at the time of the Consultation Phase IV "Have Your Say'. The option for a single, central cordon had marginal opposition amongst Edinburgh residents (43% in favour, 47% against), whereas the option for two cordons (the option presented to the public in the referendum) had stronger opposition amongst Edinburgh residents (34% in favour, 56% against). As shown by the referendum result, support for congestion charging in Edinburgh declined further after Consultation Phase IV. 
The media (newspapers, TV, radio) influences acceptability, and is often stated as a key player in the development of large transport planning projects such as urban road pricing schemes (Hårsman, 2003 and Lyons, 2003). Media and communications discussion has been provided to overcome the negative press that can surround transport schemes (Jones, 2003): pro-actively engage key stakeholder groups at all stages of the scheme design and implementation process; take steps to encourage a culture change within the initiating organisation; and clarify and agree on the role of the elected member (local politician) in the process of scheme design, selection and implementation. 
Lyons (2003) proposes three approaches for decision-makers and politicians to change the focus from the "pain' to the "gain' associated with transport project representations within the media. These approaches are to educate the public so they can see through the media hype, to work with the media and to ride the media storm. Riding a media storm has proved particularly difficult, but the example of the London congestion-charging scheme shows that in certain circumstances a controversial transport project can be implemented in the face of a hostile press. 
This paper investigates newspaper response to the Edinburgh congestion charging proposals, as part of the urban road pricing project PRoGR€SS (Pricing ROad use for Greater Responsibility, Efficiency and Sustainability in cities). The PRoGR€SS project had an overall objective to demonstrate and evaluate the effectiveness and acceptance of integrated urban transport pricing schemes to achieve transport goals and raise revenue. Edinburgh was one of eight project sites developing and demonstrating road pricing schemes; the other cities were Bristol, Copenhagen, Genoa, Gothenburg, Helsinki, Rome and Trondheim. Media analysis across the eight sites is reported, along with other findings, in Deliverable 4.3 (PRoGR€SS, 2004). 
The congestion charging scheme had been proposed by the City of Edinburgh Council (City of Edinburgh Council, 2004a and City of Edinburgh Council, 2004b), in accordance with The Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 (Scottish Parliament, 2001). The scheme consisted of two cordons and a £2 charge for inbound travel. A map of these cordons is shown in Fig. 1. The charge would have applied between Monday and Friday, during the day (7am–6.30pm) for the inner cordon and morning peak for the outer cordon (7am–10am). Vehicle exemptions included emergency service vehicles, motorcycles, local buses, Blue Badge holders (disabled) and City Car Club vehicles. City of Edinburgh Council area residents living outside the outer cordon were exempted from paying to cross the outer cordon. The importance of looking at the newspaper role in reporting or forming public opinion and attitudes was paramount, given the weight the Scottish Executive placed on the demonstration of clear public support for the scheme prior to implementation and the need to win a public referendum. 

Display Full Size version of this image (110K)
Fig. 1. A map of the outer and inner cordons for the proposed Edinburgh congestion-charging scheme. The map of the inner and outer cordons for the proposed Edinburgh congestion charging scheme, were taken from the Edinburgh referendum leaflet and reproduced with the permission of the City of Edinburgh Council. 
The primary aim of the Edinburgh proposals was to reduce congestion; a charging scheme would also offer a means of managing traffic levels and providing further transport investment. Charging can hit low-income groups worst because of their higher marginal utility of money, but then revenue can arguably be used to improve alternative and cheaper forms of transport (Rajé, 2003). 
Successfully implemented urban road pricing schemes, often with broader objectives than to reduce congestion, include Trondheim, Oslo, Bergen, Singapore and London. Of these, the central London congestion-charging scheme, introduced in February 2003, is the most comparable to the proposed scheme in Edinburgh. London has been considered a success in terms of reducing congestion, the primary objective, although revenue has been lower than expected (Transport for London, 2004). In the year since introduction of the scheme, there have been reductions in traffic levels (15%) and delays (30%) within the charging zone. In the longer term, there are proposals for universal road pricing across the United Kingdom (Department for Transport, 2003 and Department for Transport, 2004). 
2. Developing a media analysis framework for transport applications
As asserted by Newbold and Newbold (1995), the entire study of mass communications is based on the premise that the media does have significant effects upon opinions and attitudes. Katz and Lazarsfield (1995) present three major divisions within traditional mass media research. They are: research into the audience of a given communications message or medium; research enabling study of the language, logic and layout of communications messages; and research into the impact of mass communications. All three divisions ultimately look at the effect of the media influencing (and changing) opinions and attitudes of those receiving the communications. The focus of this paper is on the second of these three divisions, examining the communications messages of newspaper coverage relating to the Edinburgh congestion charging proposals. 
There has been a recent increase in media analysis using transport applications. The importance of the media during the 2000 fuel tax protests was highlighted by Lyons and Chatterjee (2002), using historical and contemporary searches of newspaper archives. A comparative assessment of the press response to four proposed or implemented congestion charging schemes was undertaken by Krause (2004), using the terms "toll road' and "toll bridge' in newspaper text searches. 
Media coverage of the London congestion-charging scheme has been analysed in more detail by Gaber (2004). The study includes a chronology of events leading up to scheme implementation, a breakdown of positive and negative arguments within newspapers, an investigation into "scare stories', and content analysis of direct quotations from individuals and organisations. The most rigorous methodological technique in Gaber's approach is content analysis, used in media research to study the language, logic and layout of communication messages (Katz and Lazarsfield, 1995). The analytical method of content analysis has also been utilised by Langmyhr (1997), to review the type and form of equity arguments that relate to congestion charging, as presented by different stakeholders in Norwegian newspapers (and official documentation and recorded proceedings). 
Many of these media analysis techniques were applied to the Edinburgh congestion charging proposals: the development of a press archive, newspaper text searches, a chronology of events, a breakdown of positive and negative arguments within newspapers, and content analysis of the communications messages within newspapers. 
3. Developing a newspaper analysis framework for the Edinburgh proposals
As part of the PRoGR€SS project, a press archive of over 1500 newspaper articles (between June 1998 and May 2004) was developed. Each article included at least one reference to the Edinburgh congestion charging proposals. The archive consisted of the following variables: article date; article headline; page number; article type (e.g. News, Comment, Letter); a summary of the main themes within the article; and a three-level star rating of the article's relevance to the Edinburgh congestion charging proposals. 
In addition to the content of News stories within the press archive, the Letters and Comments sections were examined, to explore public and newspaper opinion as expressed in written form within newspapers. Letters written to the newspapers were categorized as to whether overall they were positive, negative or "other' (e.g. a factual letter or a letter with an equal split of positive and negative arguments) towards the congestion charging proposals. Newspaper opinion within the Comments pages of the Edinburgh Evening News during Consultation Phase IV was also examined; this Consultation Phase was the event over the time period of the press archive that generated the most newspaper coverage. A further aspect of the PRoGR€SS project was to consider whether the newspapers acted as opinion makers or opinion reporters in regard to the Edinburgh congestion charging proposals. 
To quantify the argument direction of newspaper coverage, content analysis was performed on 165 News articles from the PRoGR€SS press archive (dating from January 2000–June 2003). The articles selected were the most prominent, appearing on one of the first two pages of the two most represented newspapers within the press archive, the Edinburgh Evening News and the Scotsman. The software package Non-numerical Unstructured Data Indexing Searching and Theorizing (NUDIST), was used to conduct the content analysis. Each newspaper article was split into individual text units, defined as lines of text within the article separated by punctuation, the most detailed unit of analysis. 
The key-coding category within the content analysis was argument direction—whether newspaper article text units were positive or negative towards the proposals. Codes were also provided for mixed (positive and negative within the same text unit) and neutral (no opinion expressed, information imparted) arguments. Other coding categories were argument subject and the stakeholder expressing the argument (e.g. politician, member of the business community). Argument subject codes were developed from comments expressed by members of the public during Consultation Phase IV (Cain and Jones, 2002). The seven subject codes were: alternative solutions to congestion charging; charging scheme design; investment package; impacts of options; Consultation phases; political aspects of developing congestion charging scheme; and comparison of the Edinburgh scheme with other proposals. 
4. Newspaper response to the Edinburgh congestion charging proposals
Media interest in the scheme grew over the time period of the PRoGR€SS project, reflected by a steady increase in the number of newspaper articles. Of the newspaper articles within the press archive, most were from the Edinburgh Evening News (952, 56%). The next highest represented newspaper was the Scotsman (259, 15%). Although the Edinburgh Evening News and the Scotsman are owned by the same company and often use the same information sources, they differ in format and style. The Scotsman is a morning, Scotland-wide "broadsheet' newspaper, whereas the Edinburgh Evening News is a local newspaper, more "tabloid' in style. The scheme was often referred to as a "road toll', even though the conventional image of a toll booth is out-dated and not relevant. Of the News story titles within the press archive, 45% contained the word "toll'. 

