1. Introduction
This paper examines the problems in targeting potential financial services customers, problems which are “exacerbated by the infrequency of financial service purchase and the products' relatively high value” (Birkin et al., 1996, p. 242). The UK financial services market has been expanded in recent years through the addition of a number of non-traditional players, and this paper reports a Geographic Information System (GIS)-based analysis of the potential for a major UK grocer/retailer to diversify into this market via mail response modelling applied to data obtained from a customer database. 
The specific objective of our analysis is to explore whether spatial analysis of lifestyle data might identify the characteristics of those likely to respond to mailshots and thus improve targeting of direct mailings to store card holders. We investigate whether the spatial variable “distance to store” affects the odds of response, since this might have implications as to whether the new competitors should support their products through their existing store networks rather than developing new direct marketing channels. Given the suburbanisation of many retail functions and the enduring commercial and retail roles of traditional town centres (Wrigley and Lowe, 1996 and Wrigley and Lowe, 2002; Thurstain-Goodwin and Batty, 2001, p. 3), mail responses in the catchments of both a traditional city centre and an out-of-centre store were modelled in order to ascertain any differences in propensities to respond to direct mail based on store location. 
The entry of traditional grocer/retailers into the financial services sector has been predicated on their desire to diversify their product offerings, and to respond to the expanded market for financial services such as personal pensions, tax-free savings and life assurance. This has made marketing more proactive than hitherto, such that “the motivation [to purchase] is provided by the supplier” (Birkin et al., 1996, p. 242), although this brings with it obligations incumbent upon the end provider to explain differentiated financial services to a broad customer base in a comprehensible manner. 
Market segmentation is very important to these goals, especially as “not all existing customers [are] suitable for the products being sold” (Birkin et al., 1996, p. 253). This is a factor in the low success rates of direct mail (typically 1%) where “direct sales costs are virtually fixed whatever the take-up rate, [so] any improvements to the [accuracy] of mail-outs is of benefit” (Beaumont and Inglis, 1989, p. 601). 
The increased competition in the UK financial services industry and the need for more accurate targeting has increased use of tools such as GIS, especially as most grocery retailers are long-established users. Also, this advent of supermarket financial services has “brought about substantial growth of direct mail as a distribution channel, the success of which depends most importantly on the mailing list” (Bult and Wansbeek, 1995, p. 378). Consequently, and despite a number of shortcomings (Longley and Harris, 1999), lifestyle data from store cards and loyalty programmes are increasingly used as a tactical tool in targeting store promotions and for financial services marketing. However, the evidence as to whether store cards engender loyalty is mixed (The Sunday Times, 3 February 2002). They do potentially enable closer customer relationships, which are likely to be useful in a strategic sense when developing new products for an existing customer base, and for outreach to new customers. However, the retail IT industry still feels that supermarkets are “not making sufficient use of the vast quantities of customer data at their disposal” (Short and Costanzo, 1999). 
A major direct mailer (approximately 25 m pieces per annum) and the most successful of the new banks is Marks &amp; Spencer Money (formerly Marks and Spencer Financial Services and a subsidiary of Marks and Spencer (M&amp;S) Plc), which was set up in 1985 to run what is now the “&amp;more” credit card. It became a bank in 1987 and now provides personal lending, unit trusts, life assurance, pensions, individual savings accounts, and Stakeholder Pensions, making it one of the more developed new arrivals (Lascelles, 2000). In 1997 the major UK supermarkets, led by Sainsbury and Tesco, also entered the banking arena utilising their loyalty card schemes, and now offer a comprehensive range of financial products, such as credit cards, insurance, pensions, and mortgages. Other strategies have also been pursued however, with for example grocery retailer Safeway/Morrisons dropping its UK store loyalty card in 2001 in favour of selective price cutting, while multiple Asda (a subsidiary of Wal-Mart) has also phased out its loyalty schemes. 
Because direct mailing is the primary medium for retail sales in the financial service industry, the trend of service provision by the new entrants is predominantly via direct and Internet banking operations and call centres. This differs from clearing banks that use staff and floor-space to provide reassurance about financial products, such as pensions, that are generally perceived as “inherently complex [compared to many other financial services products] and remain a mystery to the majority of consumers” (Ironfield-Smith, 2001). The US experience has shown that even direct banks, such as Security First Network Bank, have used branches to attract more customers (Bream, 1998), and the frequency at which customers visit a supermarket provides the supermarkets with enviable opportunities to market their products in-store (Short and Costanzo, 1999). It is claimed that M&amp;S Money owes much of its success to reaching the market through financial services counters in more than 70 M&amp;S stores, in addition to the strength of the M&amp;S brand (Lascelles, 2000). Short and Costanzo (1999) report that Tesco has introduced Internet and phone banking services, and Tesco Personal Finance has desks in every Tesco store (apart from Tesco Express locations). Sainsbury's Bank operates a telephone banking service aimed principally at loyalty card holders, while the firm's supermarkets have “Bank Information Points”. Other strategies include stand-alone bank branches in supermarkets—a popular model in the US (Short and Costanzo, 1999). It is in this context that this paper explores whether the proximity of existing customers to stores affects propensity to respond to financial services mailings, since this has implications for establishing financial services facilities (staffed or otherwise) in selected branches where there is likely to be a demand for them. 
It should be noted that the “supermarket banks” have only a 1% share of the market (Mintel, 1999, Current Accounts, cited in Short and Costanzo, 1999), and “cherry-pick” the most profitable offerings. Unfortunately, commercial GIS are lacking in appropriate direct marketing functionality that could aid direct mailing to increase this market penetration, and most effort in this field has been concentrated on geodemographics (Birkin, 1995, p. 118; Brown, 1991, p. 243). It is however “response modelling” using lifestyle data that allows the “construction of a representation of the factors affecting consumer choice that is capable of predicting likely response at the individual level” (Brown, 1991, p. 252). 
All of this suggests that lifestyle (store/loyalty card) data remain something of an unknown quantity in the marketing of financial services. In this context, evaluation of the potential of lifestyle data in our case-study is a valuable research exercise and requires fulfilment of the following tasks: 
(1) Modelling lifestyle characteristics spatially: To assess the effect of location and proximity upon responsiveness to mail for products not directly supported in-store, appropriate statistical models are required to understand the existing customer base. These models will identify those customer characteristics that influence the success of marketing financial services in the context of a city centre store and an out-of-centre site. Research has traditionally pointed towards differences in mail responsiveness between customers of suburban versus urban locations (Gillett, 1976), and our research provides an opportunity to understand such differences in quantitative terms.
(2) Analysing the representativeness of lifestyle data: New financial services products, such as stakeholder pensions, are targeted at large swathes of the population, and the large retailers in the UK command sufficient market share to deem their customer data to be comprehensive enough to facilitate the targeting of any demographic. However, there is no guarantee that this is the case. Thus, our empirical analysis also profiles existing customer characteristics vis a vis the general population, an issue that has hitherto received little attention in the literature. This is necessary in order to anticipate the broader applicability of predictive models that are based on existing customer data.
We conclude by using these results to appraise the efficacy of in-store marketing of financial services in each of the locations, and comment on the usefulness of lifestyles data in such applications. 
2. The case study
Our research draws on data from a major UK grocer/retailer that sends out several million pieces of direct mail annually to several million card holders, and depends heavily upon the medium to maximise new business. The financial services offered range from personal pensions, tax-free savings and life assurance to lines of credit. 
Previous research has identified how various socio-economic and psychographic discriminators of mail responsiveness (Batey and Brown, 1995; Birkin et al., 2002) are capable of capturing variations in response according to distance from store. Here, we investigate the extent to which such spatial effects interact with brand stretching in the realm of financial services, where financial products are cross-sold to existing customers via direct mail. This research has obvious implications for retailer strategy with regard to the provision of in-store support for new financial service functions. These market area effects are investigated using a paired comparison of a city centre store and a neighbouring out-of-town store as they were deemed broadly comparable in conventional retail terms. 
Customer segmentation in market area analysis entails “analysis of customers to create a discriminating model that is based upon proven customer attributes. Targeting includes a predictive assessment of response that can be expected, employing variables drawn from the company's data and other databases” (Beaumont and Inglis, 1989, p. 601). In this context, lifestyles analysis has developed to supplement conventional geodemographic analysis, because the latter have four known principal flaws (see also Birkin, 1995, p. 126; Birkin et al., 1996, pp. 244–245): 
(1) They are based on dated information.
(2) They largely or exclusively rely upon variables taken from a census.
(3) The variables are selected subjectively and may bear only a very indirect correspondence with purchasing behaviour (at best).
(4) They are compromised by the ecological fallacy, that is, “the inappropriate ascription of the characteristics of areal data to individuals and point locations within those areas” (Harris, 1998).
Lifestyles data, by contrast, contain non-census derived characteristics for individuals, and are often used in statistical modelling where the problems of auto-selection and bias are deemed to be compensated by avoidance of the problems of ecological fallacy that beset geodemographics. However, lifestyles datasets are inevitably partial in their representation of population characteristics, and the principles and practice of lifestyles data collection are unscientific from the standpoint of “what if?” market area analysis (Longley and Harris, 1999). Moreover, further uncertainties are created if lifestyles data are fused to other sources, and more information is needed on the appropriateness of use of lifestyles and/or census derived geodemographics (see Longley and Harris, 2000). 
One of the crucial considerations in the application of “what is” lifestyles datasets to “what if” scenario analysis of newly emerging markets is the issue of whether the customer data are likely to be representative of the population at large, and as recorded in the Census. The customer database is likely not just to represent a biased subset of the population at large, but also disproportionately to comprise mail responsive store customers—because store cardholders had either opened their accounts in one of the chain's stores or, more usually, had opened the account in response to various mailing campaigns, though the extent to which this is the case is unknown. 
No weighting is applied in the modelling of the lifestyles database, and thus the models are not applicable to the wider population. However, in the analysis presented below we explore the correspondence with the general population by using Small Area Statistics (SAS) from the 1991 Census of Population (current at time of research) to identify information about age at the ED (Enumeration District: typically 200 households or 442 persons) scale. The UK postcode/ED directory facilitated the matching of our customer postcodes to the Census EDs. 

