This airport space
is a place of transmission of people (and objects) into global relationships, what
Gottdiener calls a ``space of transition'' that facilitates the shrinkage of the globe and
the transcendence of time and space (2001, pages 10 ^ 11). Air travel is one `space of
flows' that increasingly moves people apparently (though never actually) seamlessly
around the world especially connecting various hub airports located in major `global'
cities (Urry, 2000). This emphasises the system of airports that links together places,
forming networks that bring connected places closer together, while distancing those
places that are not so connected. It is the system of airports that is key to many global
processes, permitting travellers to encounter many people and places from around the
world, face to face (see Gogia, this issue; Lassen, this issue).
Moreover, contrary to the Auge¨'s ``cultural critique of placelessness'' associated with
analysis of nonplaces ``where people coexist or cohabit without living together'' (1995,
page 110), airports do in fact possess a specific contingent materiality. They seem
places of material organisation and considerable social complexity. Airports are places
of ``the boring, everyday, routine, but essential operations, processes, systems, and
technologies, that enable global mobility to occur'' (Parker, 2002, page 16). Airports
are places of work for often tens of thousands of workers located within airport-cities.
Various nonhuman actants, combined with rule-following humans, enable, for example,
air traffic control systems to effect high levels of safe take-off and landings.
Airports are also a place of `cybermobilities' (Adey and Bevan, forthcoming) in
which software keeps the airport system functioning smoothly and transforms it into a
kind of `code/space' (Dodge and Kitchin, 2004). Wood and Graham (forthcoming)
further suggest that automated software for sorting travellers as they pass through
automated surveillance systems (such as iris-recognition systems) is increasingly pro-
ducing a `kinetic elite' whose ease of mobility differentiates them from the low-speed,
low-mobility majority. Software also enables the tight coupling of distinctive airport
systemsöfrom the baggage X-ray and passenger surveillance systems to air traffic
control and mechanical systems, passenger ticketing and ground transportation, and
human resource systems that manage flight crews, ground workers, and security staffö
such that breakdowns in one component of an airport system often have knock-on
effects which can cause lengthy delays.
Certain airports like Schiphol are being redesigned to make them destination
places in their own right: ``the implosive articulation of a many-purposed pedestrian
crowd creates a critical mass of social density, much like the busy downtown district
of a large central city. With enough interacting people, the scene itself emerges as
a distinct feature of place'' (Gottdiener, 2001, pages 21 ^ 22). As a consequence there
is increasing `dwelltime' in places of transit. In such places: ``[I]nstead of experiencing
waiting time as wasted time ... the urban traveller is invited to use transit time to
accumulate useful experiences of leisure and work'' (Lloyd, 2003, page 94). Other
travellers may be inadvertently forced to live in airports, like the character Viktor
Navorski played by Tom Hanks in Stephen Spielberg's film The Terminal. For those
detained, there are few ways to use transit time, as they experience a disconnection not
only from physical arrival, but also from means of communication such as mobile
telephones or Internet access.
And increasingly air terminals are becoming like cities (Gottdiener 2001; Pascoe 2001)
but also in what has been called the frisk society, cities are becoming like airports. The use
of technologies such as detention centres, closed-circuit television (CCTV), Internet cafes,
GPS (Global Positioning System), iris-recognition security,WiFi hotspots, and intermodal
traffic interchanges are first trialed within airports before moving out as mundane
characteristics of cities. And daily flows through airports contribute immensely to the
production of contemporary urbanism, including diasporic cultural communities, `ethnic'
restaurants and neighbourhoods, distant families and cosmopolitan identities, and
exclusive zones and corridors of connectivity for the fast-tracked kinetic elite.
The systems of airports are part of the process through which time and space are
dramatically bent, as graphically seen in the events of September 11. Time ^ space is
`curved' into new complex configurations as the `whole world' is brought dramatically
closer (see Urry, 2002). Systems of interconnected material worlds produce new moments
of unintended and dangerous copresence. The `gates' designed to prevent networks from
colliding (and the narratives of security that underwrote the building of those gatekeeping
processes) are less sustainable as flows of terrorists slip under, over, and through various
borders, eliminating the invisibilities and screens that kept networks apart.
More generally, the mobilities of money laundering, the drug trade, sewage and
waste, infections, urban crime, asylum seeking, arms trading, people smuggling, slave
trading, and urban terrorism, all make visible the already existing chaotic juxtaposition
of different spaces and networks. Thus global diseases rapidly move: ``The world has
rapidly become much more vulnerable to the eruption and, more critically, to the wide-
spread and even global spread of both new and old infectious diseases ... the dramatic
increase in worldwide movement of people, goods and ideas is the driving force ... .
A person harbouring a life-threatening microbe can easily board a jet plane and be on
another continent when the symptoms of illness strike. The jet plane itself, and its cargo,
can carry insects and infectious agents into new ecologic settings'' (Mann, cited in
Buchanan, 2002, page 172). Time ^ space is thus `curved' into new complex configurations.
Only a few long-range transport connections are necessary to generate epidemics, such as
SARS that occurred within the very mobile Chinese diaspora in 2003 [especially between
south China, Hong Kong, and Toronto (Sum, 2004)], and thousands of apparently
inconsequential movements of sheep combined with various transnational movements
of meat and airplanes produced the rapid spread of foot and mouth disease during the
UK outbreak of 2001 (Law, this issue).
These last points lead us on to consider what the new mobilities paradigm might say
about some recent changes in mobilities.We briefly mention a few such developments.
First, material changes seem to be `dematerialising' connections, as people,
machines, images, information, power, money, ideas, and dangers are `on the move',
making and remaking networks at increasingly rapid speed across the world. Social
networks are underpinned by technologies based upon timeframes transcending human
consciousness. Computers make decisions in nanosecond time, producing instantane-
ous and simultaneous effects. Pervasive computing produces a switching and mobility
between different self-reproducing systems, such as the Internet with its massive search
engines, databases of information storage and retrieval, world money flows (especially
through the ubiquitous `spreadsheet culture'), intelligent transport systems, robotic
vision machines under the oceans, and vision machines more generally (Kaplan, this
issue; Thrift 2001).
Further, the 21st century will be organised around new `machines' enabling `people'
to be more individually mobile through space, forming small world connections `on the
go'. `Persons' will occur as various nodes in multiple machines of inhabitation and
mobility. The 21st century will be the century of machines inhabited by individuals or
very small groups of individuals. Through inhabiting (or internalising) such machines
humans come to `life'. Such machines are miniaturised, privatised, digitised and mobi-
lised; they include walkmans, I-pods, mobile phones, the individual television, the
networked computer/Internet, the individualised smart car/bike, virtual reality `travel',
tele-immersion sites, laptops, personal organisers, wireless connections, helicopters,
smart small aircraft, and many others yet to emerge. Such machines are closely inter-
woven with the corporeal [see Bull (2000), on the SonyWalkman; and see Callon et al,
(2004)].
There is increasing convergence between transport and communication, `mobilis-
ing' the requirements and characteristics of copresence. And yet at the same time this
dependence upon machines for movement means that life is increasingly sedentary
even if people are on the go. Marvin and Medd (this issue) show how this results in
increasing worldwide obesity, the more mobile the city, the greater it seems the surplus
of `fatty' bodies.
These `mobility systems' are developing new characteristics. They are simply much
more complicated, made up of very many elements and based upon specialised and
arcane forms of expertise. Mobilities have always involved expert systems but these are
now highly specialised, many based upon entire university degree programmes (such as
BAs in golf course management) and specialised consultancy companies. Moreover,
such systems are much more interdependent with each other so that individual journeys or
pieces of communication depend upon multiple systems, all needing to function and
interface successfully with each other. Indeed, since the 1970s, systems have been much
more dependent upon computers and software. Software, we might say, writes mobility.
There has been a huge generation of specific software systems that again need to speak
effectively to each other in order that particular mobilities take place. And finally, these
systems have become vulnerable, especially to what Perrow (1999) terms `normal accidents'
that are almost built in, almost certain to occur from time to time given the tightly
locked-in nature of such systems, as Law (this issue) shows in the case of agriculture
or water control systems.
And we cannot do without such systems. As daily and weekly time ^ space patterns
in the richer parts of the world are desynchronised from historical communities and
place, so systems provide the means by which to schedule work and social life.
Organising `copresence' with key others (workmates, family, significant others, friends)
becomes more demanding, with this loss of collective coordination within each day,
week, year, and so on. `Clusters' dissolve into more personal forms of networks, what
Haythornthwaite and Wellman term `personalised networking' (2002; Hampton and
Wellman, 2001). With such desynchronisation the use of scheduling becomes more
necessary. `Personalised networking' entails a person-to-person connectivity, most
visible with machines that enable immediate, mobile connectivity. There is an increas-
ingly `do-it-yourself ' scheduling society commonplace in at least large cities across
the world (Southerton et al, 2001). Thus the greater the personalisation of networks, the
more important are systems to facilitate that personalisation. There is a spiralling,
adaptive relationship effected through `scheduling systems', while of course much of the
world's population are unable to participate in a life on the move and are even more
socially excluded.
Furthermore, as richer people move around developing their individual life projects
they extend their personal networks and appear to exert increased `agency'. But as they
exert such `agency' so much about them gets left behind in traces on countless com-
puters: mobile phone records, use of automatic teller machines, creditworthiness
ratings, CCTV images, differentiated insurance rates through GIS software, hotel
bookings, GPS data, fingerprints, travel itineraries, bibliometric data, and so on. These
have the effect of reconfiguring humans as bits of scattered informational traces
resulting from various `systems' of which most are unaware (Germann Molz, this issue;
Kaplan, this issue).
Thus many individuals increasingly exist beyond their private bodies. They leave
traces of their selves in informational space, as they are mobile through space because
of `self-retrieval' at the other end of a network. People are able to `plug into' systems of
information through which they can `do' things and `talk' to people without being
present in a particular place. Illocutionary acts used to require copresence and utter-
ances in public; they now require a click on `OK'. Much of what was once `private'
already exists outside of the physical body and outside we might say the `self '. The self
is thus spread out or made mobile as a series of traces in cyberspace, even, or in fact
especially, those who seek to get away from it all as round-the world travellers
(Germann Molz, this issue).
Various sorting systems, in an effort to determine entry and exit, deploy detection
systems and cyberimagery of `strangers' and `familiars' to simulate community on
multiple screens in the workplace, home, car, airport, shopping centre, post office,
bar, store, garage, train, aircraft, and so on (generally here see Graham, 2002).
This set of changes thus produces novel and `flickering' combinations of presence
and absence of peoples, enemies and friends. New mobilities are bringing into being
new surprising combinations of presence and absence as the new century chaotically
unfolds. Methods and theories will need to be ever on the move to keep up with these
new forms of mobilities, new systems of scheduling and monitoring, and new pervasive
modes of mobilised social inclusion/exclusion, as the various papers in this theme issue
richly document.

