Efforts to make
threshold concepts "easier' by simplifying their initial expression and
application may, in fact, set students onto a path of "ritualised'
knowledge that actually creates a barrier that results in some
students being prevented from crossing the "threshold' of a concept.
While this aside remains untested, it also reveals the potential insight
that a systematic framework based on forms of troublesome
knowledge may open up…The promise of this approach may be a
method by which to identify more accurately why a student cannot
grasp and express a threshold concept. (Meyer and Shanahan 2003,
p. 15)
What appears to be taking place in the situations reported in this study
is that when teachers introduce, or "scaffold', a na€_ve version of a
threshold concept (in that it is a deliberately simplified and limited
delineation), it seems to act to a certain extent as a proxy for the
threshold concept. But though the use of such a na€_ve interpretation – in
this case of "opportunity cost', a sophisticated concept – is intended to
aid students' understanding, the Australian study found that this was
often not the case, and the interpretation was found to operate more
frequently as a false proxy, leading students to settle for the na€_ve
version, and entering into a form of ritualised learning or mimicry. The
concept offered appeared to have an enchanting, beguiling or ensnaring
effect, simultaneously promising understanding but curtailing it at the
same time by seeming to close down further avenues of enquiry or
complexity. Reimann and Jackson (2003) report one interesting possible
explanation for such mimicry in their investigation of threshold concepts
acquisition in a first year Economics module.
… the fact that students' perceive first year introductory Economics
modules as mainly providing revision might hinder learning. Such
perceptions may lead to a fossilisation of students' existing conceptions,
including potential misconceptions, and prevent reconceptualisation,
and this might apply to the way in which students with
previous knowledge of Economics conceptualise ... threshold concepts.
We therefore need to ask where these perceptions come from.
One possible reason might be that introductory curricula follow a
standard sequence of mainstream Economics concepts and that
teaching–learning environments in Economics have a tendency to be
relatively uniform. This adherence to a standard content and a
standard way of teaching it could potentially contribute to an overall
appearance of sameness. Whether this is definitely the case needs to
be explored further. (Reimann and Jackson 2003, p. 24)
We are reminded here of Lather's plea, cited earlier, for a praxis "where
the effort is to … provoke something else into happening – something
other than the return of the same' (1998, p. 492). Reimann and Jackson
also cite Hallde´n's work on conceptual change, which draws attention
to the importance of contextualisation in this respect.
If we ask students direct questions pertaining to theoretical
principles, we risk getting responses that mirror verbatim learning
only. If, on the other hand, we ask real-world questions, we are in
fact testing much more than the students' knowledge of theoretical
principles. We are also testing their ability to contextualize problems
in the realm of the appropriate scientific field as well as their ability
to identify a problem as a case in which a scientific principle is to be
applied. (Hallde´n 1999, p. 56)
Cousin (2003), in her study of Otherness as a threshold concept in
Cultural Studies courses, reports the existence of mimicry – "bypassing'
or "faking it' – in the domain of affect and identity.
Williamson (1992) has argued that school boys can "do sexism' just
as they can "do the Ancient Romans'. They can bypass an
interrogation of their own masculinity by otherising the Others as
the passive agents of their own oppression; they can also churn out
dutiful assessment assignments that attract good marks. Although
the deep learning of Otherness implies abilities of empathetic
engagement and self-reflexivity, conventional academic testing risks
the encouragement of performances of mimicry. "Faking it' in the
learning of Otherness can mean securing a good examination result
without engaging with the concept's personally transformative
potential. (Cousin 2003, p. 9)
This is not to ignore, however, the very real possibility that in certain
circumstances students might well adopt what appears to be a form of
mimicry as a serious attempt to come to terms with conceptual difficulty,
or to try on certain conceptual novelties for size as it were. We
would not wish to belittle or dismiss such responses as they may well
prove to be successful routes through to understanding for certain
learners. There is a clear need here for further research endeavour to
increase our understanding of such coping strategies. Nonetheless we
would still hold to the notion that "enchanted' understandings might
beguile us into a sense of greater comprehension than we might actually
possess.
This signals a further need for caution, however, in terms of the
problem of objectivism. By implying that enchantment might lead to
limited, mimetic understandings it might easily be implied that there is
then one definitive and total conceptual understanding available, to
which the tutor aims to bring the learner in due course. This would
imply an objectivist position which would be in contradiction to our
earlier characterising of threshold concepts as discursive in nature, and
therefore by implication, subject to the endless play of signification
which language implies (Derrida 1978). Far from wishing to imply any
such objectivist assumptions we would rather point to the likelihood of
variation in the forms that learners' understandings might take and,
again, the need for further systematic enquiry into these issues.
Pre-liminal variation
So, as a way of helping students, we can distinguish, in theory at least,
between variation in students' "tacit' understanding (or lack thereof) of
a threshold concept. We see this situation of what we choose to call preliminal
variation as a potentially important and useful means of opening
up our understanding of why some students will productively negotiate
the liminal space and others find difficulty in doing so. The question is:
does such variation explain how the threshold will be, or can be, or can
only be, approached (or turned away from) as it "comes into view'? And
how does it "come into view'? Does the view look or maybe even feel
appealing, or perhaps discomforting? Again, both epistemological and/
or ontological factors may come into play at this pre-liminal phase.
Cousin, for example, makes a useful comparison between the deployment
of cultural capital and what she terms "emotional capital' as one
potential means of gaining purchase on this issue.
This result is likely to be a consequence of a student's deployment of
cultural capital (particularly in relation to writing essays and
examinations) at the expense of her emotional capital. For
Williamson, it is up to the teacher to help the student get the
balance between the two right. Otherwise, the variation in understanding
produced by different levels of student engagement does
not come into view for either teacher or student, nor in conventional
testing regimes. (Cousin 2003, p. 9)
To move forward in our understanding of the acquisition of threshold
concepts, from both teachers' and students' perspectives, we need to
devise methods of observation and enquiry that allow us to explore
variation in students' experiences of threshold concepts in rather special
ways. The small-scale but important "collaborative initiative' undertaken
as part of the Enhancing Teaching–Learning Environments in
Undergraduate Courses project1 with colleagues in the Department of
Economics at Staffordshire University provides an interesting example
of such an approach and also the inherent difficulties involved in such
an undertaking (Reimann and Jackson 2003). Without even mentioning
"opportunity cost' to novice students of Economics (who have yet to
formally encounter the concept) these authors investigated how we
might create an authentic scenario, devoid of Economics terminology,
that presents an opportunity to "think like an economist'. This is a nontrivial
question, and it is precisely a knowledge of students' responses to
such scenarios, and the variation within those responses, that might help
us remove some of the problems of teaching threshold concepts. The
purpose of this particular case study was to gain insight into the preliminal
variation in the learning of two specific threshold concepts,
"opportunity cost' and "elasticity', amongst first year students, and to
consider how this might be related to factors in the teaching–learning
environment, and how in the light of findings the tutor on the programme
might redesign existing approaches. Within the case study these
authors sought authentic scenarios which were "as close as possible to
students' own experiences' and which would "potentially lead students
to apply their understanding of threshold concepts' (Reimann and
Jackson 2003, p. 7). The focus was:
… to use situations related to students' everyday life and to
investigate whether students' thinking in such situations has changed
as a consequence of learning and being taught about threshold
concepts. The assumption is that if students have "crossed the
threshold' and have started to think like economists, then their
thinking about everyday economic problems in authentic situations
should have changed as well. We therefore needed to find a way of
tapping into students' thinking about such everyday economic
problems (p. 7).
Moving to a rather different disciplinary context, Meyer and Land (2003)
have commented briefly on the threshold concept status of a limit in pure
mathematics. In the words of Cornu (1991, p. 153) "It holds a central
position which permeates the whole of mathematical analysis – as a
foundation of the theory of approximation, of continuity, and of differential
and integral calculus.' Picking up from the second section, we
can see how Mathematics combines natural and symbolic language in
dealing with the abstract. But in approaching the formalised symbolic
definition of a limit, it has also been recognised by several writers that the
natural language form of the term can create "troublesomeness'. A "limit'
in terms of pre-liminal variation may be thought about in common sense
terms as a boundary, barrier, the end of something, and so on, that is for
example, visible, real, attainable or reachable in some everyday sense.
But this interpretation is fundamentally what a limit in mathematics is
not about – "limits' are not reached, they are "tended towards'. Cornu
(1991, p. 154), in referring to work by Schwartzenburger and Tall (1978),
observes "... that the words "‘tends to'’ and "‘limit'’ have a significance for
the students before any lessons begin ... and that students continue to rely
on these meanings after they have been given a formal definition.'
(Emphasis added)
Conclusion
To encourage further such studies across different disciplinary settings
we have, within this paper, outlined what we consider to be potential
elements of an interpretive, explanatory and actionable conceptual
framework. We would hope that the theoretical significance of this
proposed conceptual framework lies in its explanatory potential to locate
troublesome aspects of disciplinary knowledge within transitions
across conceptual thresholds and hence to assist teachers in identifying
appropriate ways of modifying or redesigning curricula to enable their
students to negotiate such epistemological transitions, and ontological
transformations, in a more satisfying fashion for all concerned.
Ultimately of course it is not for us (and we would not wish) to
generalise across the varied and complex settings within which discipline-
based colleagues might negotiate such transitions in the context of
their own institutions and students. Nonetheless we hope that this
emerging framework might offer a new lens through which to focus on
critical micro-perspectives on variation, and in particular pre-liminal
variation, in the quality of learning engagement. Course designers, we
feel, might benefit from identifying sources of troublesomeness and
stuck places for their students, the likely issues that might arise around
identity, and how these can be sensitively and appropriately accommodated
within the time and resource constraints of conventional
university degree provision.
In reflexive fashion, as a number of our colleagues have already
observed in conversations about threshold concepts, we hope that the
idea of a threshold concept will serve to operate, in itself, as a threshold
concept.

