However, some research findings in physical activity settings (e.g., Wilson, Rodgers, Blanchard, &amp; Gessell, 2003)—as well as in other domains, such as politics and education (e.g., Koestner &amp; Losier, 2002)—have been less conclusive regarding the positive implications of intrinsic motivation compared to other self-determined forms of regulation. Wilson et al. (2003) provided evidence suggesting that among participants recruited to engage in a 12-week structured exercise program, identified regulation was a stronger predictor of self-reported exercise behavior than was intrinsic motivation, although both regulations predicted exercise behaviors, exercise attitudes, and physical fitness. In addition, introjected regulation has been shown to be correlated positively with strenuous exercise behavior in some studies (e.g., Wilson, Rodgers, &amp; Fraser, 2002), but not in others (e.g., Wilson et al., 2003).
Ryan (1995) proposed that the characteristics of the situation in question will determine the extent to which intrinsic and internalized extrinsic regulations will produce positive behavioral outcomes. With respect to the latter, in contexts in which the activities undertaken are important, but may lack in intrinsic appeal, it is assumed that the innate tendency to internalize the role of such activities will be witnessed (Ryan, 1995). In view of the considerable value that society bestows upon exercise for health and aesthetic gains, research demonstrating that introjected and identified regulations positively predict exercise behavior may indicate that, for some individuals, exercise engagement is maintained via the process described by Ryan. That is, exercise behavior constitutes an externally motivated activity that requires internalization to initiate and sustain action.
An additional tenet of SDT relevant to the current investigation concerns the social context in which individuals operate. According to SDT, autonomy-supportive contexts are conducive to need satisfaction and ensuing self-determined motivational regulations. Such contexts are characterized by the minimization of controls by significant others, the understanding of other people's perspectives, and the provision of choices that guide and facilitate the decision-making process (Deci &amp; Ryan, 1985; Ryan &amp; Deci, 2000). Supporting these propositions, Wilson and Rodgers (2004) found that among female students and staff enrolled in a team-based intramural physical activity event, perceived autonomy support from friends was associated positively with intrinsic motivation and identified regulation. Furthermore, Standage, Duda, and Ntoumanis (2003) recently demonstrated that, among secondary school physical education students, an autonomy-supportive climate was related positively to satisfaction of the need for competence, autonomy, and relatedness, which, in turn, predicted greater self-determined motivation. However, as far as the present authors are aware, no study has considered the implications of an autonomy-supportive environment provided by an exercise class leader.

Study Aims and Hypotheses
 
The first aim of the current study is to explore how satisfaction of the three psychological needs relates to the type of motivational regulations guiding exercise behavior. Furthermore, we examine the extent to which psychological need satisfaction and motivational regulations can predict exercise behavior.
To date, published research in the exercise domain has determined only the direct effects of psychological need satisfaction on motivational regulations and motivational regulations on exercise behaviors (Wilson et al., 2002, 2003). Thus, extending previous research, the current study also explores the indirect effects of need satisfaction on behavioral outcomes, with motivational regulations being tested as potential mediators. The present research also examines whether, as assumed in SDT (Deci &amp; Ryan, 1985), an autonomy-supportive context provided by an exercise class leader corresponds to greater intrinsic motivation and identified regulation via the support provided for the three basic psychological needs.
Based on the propositions of SDT and previous research in the physical, educational, and political domains (Koestner &amp; Losier, 2002; Wilson &amp; Rodgers, 2004; Wilson et al., 2002, 2003), we hypothesize first that positive relationships will be observed between psychological need satisfaction and identified and intrinsic motives; and a negative link will emerge between psychological need satisfaction and introjected and external regulations. Second, identified and introjected regulation and intrinsic motivation are expected to predict exercise behaviors positively and to mediate the relationship between psychological need satisfaction and exercise behaviors. In turn, external regulation is hypothesized to predict exercise behaviors negatively and to mediate the relationship between inadequate psychological need satisfaction and more negative behavioral outcomes. Third, it is predicted that perceived autonomy support (PAS) provided by the exercise class leader will be related positively to satisfaction of the three basic needs and self-determined motivation. Finally, PAS is also hypothesized to predict intrinsic motivation and identified regulation via satisfaction of the basic psychological needs.

Method
 
Participants
Participants (N=369; 173 male, 192 female, 4 unspecified) ranged in age from 16 to 64 years (M=31.86, SD=11.28). The majority (88.7%) of the participants were White. One hundred six (37 male, 68 female, 1 unspecified) of the participants reported taking part in regular exercise classes, and thus constituted the subsample with which we examined relationships between PAS, need satisfaction, and motivational regulations. The subsample ranged in age from 16 to 62 years (M=30.24, SD=10.32).
An a priori power analysis, conducted using GPower (Version 2; Faul &amp; Erdfelder, 1992), ensured that these sample sizes were sufficient to yield adequate statistical power for all statistical procedures planned and subsequently conducted in the current study. More specifically, to detect a significant finding (at the .05 level) at a desired power level of .95, a minimum of 143 participants was required for analyses conducted on the total sample, and 41 for the substudy analyses.
Measures
Psychological need satisfaction. Psychological need satisfaction was measured via the 21-item Basic Need Satisfaction at Work Scale (Deci et al., 2001), adapted by the authors to make it relevant to the exercise domain. This 21-item scale is based on a 15-item measure developed by Kasser, Davey, and Ryan (1992) to tap reported autonomy, relatedness, and competence in the work domain. In the development of the original 15-item measure, some items were taken from the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI; Ryan, 1982), support for which has been garnered in the physical domain (McAuley, Duncan, &amp; Tammen, 1989). The 21-item Basic Need Satisfaction at Work scale exhibited alphas of .73 for competence, .84 for relatedness, and .79 for autonomy in a sample of U.S. workers (Deci et al., 2001).
The 21-item scale utilized by Deci et al. (2001) includes six items that measure competence (e.g., "Most days I feel a sense of accomplishment from exercising"), eight items that measure relatedness (e.g., "People I exercise with take my feelings into consideration"), and seven items that measure autonomy (e.g., "I feel like I am free to decide for myself how to exercise") need satisfaction. Following the stem "Please indicate how true each of the following statements is for you, given your experiences of exercise," participants responded to each item on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (not true for me) to 7 (very true for me).
Behavioral Regulation in Exercise Questionnaire (BREQ; Mullan, Markland, &amp; Ingledew, 1997). Participants completed the BREQ, which is a 15-item self-report measure assessing the reasons why people exercise. The BREQ includes scales assessing external, introjected, identified, and intrinsic regulations. Following the stem "Why do you exercise?" participants responded to each item on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (not true for me) to 5 (very true for me). Previous research supports the BREQ's multidimensional four-factor structure, the invariance of this factor structure across gender, and the internal consistency of each subscale (i.e., alphas ranged from .76 to .90; Mullan &amp; Markland, 1997; Mullan et al., 1997).
Godin Leisure Time Exercise Questionnaire (GLTEQ; Godin &amp; Shepard, 1985). The GLTEQ was used to assess self-reported exercise behavior. The GLTEQ contains three questions assessing the frequency of mild, moderate, and strenuous exercise engaged in (for a minimum of 15 min) during a typical week.
Exercise behavior scores can be calculated by multiplying weekly frequencies of strenuous (e.g., running, vigorous gym workout), moderate (e.g., easy cycling), and mild activities (e.g., easy walking) by 9, 5, and 3 METS (units of metabolic equivalence), respectively. An overall exercise behavior score is calculated by summing the weighted product of each question as follows: (mild × 3)+(moderate × 5)+(strenuous × 9). Based on its correlations with objective indicators of exercise and physical fitness (e.g., exercise monitor and maximal aerobic capacity test scores), a previous study has concluded that the GLTEQ is a reliable and valid measure of leisure-time exercise behavior (Jacobs, Ainsworth, Hartman, &amp; Leon, 1993).
Perceived autonomy support. PAS from the exercise class leader was measured using a short (6 items) version of the original 15-item Health Care Climate Questionnaire (HCCQ; Williams, Grow, Freedman, Ryan, &amp; Deci, 1996). The original scale assesses participants' perceptions of the degree of autonomy support provided by a relevant health care provider and includes items such as "I feel that my health care provider provides me with choices and options." In the current study, the term "my health care provider" was replaced with "my exercise class leader," and participants were asked to respond to items in reference to the exercise class in which they participated most commonly.
Participants responded to each item on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Previous studies using the original HCCQ (Williams et al., 1996) revealed a one-factor solution measuring PAS and an alpha value of .95.
Procedure
The current research was approved by the ethics subcommittee of a university in the United Kingdom. Participants were recruited in a number of different settings, including sports clubs, public leisure centers, private fitness clubs, shops, and supermarkets in the West Midlands, UK.
Participants were approached by the first author, who explained the purpose of the study, and were asked if they were willing to complete a multisection questionnaire packet. Those who agreed to take part provided their informed consent.
The first section of the questionnaire assessed psychological need satisfaction via exercise, motivational regulations, and exercise behaviors. Those participants who reported taking part in regular exercise classes completed an additional section of the questionnaire tapping PAS provided by the exercise class leader in the class in which they participated most commonly.

Results
 
Preliminary Data Analysis
Data were screened according to the recommendations of Tabachnick and Fidell (2001). Four multivariate outliers were removed from the sample based on the Mahalonobis distance criterion (see Tabachnick &amp; Fidell, 2001), leaving a final sample of 369 participants. Examination of the assumptions associated with regression analyses (i.e., normality, linearity, and homoscedasticity) suggests that there were no particular problems in the data. More specifically, inspection of a scatterplot of the residuals indicates that both linearity and homoscedasticity assumptions were tenable.
To explore whether the data were marked by multicollinearity, both variance inflation (1.06–2.28) and tolerance (0.44–0.95) values were examined. No particular problems were found, since the obtained values are within acceptable limits. In addition, based on Belsley (1991) and Belsley, Kuh, and Welsch's (1980) suggestions, the condition indexes (CI) and variance proportions factors (VPF) for all multiple regression analyses were explored. Using the criterion proposed in Pedhazur (1997), in no instances when the CI was greater than 10 did the VPF values observed exceed 0.50 for two or more predictors, suggesting that there was no collinearity in the data.
Reliability Analysis and Descriptive Statistics
Internal consistency estimates (Cronbach's coefficient alpha) and descriptive statistics were computed for all variables (see Table 1). Reliability analyses indicate that, in general, internal consistency coefficients were greater than .70. However, the alpha values observed for two of the need scales were marginal: autonomy, ?=.65; and competence, ?=.65. Thus, results based on these variables should be interpreted with caution.
All participants engaged in at least some form of mild exercise (range =3–223 METS; M=7.59, SD=9.31). The mean level of total self-reported exercise (M=57.28, SD=36.83) was higher than that reported in previous studies examining the propositions of SDT in the exercise domain (e.g., Wilson et al., 2002, 2003). Autonomy was the most highly satisfied need, followed by relatedness and competence. Intrinsic motivation was the most strongly endorsed exercise regulation, closely followed by identified regulation.

