

She was glad, however, that he was jealous of her having a break. The more he imagined her to be having a wonderful time, chilling out, the harder he would try to get to be with her. 

'Yes . . . well you deserve one, too,' she said. 

Elliot groaned. 'I just can't bear it,' he said, scrunching up his face so that he looked like a little boy. 'I don't want to go.'

Kellie was used to this. Elliot was far worse than her every time they had to part. She knew he felt guilty about spending time with his family, away from her, and, ironic though this was, more often than not she was the one who ended up being strong about it. It was almost as if there were two Elliots: the one at work who was powerful, masterly and strong, and this Elliot, the one she loved the most, but also the one who made it almost impossible to believe he had a child of his own. 

Usually, Kellie laughed at him, but now, as she lay her chin on his chest and walked her fingertips through the thick ruffle of dark hair between his nipples, her usual composure was replaced by suffocating jealousy. 

'Then don't go. Stay here with me. Don't go at all,' she said. 'We can stay in bed for days and live off room service. No one would ever know . . .'

'I'd love to, believe me,' he said, stretching. 

'But you can't,' she said, finishing his sentence for him. Or won't, she wanted to add, but stopped herself. 

'Hey, look on the bright side,' he said, gently. 'I was supposed to be going for a whole week, but I absolutely refused. The three-day rule must be obeyed.'

'What's that?'

'You know, the saying . . . families are like fish. Three days and they go off.'

'If it's going to be so terrible, why don't you just bin it? Think about it. This could be the perfect opportunity. Call Isabelle. Tell her it's over.'

Elliot sighed. 'Bloody hell, it's tempting, believe me, but we've been through this. There's Taylor . . . and my father . . . it's Christmas . . .'

There it was again: Christmas. Kellie knew it was fatal to sound as if she was whining, or harassing him (she knew these were the most loathed traits of Elliot's daughter and wife), but she didn't understand this big deal about Christmas. She wasn't religious and Elliot wasn't either. Sure, she liked to celebrate it along with everyone else, but that whole family togetherness thing was so archaic. Her own family would never dream of deeming Christmas enough of a reason to get together. Her brother was on a ship somewhere off Canada, her mother lived and worked in Paris, and her father had remarried back home in Australia a few years ago and had another family to worry about now. 

'Christmas. Christmas. I hate bloody Christmas,' she said, rolling away from him and folding her arms. She thought about the iPod play list she'd put together entitled Shite Christmas which included Big Boss Man's 'Christmas Boogaloo', Grandaddy's 'Alan Parsons in a Winter Wonderland' and, Kellie's personal favourite, Robin Laing's 'The Man Who Slits the Turkeys' Throats at Christmas'. She was going to have a long bath and play it as soon as Elliot had gone. 

'Bah humbug,' Elliot said. 

'I do. It's such bollocks. We just get suckered in to all this consumerism and nobody really gives a shit. The only people who benefit are the shops. It's like being hit by a tsunami of tackiness. I went to Oxford Street last week and it was hell on a stick.'

Elliot laughed. 

'And Christmas cards?' she continued on her rant. 'What's all that about? It's such a waste of trees. Half the time people don't even sign them. Oh, and those round robin letters -' She paused, a thought occurring to her. She turned over, leaning on her elbows, and looked at Elliot. 'Does Isabelle send one? I bet she does.'

Elliot groaned and covered his face. 

'Ha! I knew it. Tell me all about it. Go on. Is it -'

'Excruciating? Yes, it is,' Elliot said, cutting her off, as he looked through the gaps between his fingers. He clearly wasn't going to relent and give her all the details, but she knew this already. Elliot was a diplomat and he only liked bitching about Isabelle on his own terms (usually when he was drunk) but not like this, not when Kellie tried to instigate conversations that would force him to say unkind things. 'Fortunately for me,' he continued, pressing the end of Kellie's nose and smiling, 'I have you to get me out of all that stuff. Thank God.'

'You could just get out of it now, if you wanted to . . .'

'Oh darling. Please don't make this harder than it already is. I have to do what's right, and I have to do this. Just this one time, OK?'

'But you are still going to tell them in the new year like you promised?' she asked. 

'Yes.'

'By New Year?' she specified. 

'I've told you: I'm going to fix it.'

She knew it was pointless pressing him any further. She had to trust him. She did. She loved him. He'd broken down a few months ago and told her that he'd fallen in love with her and that she'd shown him that all that he had in his life meant nothing without her. Since then, their future together had become certain. 

'It's going to be far worse for me,' he said, smoothing a strand of her long wavy brown hair away from her face. 'How do you think I'm going to feel, knowing you're here? I need to be able to think about where you are every second. What are you going to do when I go?'

Now that he'd asked her such an obvious question, it occurred to Kellie that she'd given it almost no thought. She supposed she could amuse herself. She'd take spa treatments and indulge herself with some quality time doing nothing. Suddenly she felt less brave at the prospect. 

'I bet you'll be in heaven with all those movies to watch without me to interrupt,' he said. 

She didn't have the heart to tell him that she'd already checked out the hotel room's DVD collection and had seen every one, just the same as she'd seen nearly every film in her local video store. She'd inadvertently turned into an amateur movie buff - an unexpected benefit of all those late nights she'd spent on her own, waiting for Elliot to call. 

'I suppose . . . or I can explore a bit. Catch up on some sleep . . . read . . .' She rubbed her eyes, last night's mascara crunching beneath the heel of her hand. 'Take off my make-up,' she continued, showing the black smudge to Elliot. 'Attractive, huh?'

'Very. You're beautiful, Kel. Even when you're impersonating a panda. Now, how about you bring that perfect, sexy body of yours over here?' he said, pulling her on top of him. 

Then slowly, sensuously, they began to make love. 

Kellie had never intended to become Elliot's mistress, but a year into their relationship, the facts were simple: Elliot made her happy and she made him happy too. Happier than he'd ever been in his life, so he said, and she believed him. Despite their ten-year age difference, they had a sexual connection and an emotional compatibility that they both talked about as being fated - and even though being a mistress came with its harder moments, there wasn't even a glimmer of suspicion in her mind that Elliot was 'fucking his cake and eating it', as Jane, her oldest but now extremely distant friend, had so bluntly summed it up. Kellie was impervious to such accusations. The reality was Elliot had been unhappy for years, long before he'd met Kellie. 

In fact, his reputation as a miserable ogre had somewhat preceded him when she'd started working on her first corporate law case with him at WDG &amp; Partners. Apparently, Elliot Thorne was the big, ferocious, uncompromising boss, reportedly so demanding that he'd made plenty of other minions in Kellie's position cry. But Kellie had taken a different approach, answering him back and making him apologise for being rude. She'd fought fire with fire, and playing Elliot at his own game had seemed to do the trick. Within days she'd made him laugh. Within weeks they'd become friends. 

It wasn't long before he'd tentatively opened up to her and she'd discovered that he was just about the loneliest man she'd ever met. Soon Kellie knew all about his control freak, business-obsessed wife, Isabelle, and his surly, withdrawn daughter, Taylor. Kellie knew she shouldn't get involved, but she'd found herself wanting to make Elliot's life a better place. 

Then, last Christmas, they'd spent every night in the run-up to Christmas working on a case until the small hours. When they'd finally said goodbye, Kellie had fought back tears of an altogether different sort to those of her predecessors. She'd known that she was going to miss him, and it wasn't the kind of missing that was healthy to feel about one's boss. 

Which is why, when a soaking wet, distraught-looking Elliot had run up the road after her and had flattened her against the railings, apologising and kissing her in quick succession, she'd known that she wasn't the only one in the grip of something bigger than she'd ever experienced. 

They'd barely spent more than a day apart since, and when Elliot had rented the flat up the road from the Chancery Lane office, it had seemed like the most natural and convenient thing in the world for Kellie to move in. He might have been keeping her a secret from his family until the time was right, and it certainly wasn't right to let anyone at work know, but Elliot's commitment to her never wavered. 

And now, afterwards, as she lay in his arms, silently stroking his smooth skin, she felt more in love with him than ever. Eventually, Elliot stretched before getting up and heading into the en-suite bathroom. 

Kellie admired the view of his naked backside, as he looked at himself in the mirror. 

'So what's this Brayner island like, then?' she asked, getting out of bed. 

'It's a nice place to come in the summer, but why Dad has moved here permanently is a mystery. No one expected him to retire here full time.'

'I quite like the idea of retiring to a small island,' Kellie said, joining him in the bathroom. 'It's romantic.'

'And totally impractical, but he's so stubborn there was no telling him.'

'I'd like to see it one day. It's beautiful, right?'

'If you like that kind of thing, but to be honest, at this time of year it's just barren and bleak and windswept, and there's absolutely nothing to do. For city people like us, it's just . . . I don't know . . . you'd find it much too low level. Boring.'

Kellie put her arms around his waist and pressed her cheek against his back, as he started to brush his teeth. She didn't want to argue with him. He always seemed to forget that she'd grown up in Australia and was used to wilderness. It didn't matter. She liked him referring to them as an 'us'. 

'You never talk about your family much, apart from what happened to Stephanie. How is she?' Kellie felt for Elliot's elder sister. She wished she could reach out to her, but she knew that even thinking this was overstepping the boundaries of her current relationship with Elliot. It was so frustrating to be so central to his life in some ways and entirely excluded in others. 

'Coping, I guess. I suppose that's one good thing about Christmas at Dad's. It'll take her mind off things. It might cheer her up a bit.'
