
The hamster was alone, which made it worse. Alone with a wheel on a wasteland of wood shavings and newspaper. Georgia and Bessi did everything they could; stuffed him with grapes and cleaned his mess, gave him a name. "Ham,' Georgia said, her eyes level with Ham's because she was only seven, "be happy some days or you might not wake up in the morning, isn't it. Here's a present.' She'd pulled a rose off the rose bush in the garden that was Her Responsibility (Aubrey had said so, and Ida had agreed – so Kemy could shut up) and laid it, the ruby petals flat on one side, a single leaf asleep in the sun, on a saucer. She opened the cage and put the saucer next to Ham. He sniffed it and then was still again, but with a thoughtful look on his face that wasn't there before. Georgia thought that sometimes flowers were better for people's health than food. She often spent entire afternoons in the garden with a cloth, a spade and a watering can, wiping dirt off leaves, spraying the lawn with vigour, and pulling away the harmful weeds. 

The twins lived two floors above Ham, in the loft. It was their house. They lived at 26a Waifer Avenue and the other Hunters were 26, down the stairs where the house was darker, particularly in the cupboard under the stairs where Aubrey made them sit and "think about what you've done' when they misbehaved (which could involve breaking his stapler, using all the hot water, finishing the ginger nuts or scratching the car with the edge of a bicycle pedal). Other dark corners for thinking about what you've done were located at the rear of the dining room next to Aubrey's desk and outside in the garage with the dirty rags and white spirit. 

On the outside of their front door Georgia and Bessi had written in chalk "26a', and on the inside "G + B', at eye level, just above the handle. This was the extra dimension. The one after sight, sound, smell, touch and taste where the world multiplied and exploded because it was the sum of two people. Bright was twice as bright. All the colours were extra. Girls with umbrellas skipped across the wallpaper and Georgia and Bessi could hear them laughing. 

The loft had a separate flight of stairs leading up from the first-floor landing and an en suite bathroom with a spaghetti-Western saloon door. Because of its intimacy with the roof, it was the only room in the house that had triangles and slanting walls. The ceiling sloped down over Bessi's bed and made her feel lucky. There was no other bed in the whole house that the ceiling, that God, was so close to, not even Bel's, who had the biggest room because she had breasts. That meant that Bessi's bed was the best. She wrote it down in yellow chalk: BESSI BEST BED, on the wall where her eyes landed in the mornings, just by the attic cupboard where things could be hidden, whole people could be hidden and no one would know to look there because you couldn't stand up in it and it was full of old books and buckets and spades for the holidays. 

At the end of Georgia's bed next to the window – a whole upper wall of window that gave them church bells and sunsets and an evergreen tree in the far distance – was another triangle, an alcove, for thinking. Two beanbags whose bubbles smelt of strawberry were tucked into the corners and that was where they sat. Not many people were allowed to sit there too, just Kemy and Ham. But absolutely no one was allowed to sit there with them when they were thinking, especially when they were making a decision. 

Late in the summer of 1980, Kemy knocked on the door (that was a rule) when the twins were trying to decide whether Ida and Aubrey should get a divorce or not. Georgia had put a jar of roses on the windowsill so that she could picture them while she was deciding, and sliced a nectarine for them to share afterwards – the nectarine was their favourite fruit, because its flesh was the colour of sunset. Bessi had wrapped her special duvet around her because she couldn't think when she was cold. Sky-blue slippers on their feet, they sat down in the strawberry corners and shut their eyes. They thought long and hard about it, drifting through possibles. Five minutes passed and ten minutes. Then, into the silence, Georgia said, "Mummy can't drive.' Bessi had not thought of this. It was definitely important because they needed a car for shopping and getting Ham to the vet next week to see to his cold. A cold could kill a hamster. 

That was a No. 

What Bessi had been thinking about was the apple trees that were Her Responsibility. Ida liked to make pies, and Aubrey liked to eat them, so Bessi had to watch the apple trees all year round until the apples started thumping to the ground in September. Then she'd make the announcement, projecting her voice: "APPLE PIE TIME!' And everyone had to follow her with their baskets and stepladders and Safeway bags, even Bel with her hips. Bessi didn't know whether she could give up this position because she felt, in some way, it was important training for the future. And it was almost September. So now she murmured, "It's almost apple.' 

That was another No. 

But if they did get a divorce, thought Georgia, they'd all get more sleep, wherever they were, and surely that was a Yes. 

But not if they ended up sleeping in Gladstone Park. And that wasn't definitely impossible. 

Then Kemy knocked on the door, which was irritating because they hadn't got very far. 

"What?' they moaned. 

"Can I come in?' 

"No,' said Bessi, "we're deciding.' 

"What about?' Kemy was disappointed. "I want to too.' 

"No. Go away,' said Georgia. "'Simportant.' 

Kemy was five and didn't know what simportant meant so she started crying. "I'm telling Daddy you're deciding,' she shouted, and stamped downstairs. 

Georgia and Bessi adjourned the divorce decision, agreeing that it would be best to wait until after the vet and after this year's apples. And anyway, "It's not up to us,' Bessi pointed out, taking a piece of nectarine. "No,' said Georgia, "it's up to Bel.' 

In the mornings they went first into the sunlounge to check on Ham and then out into the garden for the apples and the roses. They put their anoraks on – Georgia's red and blue, Bessi's yellow and green – over their pyjamas when it was cold. It was usually cold because heating was expensive in the sunlounge (thin walls, a plastic corrugated roof) and there was no heating outside unless it was summer. They understood that. It would be a waste of money to put heaters along the fence outside. Imagine how much it would cost to heat all the outsides in the world. Probably more than three hundred pounds. 

Georgia climbed the stepladder and unhooked the hose from the wall. Ham watched. He'd been awake for hours watching the hazy dawn pull in the morning. Today, a Wednesday, he was especially not happy. Wednesdays were hard and the twins understood this too. It was the being in the middle of the beginning and the end when things tumbled, things tossed. The day was reluctant and didn't know what to wear. It dreamed and reached out for dusk but people carried on as if it was Tuesday, or Friday, as if time's moods didn't matter. This was confusing for Ham and the twins but they did the best they could to join in. 

With the hose over her arm Georgia peered into Ham's cage. It smelt of dry wood and droppings. He blinked very slowly and looked at her chin. "Chocolate drop for brekky treat?' she rustled in the food tray under the table. "Cheer you up today.' There was no noticeable response, not even a quicker breath or a quiet sneeze. 

Georgia stepped out into the crispy sun and studied Bessi through the bushes that separated the front back garden from the back back garden. The back back garden was wild. Aubrey only mowed the lawn up there once a year because no one ever showed an interest in shaking out a mat and lying down. It had shadows. A hulk of old grass turning to straw by the back wall. A shack next to it full of incredible spiders. Bessi shone through the leaves like stained glass. Very still. She was waiting for thumps with her eyes closed but none had happened yet. She felt that if she concentrated hard enough something would, right in front of her. 

The apple trees, who were very pregnant now, creaked and swayed into another long Wednesday. They were twins too. So far this year they'd released three unblushing apples between them. Not nearly enough for Bessi to say Apple Pie Time. There had to be at least four each, with rosy cheeks. And then the things could happen. The ceremonial march into the wild, the picking, peeling, boiling and baking, apple pies and apple sauce with inside sugar and all of it up to her. Dear God, she thought, please help them drop the apples so that we can pick them up. Thank you Amen. 

Georgia went and stood next to Bessi and their knuckles brushed together. There was a shiver on the wind. Bessi opened her eyes. 

"I think Ham's d'stressed,' Georgia said, staring through the grass. There was a pause. Sometimes, when Ida hadn't got enough sleep, she closed the bathroom door and locked it. She had a bath for five hours, during which time they would put their ears up against the door and hear her talking to someone in Edo (usually Nne-Nne, her mother, whom she missed). When the bathroom door finally shuddered open, Ida would wander out into the hall as if it were a dirt-track into a whole new country and she'd arrived at the airport with nothing but her magic dressing gown and a toilet bag. Georgia asked Bel what it meant because being clean didn't usually take that much time. Usually it took twenty minutes, or an hour if they had bubble bath. Bel had lowered her voice and told her that Ida might have d'stression. When Georgia had asked her what that meant she'd said it was to do with being sad, that being sad could be like having a cold if there was enough of it. 

And Ham had a cold. 

"Is he in the bathroom?' asked Bessi. 

"No. He's in his room.' 

Bessi frowned. "But if he's not in the bath, how can he be d'stressed?' 

"You don't have to have a bath. You just have to have a cold.' 

"Oh.' 

They stared at the base of a thumpless apple tree. A sparrow who nested in its branches peeked down at them and waited. 

"What shall we do?' said Bessi. 

"Gave him a chocolate but he doesn't want it.' 

"What about Vicks? On his nose.' 

"Have to ask Mummy.' 

"OK.' 

Georgia went quiet. She fell into deep thought and put her hand on her stomach over her scar. She said, "What if he dies, Bess?' 

"Don't know. We might have to put him in a box and have a funeral.' 

Neasden was like the high heel at the bottom of Italy. It was what the city stepped on to be sexy. London needed its Neasdens to make the Piccadilly lights, the dazzling Strand, the pigeons at Trafalgar Square and the Queen waving from her Buckingham balcony seem exciting, all that way away, over acres of rail track and miles and miles of traffic. The children of the city suburbs watched it all on TV. It was only very occasionally that the Hunters ventured past Kilburn because most of the things they needed could be bought from Brent Cross, which had all the shops. And when they did go into town the Little Ones (Kemy and the twins) bumped into things and someone always got lost (Kemy in the bedding department of the Oxford Street branch of Debenhams, Georgia at the Leicester Square funfair one winter, underneath an orange polka-dot horse with wings). 

Neasden was easier. A little hilly place next to a river and a motorway with nodding trees and one stubby row of shops. One bank, one library, one optician, one chemist, one chip shop, one Chinese takeaway, pub, hairdresser, off-licence, cash 'n' carry, greengrocer and two newsagents, a full stop at each end of Neasden Lane. There was also a chocolate-smelling chocolate-biscuit factory said by the older locals to have driven people to madness. Schoolchildren were given unforgettable guided tours through it, the chocolate warm, melting, over freshly baked biscuits on conveyor belts. Georgia and Bessi had been there, and afterwards they'd laughed a lot.
