I was still looking at the photograph, puzzling at the contrasts within
it, when the phone on Mercer's desk started ringing. I stared down for a
second, feeling strangely caught out.
Get yourself together, Mark, I thought, and I answered it on the third
ring.
'Detective Sergeant Mercer's office. Mark Nelson speaking.'
'Hello, Detective Nelson.' The woman's voice was relaxed and warm,
and she sounded slightly amused. 'I'm Eileen Mercer. I don't believe I've
spoken to you before. You must be my husband's new servant?'
She didn't actually laugh, but accented the last word enough to let me
know she wasn't serious.
I smiled. 'That's exactly what it says on my new card.'
This time she did laugh. 'I'll bet. Is my husband there?'
'No, I'm sorry, he's not.' I glanced around the office as though he
might materialise. 'Nobody is.'

'Nobody at all?'
'Just me.'
'This is your first day, isn't it?'
'Yes.'
'I thought so. John told me about you. He said he was very impressed
with your CV and he was looking forward to working with you.'
'He did?'
'Absolutely.' She didn't seem to realise she'd told me something astonishing,
but added: 'I'll say that to you because I'm sure he won't. How
are you finding it so far?'
'Not good.' I slid into Mercer's seat. 'I was late. To be honest, I don't
even know where everyone is at the moment.'
'That was going to be my next question.'
'I'm sorry.'
'Oh no, no, don't be. Poor you. For what it's worth, I'm sure they'll
understand. The roads are a nightmare at the moment. My husband got
lost at the weekend, so don't let him give you any grief.'
'Okay.'
'You're new to the city, I'm guessing?'
'Yes,' I said. 'I moved over from the coast a couple of days ago. But I
still can't believe I've turned up late.'
'Can I call you Mark?'
'Of course.'
'How old are you, Mark?'
'I'm twenty-eight.'
'So young. I tell you what, Mark. You sound very nice, and I know
how intimidating my husband can seem – to other people, anyway. So
what I suggest is this. If you do me a favour, I'll make sure John goes easy
on you. He does listen to me.'
'That's nice of you,' I said. 'But I'll do the favour regardless.'
'Well, the favour's easy. I want you to tell my husband I phoned. And
tell him: “Don't forget.”'
'“Don't forget,”' I repeated.
'That's right. It won't please him much, I imagine. And don't ask him
what it means.' Her voice dropped to a stage whisper. 'It'll just annoy
him.'
'I think I can manage that.'
'That's good—'
Another shrill tone interrupted us. I swivelled on the chair and looked
at my desk. My phone was flashing.

'Er . . .'
Eileen Mercer saved me any embarrassment. 'That'll be one of the
gang, Mark. You have to go.'
'I hope so.'
'Remember the message and have a good day. I'm sure I'll talk to you
again.'
'Okay. Take care.'
'You too.'
I hung up and scrambled over to my desk, thinking: Don't forget,
don't forget. If I didn't remember to pass on the message, the sheer irony
would kill me before Mercer did.
'Detective Nelson.'
'Mark? Pete.'
Pete Dwyer was Mercer's second-in-command. At the interview, it had
been him who asked most of the questions, looking slightly baffled and
annoyed by all the paperwork throughout. He was an amiable bear of a
man, constantly either frowning or thinking about it, but he'd done his
best to put me at ease, and I'd mentally thanked him for it.
'Hi Pete. I'm—'
'Don't worry about it. We need you out here in the field. You got a
pen?'
'Uh-huh.'
He explained the situation briefly. We had a dead body out in the
suburbs. Suspicious circumstances. Simon Duncan, who was the forensics
expert on Mercer's team, was working with scene-of-crime officers
right now, so official judgments were being reserved, but it was almost
certainly a homicide. They needed me to get the door-to-doors started
with the neighbours – probably about half an hour ago.
'Right,' I said, scribbling furiously. 'Where am I heading?'
3 DECEMBER 10.10 A.M.
21 HOURS, 10 MINUTES UNTIL DAWN
Eileen
After talking to Mark Nelson, Eileen found herself wandering through
the house from room to room. It felt like she was waiting for something
to happen, and was reluctant to do anything else until it had. In the
meantime, she couldn't settle.

Which was strange. Her schedule was free for the day, and although
her sister sometimes called round she never turned up unannounced.
There were no pressing tasks, no appointments; her calendar was clear.
But still, when she heard the knock at the door, the sudden, apparently
unexpected noise seemed to resolve something.
It had been this way since before the weekend; she'd been suffering
from a sense of unease ever since the dream on Friday night.
Eileen had gone over it in her head upon waking, and then talked
about it with John a little later. The dream had been brief and uneventful,
consisting of her walking around the house and noticing that things
had changed and items were missing. In the way of dreams, her mind
conjured up a flash of complicated back-story to explain it all, but all
she remembered was that John had left her. It was his possessions that
were gone. Books leaned at angles on the shelves, supporting each other.
Pictures had been taken down from the walls, leaving pale stamps on the
paint. Her clothes, hanging in their shared wardrobe, formed a multicoloured
barcode.
'I hope you're not planning on running off,' she'd told John over
breakfast.
Her tone had made it clear she wasn't serious, but even so she'd been
waiting for an answer. Eileen often talked about dreams when they
bothered her. Sometimes she even made the contents up, so that she
could discuss any issues they were having in a more circumspect way.
John didn't know that, but they had been married for a long time, and
he understood her well enough to know she was asking for reassurance,
which he generally gave. After over thirty years together, it would have
been odd if he couldn't read between her lines.
'I'm too old to run,' he'd said.
'Is that the only reason?'
He'd thought about it. 'Too tired, as well.'
'That's all right, then.'
But reading between the lines went both ways, and Eileen had noticed
that his first response had been play, his second more considered. There
were a hundred other reasons John would never leave her, of course, but
he'd known she'd take those as givens. Instead, he'd raised something else.
Too tired.
She'd watched him all weekend, thinking that tired didn't cover it.
Tired was a problem that sleep could solve, whereas over the past few
weeks John had looked as though he slept fine, but woke up every morning
a little bit more depleted than the night before. Too lost was a more
accurate reason. In order to run away, after all, you needed a direction
to start off in.
And so, after talking to Nelson, Eileen wandered the house, wondering
if it was this new detective's appointment that was concerning her husband.
'He reminds me of me,' John had said, sounding unsure whether
that was a good or a bad thing. Maybe it was that, playing on his mind.
Perhaps it was just replacing Andrew. Or it could be nothing in particular.
The last two years had been full of good and bad times, and she hadn't
been able to pin them all down. Sometimes, he'd barely had the energy to
get out of bed; other times, he'd been the same as before his breakdown.
But whatever it was now, it was something, and she wished he would talk
to her about it, the way—
Knock, knock, knock, knock, knock.
She stopped. There was somebody at the side door, at the extension she
reserved for her clients. She didn't need to check her diary to know she
hadn't forgotten an appointment. It was Thursday, a day off. Her private
working week had finished yesterday.
'Just a moment.'
Eileen gave herself a cursory glance in the glass front of one of the
kitchen cabinets. She had a tendency to slob a bit when there was nobody
to see, and while she wasn't vain it was important that her clients were
met with a professional façade. Because of the nature of counselling, it
was necessary that personal information flowed only one way. She looked
slightly messy – jeans and a blouse – but her hair was okay. No face mask,
at least.
Knock, knock, knock.
'I said, just a moment.'
But the knocking continued regardless. Eileen made her way through,
halfway between concerned and annoyed. Reaching the door, she buried
the second emotion as deeply as she could. Even more than a face mask,
obvious irritation had no business being seen on a counsellor.
Before she opened up, she checked through the fish-eye lens.
James Reardon was on her doorstep.
He had one hand in his pocket, and was jigging impatiently on the spot:
looking down the drive anxiously, as though watching for someone.
Eileen reached out to unhook the security chain, but then hesitated.
She had been counselling Reardon on and off for over a year now, and he
was one of her few private clients with a criminal record and a propensity
for violence. In her clinical work she was accustomed to that, but by
necessity that work was always done in safer surroundings. None of those
25
people would she ever have allowed into her home, even if any of them
had been free to visit.
In James Reardon's case, however, she knew that both problems were
largely down to his domestic situation and alcohol. He had always been
quiet, polite and respectful in their sessions. Reardon was a confused
and angry young man, but he was also intelligent and seemed genuinely
interested in the process: determined to engage. She had often seen him
agitated by what they talked about and had never felt in any danger. But
she'd never seen him like this.
Eileen opened the door, but kept the chain on. Reardon's attention
snapped to where she was standing.
'Eileen.'
'Hello, James,' she said carefully. 'I'm sorry, I don't think we have an
appointment today.'
'I know. I'm sorry.' He looked away again, and then back to her. His
face was scared, plaintive. 'I just wanted to tell you that I'm sorry.'
'Sorry for what, James?'
'I've tried my best, I really have. Over the last year, it's been so hard.'
'I know it has.'
'But you've really helped me, honestly. You've been the only person
who's been there for me.'
She kept her expression neutral, but what he said was twisting their
relationship a little. Under normal circumstances, she might have tactfully
corrected him. He paid her to be there for him, but it was a specific type
of support, involving nothing more difficult than listening. She allowed
him the space to understand the fragments of his life, one small piece at
a time. She certainly wasn't his friend.
'You've been helping yourself,' Eileen told him.
He shook his head: that doesn't matter.
'I just want you to know that I have tried hard. I don't want you to
think I've let you down.'
Eileen frowned. 'James, what's wrong?'
'You've got to remember, whatever I end up doing, it's all for Karli.'
That set alarm bells ringing. Karli, Reardon's baby daughter, had been
the product of a brief reconciliation with his ex-wife, Amanda. As Eileen
understood it, that relationship had been volatile from the start, but their
two children had created a knot that stopped it unravelling smoothly.
Even now, Reardon maintained that Amanda was an unsuitable mother,
but the court had sided with her, ultimately granting a restraining order
against James and refusing him access to his children.
