on. Mma Ramotswe watched as the woman held out her wrist
to be admired by the trader, who nodded encouragement. But
the woman seemed not to agree with his verdict, and handed
the bangle back, pointing to another item at the back of the
stall. And at that moment, while the trader turned round to
stretch for whatever it was that she had singled out, the
woman quickly slipped another bangle into the pocket of the
jacket she was wearing.
Mma Ramotswe gasped. This time, she could not sit back
and allow a crime to be committed before her very eyes. If
people did nothing, then no wonder that things were getting
worse. So she stood up, and began to walk firmly towards the
stall where the woman had now engaged the trader in earnest
discussion about the merits of the merchandise which he was
showing her.
"Excuse me, Mma.'
The voice came from behind her, and Mma Ramotswe
turned round to see who had addressed her. It was the
waitress, a young woman whom Mma Ramotswe had not seen
at the café before.
"Yes, Mma, what is it?'
The waitress pointed an accusing finger at her. "You cannot
run away like that,' she said. "I saw you. You're trying to go
away without paying the bill. I saw you.'
For a moment Mma Ramotswe was unable to speak. The
accusation was a terrible one, and so unwarranted. Of course
she had not been trying to get away without paying the bill –
she would never do such a thing; all she was doing was trying
to stop a crime being committed before her eyes.
She recovered herself sufficiently to reply. "I am not trying
to go away, Mma,' she said. "I am just trying to stop that
person over there from stealing from that man. Then I would
have come back to pay.'
The waitress smiled knowingly. "They all find some excuse,'
she said. "Every day there are people like you. They come and
eat our food and then they run away and hide. You people are
all the same.'
Mma Ramotswe looked over towards the stall. The woman
had begun to walk away, presumably with the bangle still
firmly in her pocket. It would now be too late to do anything
about it, and all because of this silly young woman who had
misunderstood what she was doing.
She went back to her table and sat down. "Bring me the
bill,' she said. "I will pay it straightaway.'
The waitress stared at her. "I will bring you the bill,' she
said. "But I shall have to add something for myself. I will have
to add this if you do not want me to call the police and tell
them about how you tried to run away.'
As the waitress went off to fetch the bill, Mma Ramotswe
glanced around her to see if people at the neighbouring tables
had witnessed the scene. At the table next to hers, a woman
sat with her two young children, who were sipping with
evident pleasure at large milkshakes. The woman smiled at
Mma Ramotswe, and then turned her attention back to the
children. She had not seen anything, thought Mma
Ramotswe, but then the woman leaned across the table and
addressed a remark to her.
"Bad luck, Mma,' she said. "They are too quick in this place.
It is easier to run away at the hotels.'
For a few minutes Mma Ramotswe sat in complete silence,
reflecting on what she had seen. It was remarkable. Within a
very short space of time she had seen an instance of bare-faced
theft, had encountered a waitress who thought nothing of
extorting money, and then, to bring the whole matter to a
shameful conclusion, the woman at the next table had
disclosed a thoroughly dishonest view of the world. Mma
Ramotswe was frankly astonished. She thought of what her
father, the late Obed Ramotswe, a fine judge of cattle but also
a man of the utmost propriety, would have thought of this. He
had brought her up to be scrupulously honest, and he would
have been mortified to see this sort of behaviour. Mma
Ramotswe remembered how she had been walking with him
in Mochudi when she was a young girl and they had come
across a coin on the edge of the road. She had fallen upon it
with delight and was polishing it with her handkerchief before
he noticed what had happened and had intervened.
"That is not ours,' he said. "That money belongs to
somebody else.'
She had yielded the coin reluctantly, and it had been
handed in to a surprised police sergeant at the Mochudi Police
Post, but the lesson had been a vivid one. It was difficult for
Mma Ramotswe to imagine how anybody could steal from
another, or do any of the things which one read about in the
Botswana Daily News court reports. The only explanation was
that people who did that sort of thing had no understanding
of what others felt; they simply did not understand. If you
knew what it was like to be another person, then how could
you possibly do something which would cause pain?
The problem, though, was that there seemed to be people
in whom that imaginative part was just missing. It could be
that they were born that way – with something missing from
their brains – or it could be that they became like that because
they were never taught by their parents to sympathise with
others. That was the most likely explanation, thought Mma
Ramotswe. A whole generation of people, not only in Africa,
but everywhere else, had not been taught to feel for others
because the parents simply had not bothered to teach them
this.
She continued to think of this as she drove in her tiny white
van, back through that part of town known as the Village,
back past the University, with its growing sprawl of buildings,
and finally along Zebra Drive itself, where she lived. She had
been so disturbed by what she had seen that she had quite
forgotten to do the shopping that she had intended to do,
with the result that it was only when she pulled into her
driveway and came to a halt beside the kitchen wall that she
remembered that she had none of the items she needed to
make that night's dinner. There were no beans, for example,
which meant that their stew would be accompanied by no
greens; and there would be no custard for the pudding which
she had planned to make for the children. She sat at the wheel
of the van and contemplated retracing her tracks to the shops,
but she just did not have the energy. It was a hot day, and the
house looked cool and inviting. She could go inside, make
herself a pot of bush tea, and retire to her bedroom for a sleep.
Mr J. L. B. Matekoni and the children had gone out to
Mojadite, a small village off the Lobatse Road, to visit his
aunt, and would not be back before six or seven. She would
have the house to herself for several hours yet, and this would
be a good time for a rest. There was plenty of food in the
house – even if it was the wrong sort for the dinner that she
had planned. They could have pumpkin with the stew, rather
than beans, and the children would be perfectly happy with a
tin of peaches in syrup rather than the custard and semolina
pudding that she had thought of making. So there was no
reason to go out again.
Mma Ramotswe stepped out of the tiny white van and
walked round to the kitchen door, unlocking it to let herself
in. She could remember the days when nobody locked their
doors in Botswana, and indeed when there were many doors
that had no locks to lock anyway. But they had to lock their
doors now and there were even people who locked their gates
too. She thought of what she had seen only a short time
before. That woman who had stolen from the trader with the
wide-brimmed felt hat; she lived in a room somewhere which
she no doubt kept locked, and yet she was prepared to steal
from that poor man. Mma Ramotswe sighed. There was much
in this world over which one might shake one's head. Indeed,
it would be possible to go through life today with one's head
in constant motion, like a puppet in the hands of a shaky
puppeteer.
The kitchen was cool, and Mma Ramotswe slipped out of
her shoes, which had been pinching her recently (could one's
feet put on weight?). The polished concrete floor was
comfortable underfoot as she moved over to the sink to pour
herself a glass of water. Rose, her maid, was away for the
weekend, but had tidied the kitchen before she left on Friday
evening. Rose was conscientious and kept all the surfaces
scrupulously clean. She lived in a small house on the far edge
of Tlokweng, which she maintained with the same rigour as
she devoted to her work for Mma Ramotswe. She was one of
those women, thought Mma Ramotswe, in whom there
seemed to be an unending capacity for hard work. She had
raised a family – and raised them well – with little help from
the fathers of the children. She had provided for these children
on the small wages that she had earned as a maid and by the
payment, scant though it was, that she received for the sewing
work that she undertook. Africa was full of such women, it
seemed, and if there was to be any hope for Africa it would
surely come from women such as these.
Mma Ramotswe filled the kettle from the kitchen tap and
put it on the cooker. She did this automatically, as one
performs familiar tasks, and it was only after she had done this
that she noticed that the kettle had not been in its accustomed
place. Rose always left it on the small wooden chopping block
beside the sink, and the children, Motholeli and Puso, knew
to leave it there too. That was the kettle's place, and it would
not have occurred to anybody to leave it on the low wooden
dresser on the other side of the kitchen. Certainly Mr J. L. B.
Matekoni would not have done that – and indeed she had
never seen Mr J. L. B. Matekoni touch the kettle in all the six
months since their marriage and his arrival in the house on
Zebra Drive. Mr J. L. B. Matekoni liked tea, of course – it
would have been very difficult to marry a man who did not
like tea – but he very rarely seemed to make any tea for
himself. She had not thought about this before now, but it was
rather interesting, was it not, that somebody might believe
that tea just happened along? Mr J. L. B. Matekoni was not a
lazy man, but it was remarkable to reflect how most men
imagined that things like tea and food would simply appear if
they waited long enough. There would always be a woman in
the background – a mother, a girlfriend, a wife – who would
ensure that these needs would be met. This should change, of
course, and men should learn how to look after themselves,
but very few men seemed to be doing this yet. And there was
not much hope for the younger generation, looking at the two
apprentices and how they behaved. They still expected women
to look after them and, unfortunately, there seemed to be
enough young women who were prepared to do this.
It was while she was thinking this that Mma Ramotswe
noticed that one of the drawers in the kitchen dresser was not
as she had left it. It was not fully open, but had definitely been
pulled out and then not closed properly. She frowned. This
was very strange. Again, Rose always shut everything after she
used it and the only other person who had been in the kitchen
since Rose left had been Mma Ramotswe herself. She had
been in there early that morning, when she had got out of bed
to make breakfast for Mr J. L. B. Matekoni and the children
before they went off to Mojadite. Then she had seen them off
on their early start and had gone back into the kitchen to tidy
up. She had not needed anything from that drawer, which
contained string, scissors, and other items that she would only
use from time to time. Somebody else must have opened it.
She moved over to that side of the kitchen and opened the
drawer further to inspect it. Everything seemed to be there,
except . . . and now she noticed the ball of string which was
sitting on the top of the dresser. She picked this up and
examined it. This was her ball of string, indeed, and it had
been taken out of the drawer and left out by the person who
had opened the drawer and, she imagined, who had also
moved the kettle from its accustomed place.
Mma Ramotswe stood quite still. It now occurred to her
that there had been an intruder, and that whoever it was who
had come into the house had been disturbed by her return.
That person might have run out of the front of the house
when she came into the kitchen, but then the front door,
which provided the only means of leaving on that side of the
house, would have been left firmly locked. This meant that the
intruder might still be inside.
For a few moments she wondered what to do. She could
telephone the police and tell them that she suspected that
somebody was in the house, but what if they came out to
investigate and there was nobody? They would hardly be
pleased to be called out for no reason at all and they would
probably mutter comments about nervous women who
should know better than to waste police time while there were
real crimes to be looked into. So perhaps it was premature to
call the police and she should, instead, go through the house
herself, moving from room to room to see if there was
anybody there. Of course that was risky. Even in peaceful
Botswana there were cases of people being attacked by
intruders when they came upon them in the course of a
robbery. Some of these people were dangerous. And yet this
was Gaborone, on a Saturday afternoon, with the sun riding
high in the sky, and people walking along Zebra Drive. This
was not a time of shadows and inexplicable noises, a time of
darkness. This was not a time to be afraid.

