'Release lock on Echo!'

At the Barrier, the atmosphere is tense. Angus has opted to re-set the Shift and Latch. Almost immediately the attempt runs into trouble. When the lock on Pier 6 is released, the gate starts to oscillate violently in the current. Angus, who is directing operations by radio from the pier, has to call for full power on the hydraulic rams. Two technicians are handling the controls from workstations, while Martin monitors the strain gauges. Lauren watches from the windows but amid the gathering dark it is hard to make out what is happening.

Behind her in the operations room there is another flurry of radio exchanges. It seems the latch mechanism is failing to engage with the new pin. Angus and Martin are divided over what to do. Angus wants to return the gate to its original position; Martin thinks they would do better to leave it where it is.

At this moment the lights of the Orion Trader come into view. 

The tanker's captain has just had his first sight of the Barrier. All he can see are the tops of the piers submerged up to the stainless-steel hoods. The gates are completely invisible under water. The tide barriers he is familiar with have been of the drop-gate type. The light arrays that indicate gates are shut are under water. No helicopter has arrived and the fire is at their backs. The ship is a mile away, travelling at ten knots. Stopping is no longer a possibility. In the circumstances it is understandable that all aboard should assume that the Barrier has opened to let them pass.

He selects Delta gate between Piers 6 and 7 and lines the ship up. According to the chart the gap is sixty-one metres; from up on the bridge it looks horribly narrow. The tanker is making too much speed but cutting power to the engines will reduce the bite of the rudder and cost him steering control.

The look-out stationed in the bow calls out that he can see turbulence. That is only to be expected, the captain thinks, with the current funnelling between the piers. He is trusting to the speed and weight of the ship to carry them through. At this rate they will draw level with the Barrier in the next two minutes.

The radio officer comes running onto the bridge. He has been trying to raise the PLA on VHF. The captain pushes him away. He needs all his concentration now. They are close enough to the Barrier to see a figure waving to them from Pier 6.

Up in the operations room, Lauren witnesses the unfolding catastrophe, transfixed with horror. The swirling smoke has concealed the tanker's approach until now it is almost on the Barrier. Martin is the first to recover. Snatching the radio mike, he screams a warning over the pier tannoys.

Angus has seen the ship too. He knows it is too close to stop or turn away. There is just one chance left. He yells into the radio to control to drop Delta. Without waiting for an answer, he runs down into Pier 6 lower machinery room to knock off the latches.

Martin freezes. He grasps Angus's meaning; if they can lower the gate enough in time, there is a chance the ship will skim over without striking it. But to engineers the Barrier is a sacred charge. Their duty is to defend London against a surge, a duty backed up by Parliament. By law, anyone opening gates without authority is liable to fourteen years' imprisonment.

The rest of the team gape at him. Beyond the windows the tanker is closing the gap, water foaming under its bow. Above the wind comes the sound of its horn. The whole room hangs on his orders.

Martin takes hold of himself. Angus is right, a smashed gate is no use to London. His arm goes out, snapping his fingers to the technicians on the gate controls. 'Unlatch Delta. Full power on all hydraulics. Start emergency opening countdown!'

The room leaps into action. Martin picks up the direct-line phone to Agency Headquarters, praying it still works and he doesn't have to try the radio. To his relief there is an answer. In seconds he is through to Dave Wilcox. 'Warn Triple-C that a main gate is going down now!'

He hears a gasp. Then, 'Once the ship is through, can you raise it again?'

'Negative,' Martin replies. He is watching the screens on the desk opposite wishing that Angus was here. The latches are off and the power packs showing ready. The technicians catch his eye. Does he really mean this? Martin gestures to them. Go! Go!

Listen, he tells Wilcox. The gates are being strained beyond all limits as it is. We'll be lucky if they don't all shake themselves to pieces. Once Delta's down, it has to stay down.

'Delta lowering!' a voice interrupts.

There is no more time to argue. Martin drops the phone and darts to the windows. His heart sinks; the tanker is right on the Barrier. It must strike the gate in seconds. Water is swirling between the piers. As the gate descends the increased flow is sucking the current through, actually pulling the ship faster towards it.

'Delta point five of a metre off top,' the voice calls out again.

The gate is dropping, but it's not fast enough Martin realises with a sickening sensation. The tanker's bow wave has reached the piers. As he tenses for the impact, he sees the prow rear up suddenly and the whole vessel shudder. An instant later the boom of the collision reaches the control tower like the sound of a heavy wave breaking against a sea wall.

It is a tribute to Erich Hausser's seamanship that the Orion Trader hits Delta gate exactly on the mid-point. The tanker has a deadweight of 20,000 tonnes fully laden and draws five metres. When it strikes the gate it is travelling at approximately six metres per second. Its momentum is such that the point of the bow rides up over the sloped hump of the gate. The gate leaf is constructed from strips of 5-centimetre steel on a box-girder frame. With the strain of overtopping it's already supporting twice its design pressure of 9000 tonnes.

As the tanker ploughs on, piling its enormous weight onto the gate, the inner frame crumples, bending inwards. The gate is supported at either end by massive disks, weighing 1100 tonnes apiece, that rotate around trunnion shafts, short stub axles set into the piers. The force of the impact wrenches the gate end on Pier 6, twisting it violently inwards and jamming the bearings. The trunnion shaft is a forged steel billet bolted to a flanged steel pipe embedded in concrete and running right through the pier. Shaft and bearings are designed to support a hydraulic loading in excess of 5000 tonnes. The shaft withstands the collision but the strain shears the bolts connecting it to the support structure. With a ringing crash that jars right through the pier, the gate end rips clean away.

On the tanker's bridge the force of the crash has thrown every man to the deck. As the captain staggers back to his feet he can feel the ship judder violently, corkscrewing and twisting all along her length. Sounds of tortured metal, tearing and scraping against the hull, reach his ears. The bow of the ship pitches downwards and for a moment he thinks they are holed and sinking. There is another hideous shuddering, from astern this time, followed by a second heavy impact that rains debris on the decks. The after section of the tanker's hull has rolled into the side of Pier 5, sending a two-metre wave cascading across the concrete deck.

And still she ploughs onwards. A throat-gagging stench of raw gasoline envelops the bridge. The twisted wreckage of the gate must have punctured the double hull forward. Smoke billows through shattered windows. Bells and sirens are shrieking. Toxic gas alarm, radio short alarm, main fire alarm, every whistle and klaxon goes off. The bridge is filled with panic noises. The captain grasps the microphone and stabs the button for the engine room. 'Stop all engines! Evacuate below decks! Execute CO2 drench!'

With sparks filling the air it is vital to snuff out any fire before it can take a hold. The ship is more than halfway through the Barrier now. Her bow plunging down at so steep an angle that the entire forward section of the tank deck is completely buried for several seconds. Then she starts to rise again, but slowly, listing over to starboard as she does. At that moment a very strong vibration runs through the ship and the whole rear accommodation structure whips like a springboard. The lights go out and power failure leaves the instruments and controls useless.

Up in the control tower, Martin is frantically trying to raise Angus. Alarm bells are sounding here too. Delta is down; Echo is in trouble and now red lights are flashing on the monitors covering Charlie gate. Staring down at the scene, he sees the ship slide clear of the piers. It looks to be down at the bow and listing badly, surrounded by an iridescent patch of leaking fuel. The gate has disappeared completely, the ends torn bodily away, leaving the surge foaming triumphantly through the gap.

Martin relays the news to a stunned Dave Wilcox. Grimly he spells out the facts. Delta is gone, smashed in the collision. The strain gauges on the bearings for Charlie gate are jumping off the scale and the controls for the Latch mechanisms don't respond. Echo gate is in bad shape and they can't reach Angus.

Before Wilcox can answer, pandemonium breaks out around the monitors.

'Pier 6 Shift and Latch has broken. Echo is swinging free!' a technician shouts.

Lauren is at the windows. The black lip of the gate rears above the water for an instant then dives again. The river is thundering around the piers, water breaking confusedly across the gap. There are cries from behind her. 'The bearings have gone!' Through the gloom Lauren glimpses a huge object like the humped back of a whale. The gate has broken free at one end and rotated up to the surface. Another violent commotion ensues and it disappears from view.

The Cabinet Office Briefing Room swarms with officials. Messengers run in and out. Most people are in shirtsleeves and the phones ring constantly. Thick rubber power cables snake over the carpet. Army signallers have brought in radio sets and laid on extra phone capacity but they can't keep up with demand. Deputy Prime Minister, Venetia Maitland, sits at the head, with permanently open lines to the emergency services strategic control rooms - Police, Fire, Ambulance and Military - in front of her.

Thirty men and women are squeezed in around the main table, which is half buried under laptops and binders, directories, heaps of files. Down the centre runs an immense map of central London and the Thames estuary out as far as the Dartford Crossing. Two assistants are marking the surge's progress with coloured flags: blue for flooding; red for fire; black for an incident involving loss of life. The blue flags extend all the way up-river as far as the Thames Barrier, indicated by a broad band of yellow. North and south of it, the flood is shown engulfing Woolwich and the City Airport. Now Mary Lucas watches as an assistant leans over to plant a blue marker at Canning Town on the western end of the Royal Docks.

