
Pulling the hood close, he lowered his goggles. Christ, it was hot. Even his arms and legs were glistening now. Come on, come on. Any longer and both he and the plane would be dead from overheating. He felt in his pocket, then realized he'd left his tiny wooden lion behind. Damn. Still, it was too late to worry about it now. Put it out of mind, he told himself, put everything out of mind. 

At last, Prior, at Red One, moved off, followed by Reds Two and Three. A new low whining began, then it was his turn, at Blue One, to open the throttle and start trundling into position. Swathes of sand and dust whipped the airframe. It was bad enough taxiing with an enormous engine cowling for a view, but with the man-made sandstorm it was like night-flying without the lights. A further complication – and there always was one – was the way the Kittyhawk tended to veer to the right. He had developed a method of taking a compass bearing and hoping for the best, but with everything juddering – including his legs on the rudder pedals and the arrows on the dials it wasn't easy. And on the ground there was always time to worry. Like the fact that his plane was full to bursting with high-octane fuel and a 500lb bomb. 

Sand and grit battered the Perspex. So much for Bradshaw's cleaning efforts. Opening the throttle further, he felt the plane surge forward. A sudden jolt as a wheel went over a large stone and the stick bolted in his hand momentarily, knocking his elbow against the side of the cockpit and numbing his arm. He cursed and corrected the yaw of the plane. The rattling and noise increased with the speed, until with a sigh of relief from both the pilot and machine, Joss pulled back, the stick biting and firming up, his grip tightening, as though controlling a strong dog on a lead. The shaking stopped as he and his plane, strapped together, emerged into the big wide blue. From sand cloud to glaring brightness, he thought, squinting through the goggles at the sun that was now gleaming off the Perspex of the machine in front. He glanced behind him, back at their airfield. One of the planes was still on the ground, its propeller slowing. That song – Blue Skies. She'd always sung it wrong – wrong words, wrong tune half the time too. 

The target was a wadi some forty miles south of Mersa Matruh and the coast, full of tanks and other vehicles, and more importantly, ammunition, fuel dumps and several hundred men. These dried river beds were hard to spot from the otherwise flat desert floor, but from the air offered rich pickings, as Prior had cheerfully pointed out. But no one had been fooled by his bravado; such a base would be dense with anti-aircraft flak and machine guns. It was a basic equation: the richer the pickings, the smaller the chances of making it back. 

They crossed down into the Qattara Depression, the huge escarpment marking its northern edge clearly visible, then headed west, eighty miles behind enemy lines before looping up north so they could attack low, fast and out of the sun. Surprise was the key. They had to pray no one saw them before they dropped height into the bomb run. At twenty miles from the target, Prior brought the squadron into line astern. An old RAF attack formation, but then again, Prior, was a Cranwell man. Joss had tried suggesting they attack in lines of three astern, but it had fallen on deaf ears. "Doesn't give us enough room for manoeuvre,' Prior had told him, "and makes us a bigger target.' And that had been that. This was fine on a single run, but when there were two circuits to be made – the bombing, then the strafe – the odds were shortened even further for those at the end of the line. 

As they approached the wadi, Joss lifted his goggles onto his forehead. They were low enough now for him to see a burnt-out bomber, crumpled and alone among the sand and stone away to his left. With his thumb, he flicked off the gun safety catch. He had been on the receiving end of such attacks on many occasions. From the ground, the attackers seemed to hold all the advantages, but this was of little comfort. Strapped into the tiny cockpit, so narrow his elbows brushed the sides and his head the canopy roof, he wondered how he ever made it through. A deep breath, the target rushing towards him. Lines of orange and green tracer were already criss-crossing the sky in front of him, despite the advantage of surprise and coming from out of the sun. Arcing lazily at first, they accelerated as they flashed past his plane. 

Joss pushed the stick over hard right then left, half-rolling his plane from side to side, stomach lurching as the blue horizon swivelled. On the ground, men fell flat at the roar of nine Allison engines belting past so low. He corrected himself, dropped his bomb, and not waiting to see where it had hit, sped on through the encampment. Explosion after explosion thundered behind him, and one massive fire-ball pitched orange flames and black smoke like a geyser into the sky. Someone had scored well. Tracer followed him out into the desert as he circled, black puffs of smoke filling the sky, ahead, below and to the side. They were way off, but it wouldn't be long now. He glanced round. They'd all made it through the first run, but then that was the easy bit. Now for the strafing. No surprise any more, and the guns would be ready. The puffs of smoke intensified, and the plane jolted. Closer now. Joss gripped the stick tighter, breath quickening. Another crash, the plane shuddered again and tiny shards of shrapnel showered the airframe. Jesus that was close. He saw Prior turning in for his second run, followed by Reds Two and Three. Then his turn. 

One, he counted. The camp looked a mess. Thick oily smoke belching into the sky, but there was no let-up from the flak batteries. More splinters rained across the airframe. Two, lines of tracer looking as though they would hit him square between the eyes, but somehow hurrying past and over. The stick jolted and shook with the plane. Joss gripped it with both hands. Sweat poured down his cheeks and back. Three. Over 300 miles an hour into a sky raining bullets and debris and pieces of jagged metal. Finger on the firing button. Four. More men down below, leaping face-first onto the ground as his bullets sprayed across them. Five. Another massive explosion – not flak, not a bomb, but one of their Kittyhawks disintegrating in mid-air. The planes ahead disappeared into a cloud of smoke, then Red Three emerged again, a spectral silhouette, hardly real at all. Six. He whipped on through the burning gust. The tracer still pursued him, flashing doggedly over his canopy as he rolled once more, before running out of steam and dropping away. 

Six seconds. That was all it took, and then he was away, blind through the smoke wall at fifty feet, and then racing over the desert. The whole attack completed in just over a minute. Joss started to gulp deep breaths of air, realizing he'd stopped breathing again as he'd counted through the strafing run. Looking behind, the puffs of flak and tracer disappeared into the distance, until all he could see was the smoke cloud caused by their sixty seconds of destruction. 

Spared again. 

Prior led them back up to 10,000 feet before breaking radio silence. Two pilots killed: one blown up, the other by ploughing straight into the ground (causing as much damage as any 500-pounder). Most of the others had taken some kind of punishment, although no one else was injured and the planes were still flying, still keeping up with the CO. 

"Well done everyone,' said Prior, "but keep a sharp look out. We're not out of the woods yet.' Predictable, routine words. 

Sixteen months before, when Joss had first arrived in the desert, he'd been surprised to find his shoulders bleeding after his first sortie. The combination of sand and wearing only a thin shirt rather than a thick jacket or Irvin had caused the straps to chafe as he kept turning his head to scan the sky. His skin had hardened since. He'd also lined both his parachute and the cockpit straps with padding, but even this minor irritation had made him realize there were a number of differences between flying over home and the desert. Another was the lack of cloud cover. Flying over England, they'd cursed when there was little cloud; in North Africa, there simply were no clouds. Just a vast, burning blue, with only the sun's glare for cover. 

Goggles lowered once more, he continued to search the wide desert sky, although his mind had now begun to drift. He could do that, fly and keep a look out without really concentrating. He'd often thought it was a bit like driving a car. He might indicate, overtake or change down a gear, but without being conscious of it, thoughts on something else entirely. 

But now the dull nauseous sensation in his stomach had returned. No, he thought, this cannot be happening, not now, not after all this. "It can't, it can't,' he said out loud. There had been a time when he'd believed Tommy – that war promised honour, excitement and fellowship – but this place, this fucking awful desert, with its freezing nights and scorching days, its sand and its millions of flies and fleas, had soon put paid to that. But he'd persevered, borne it because there'd been the hope of a future worth having; a future with her. Stella had made it all bearable, only Stella. 

Bob Carter at Red Three was wavering up and down before him. Damage somewhere. Rudder or aileron, maybe. Further ahead was Prior with Brian Scott flying at his side. Christ, but what a bunch they'd become. Sun-bruised faces, uncombed, bony, barely a decent uniform between them. Joss had begun by trying to keep himself presentable, but on a canteen of water a day it was impossible. He'd rather have a glug of water on his return from a sortie than enough to wash in properly. They were all exhausted. They smelled too, of sweat mixed with oil and grease, although it was only when someone came back from leave that anyone noticed. The little round pills the medical officer sometimes issued helped keep them going, but they were no substitute for leave. And leave in Cairo was no substitute for going home. 

No wonder lines were appearing on his face. 

He looked down: wide, flat and unrelenting, a sprawling, sandy grey desert which disappeared at the horizon into a strip of haze that merged with the sky. He was unable to make out details: without woods or snaking river valleys it all looked the same to him, a barren, lifeless plain that meant nothing. No towns or villages, just sand and rock. A hellish landscape. 

The churning throb of the engine had become a neutral background that had evolved into a heavy kind of silence. He could no longer understand why he was still alive. Why was someone playing such a cruel trick on him? He was, he supposed, an above-average fighter pilot with an aboveaverage combat record, but even the greatest aces usually came down eventually: Mannon, Richtofen, Ball; Molders, Wick; even Bader and Tuck were in POW camps now. The chances of his surviving over two years of almost continual active service (bar three months instructing in the Sudanese desert) were virtually nil. But he'd always been lucky; it had been something of a joke. Strange coincidences, or flukes of nature, had followed him from England to North Africa. He had been shot down three times, crash-landed more often than he could count on one hand, been bombed, strafed and nearly died, of all things, from an infection just a few weeks after arriving in the desert. Yet here he still was. 

There had been another fortunate escape the previous evening. After dinner, Denis Carr had asked him for a game of cards. At first Joss refused, but Denis was persistent. 

"What are we playing for?' 

"Cigarettes,' said Denis. 

They'd all been running low, and getting quite irritable about it too, but Calloway, the adjutant, had told Joss they were expecting a supply plane the following morning – with plenty more cigarettes on board. Clearly Denis didn't know. 

"Not money?' 

"No – just fags. More valuable at the moment.' 

Joss relented.
