1
It happened every time. He would reach the corner of Elterwater Walk and Kendal Street and then he would stop running. It was stupid really, considering the whole point of the exercise was to get home as quickly as possible and sort out whatever mess was waiting for him this time. It was just that he knew that once he turned the corner and looked down the long row of dreary terraced houses to Number 18, he wouldn't be able to pretend any longer.

Daydreams didn't survive for long in Elterwater Walk. 

In order to put off the inevitable, Jay always did one of two things. If it was raining, he slumped down on the broken bench inside the bus shelter and tried not to inhale the stench of stale beer and urine. Then he would close his eyes and picture his nan standing at the front door, smartly dressed and totally together – just like she used to be. Creative Visualisation, it was called – he'd read about it in a magazine in the dentist's waiting room. Apparently, if you imagined things often enough and hard enough they came true.

It hadn't worked so far.

He didn't always stop at the bus shelter. If it was dry, he crossed over the street and stood outside P and J Stores, reading the cards stuck with curling sellotape to the inside of the window. "Babysitter wanted – £2 an hour.' "Mr Fixit, odd jobs done – no task too small.' "Fed up with being fat? Lose weight fast with Fataway Fitness Plan. Phone Marilyn on 01404 556557.'

He would stand there and imagine writing his own card. "Boy, aged 16, seeks someone – anyone – to get him out of here. Live-in post; hours never-ending, pay nothing at all.'

Today he added another sentence to his imaginary advertisement. "Suitable post for someone who doesn't want a life.'

The sheer absurdity of it brought a faint smile to his lips. Mr Dawson, his maths teacher, said that every problem had a solution; it was just a case of applying your mind to it. Well, he was wrong. Solutions always depended on everything else being in place; you had to have money, or friends, or no conscience at all and then you could work most things out. Jay didn't have cash, or any really close mates – not the kind you would bare your soul to, at any rate. All he had was Nan. She was all he'd ever had – well, no – that wasn't strictly true. He had had Mum way back, but he could only remember her in the briefest of flashes. If it hadn't been for all the photographs of her round the house, he guessed he'd have forgotten her altogether. After all, he had only been three years old when she and his father were killed.

There was no photo of his father.

"Least said about him the better,' Nan used to say. "It's not as if they were married or anything. Thank God.'
Until he was about twelve, he'd pestered her to know more. Now he didn't bother. It never got him anywhere and besides, he had more important things to worry about.

So it was just him and Nan.

"We'll be all right, little man,' she used to croon to him when he was tiny. "We'll do just fine.' And they had.

Until last Easter. It was when he thought about last Easter that his conscience started rearing its head. He should never have gone on the field trip because, deep down, he had known things weren't quite right. He couldn't put his finger on it; Nan had always been a bit dotty, a bit forgetful and she'd always been the sort of person who, once she'd got an idea in her head, wouldn't rest until she had carried it out. Gritty, her friends called her. The people on the receiving end of her outbursts had ruder words to describe her behaviour.

Jay couldn't help thinking that, if he'd been at home in April, he could have stopped her doing what she did, or even taken the blame himself. But by the time he got back, it was too late. 

The memory was enough to jolt him out of his daydreams and send him belting down Elterwater Walk to his house. He guessed the town planners, or whichever sad souls had named the streets in Harpleton, had thought that giving the road the name of some beauty spot up North would somehow make the place better. The whole Belgate estate was like that: Kendal Close, Windermere Way, Ullswater Court. Trouble was, they'd reckoned without the litter blowing haphazardly across the pavement, the empty drink cans rusting slowly in the gutters, the crude graffiti scrawled on the whitewashed wall of the chip shop. Even the tiny patches of weed-ridden turf that made up the front gardens of the houses were, more often than not, obscured by the clutter of bicycles and motorbikes, or bags of rubbish spilling out of dustbins.

At least his house wasn't like that. Nan had always been house proud; everything had to be immaculate. Instead of grass, Number 18 sported a neat patch of gravel with a lavender bush in the middle. There had been some terracotta flower pots with purple and yellow pansies, but stuff that was breakable never lasted long in the Belgate estate. Nan had talked of getting a bay tree, whatever that might be, but it had never materialised. Jay guessed bay trees must be expensive. At least they were on the best side of the street, the one overlooking the bottom end of Abbey Park. 

"Nan! It's me! I'm back!'

In the split second that passed between shouting out and hearing the front door slam behind him, Jay's heart missed a beat.

"Your grandmother phoned...'

The school secretary's words were echoing in his head – but not quite as loudly as the memory of the titter that rippled around 10D.

"Ah diddums...what does Granny want this time, then?...have you got your vest on, Jay?'

Even thinking about it brought the heat flooding to his cheeks.

"Nan?'

From the tiny kitchen at the end of the hallway came the sound of faint humming.

Promising, he told himself encouragingly, as he pushed open the door. If everything was OK, he could grab a can of cola and be back at school in time for afternoon registration; if not...

His grandmother was sitting at the breakfast bar, chopping carrots.

"Jay!' she beamed, dropping the knife and heaving herself off the stool. "What are you doing home at this time?'

Jay felt his shoulders relax. She looked OK; neatly dressed, mug of tea on the table, the Daily Mail folded open at the horoscope. She was fine. What had he been worrying about?

"You phoned,' he said gently. "Remember?'

"Phoned?' Her forehead wrinkled in a frown. "I didn't phone.'

"Yes,' he urged. "You phoned the school—'

"Don't be so ridiculous!' she retorted. "Why on earth would I do that?'

"Well, I don't know, do I?' He didn't mean to snap but he couldn't help himself. He was missing lunch and Science Club – neither of which mattered that much; but he was also missing out on the chance to see Fiona – and that did.
He liked to pretend that Fiona Bayliss was his girlfriend. Of course, she wasn't, and never would be; the only reason she took any notice of him was because Mr Cole had decided to team him up with her and Reena Banerjee for the Science Competition. Besides, she was tall and had gorgeous dark hair, and he was small and gingery and covered with freckles. Girls never looked at him twice; but he could dream. Maybe, if he got a move on and dealt with Nan, he could still catch her before lessons started. 

And then he'd ask her to go to the Town Fair with him. 

If he dared.

Which, of course, he wouldn't.

"So what was it all about then, Nan?' he repeated. "Why did you phone?'

"I didn't phone!' Nan's voice was taking on that pleading note, like a small kid trying to wheedle its way out of trouble. "I didn't!'

"Yes, you...' He stopped. What was the point? If he went on about it, she'd only get upset and then he'd be here forever.

"Maybe the secretary got the wrong person,' he ended lamely. "Not to worry.'

He gave her a quick kiss on the cheek.

"Got to go,' he muttered. "I'll be back about five.'

"Well, don't go without your games kit this time!' his gran interrupted. "It's on your bed.'

Jay stared at her and a great wave of relief washed over him. OK, so he didn't need games kit today, and it was only on his bed because he'd forgotten to put it in the washing bin, but at least it explained things. 

"So that's what you phoned about!' he cried, giving her a hug. "See, you did phone!'

The moment the words were out he regretted them. 

"You think I'd waste good money phoning a forgetful kid like you!' she snapped. "Your memory's your problem, not mine!'

Jay forced himself to grin. He was used to deflecting his grandmother's sudden outbursts.

"Yeah, you're right!' he nodded, tapping the side of his head and raising his eyebrows. "I'll just go and get it and be off, then!'

"That's a good boy!' his nan beamed, her mood switching back as swiftly as it had changed. "Want something to eat?'

Jay shook his head.

"No time,' he told her. "I'll get my kit and split, thanks!'

He ran upstairs two at a time, grabbed the kit, stuffed it under his bed where she wouldn't find it, darted into the loo, and then sped downstairs again.

"I've done you a sandwich anyway,' Nan said, thrusting a foil wrapped package into his hands. "Growing boys need to eat.'

Growing? I wish, Jay thought.

"You can take it with you. Mind how you go!'

"Thanks, Nan! See you!' Jay felt almost lightheaded with relief. He'd got himself into a state over nothing. Nan was fine; just a bit forgetful. All that other business had just been a blip. 

He glanced at his watch. With a bit of luck, he'd make it back to school in time. That was one advantage of living only a few streets away.

He was out of breath by the time he reached the gates of Bishop Andrew Upper School, but there were still clusters of kids ambling through the swing doors into the Arts block, so he guessed the second bell hadn't gone.

"What you got there, then?' 

He didn't have to turn round to know who was asking the question. Rick Barnes. And if Rick was there, it was an odds-on certainty Matt Cooper was there too.

He quickened his pace without glancing behind him.

"I said, what you got there then?'

With one stride, Rick was in front of him, blocking his path and gesturing towards the somewhat squashed package in Jay's hand. 

"Just a sandwich,' Jay said as casually as he could.

"We were just saying how hungry we were, isn't that right, Matt?'

Rick nudged his mate.

"You can have it if you want,' Jay replied. With Rick standing this close, he suddenly wasn't hungry anyway.

"Really?' Rick's upper lip curled as he towered over Jay. "I'd have thought a little midget like you needed all the food he could get.'

Jay swallowed. At five foot four he was the smallest boy in his year and scrawny with it. He didn't like to be reminded of the fact. 

"Suit yourself!' He shrugged, feigning a bravado he certainly didn't feel. 

To his intense relief, the registration bell shrilled. He made a feeble attempt to push past the two boys.

"Not so fast!' Rick ordered. "Give it here!'

Jay handed the package over, and slowly, his eyes never leaving Jay's face, Rick peeled back the silver foil.
"What the...?'

The package fell to the ground as Rick recoiled in disgust. 


