The kitchen was alive with hustle and bustle. Great
billows of steam were already rising from the huge payrola,
the cauldron, hanging on a hook over the open fire. An
older servant took the water from the scullion, emptied it
into the pot, and then shoved the barrel back at him
without saying a word. The boy rolled his eyes at Ala?¨s as
he headed out and back up to the well once more.
Capons, lentils and cabbage in sealed earthenware jars
stood waiting to be cooked on the big table in the centre
of the room, together with pots containing salt mullet, eel
and pike. At one end were fogac¸a puddings in cloth bags,
goose pate´ and slabs of salted pork. At the other, trays of
raisins, quinces, figs and cherries. A boy of nine or ten was
standing with his elbows propped on the table, the scowl
on his face making it clear how much he was looking
forward to another hot and sweaty day at the turnspit,
watching the meat roast. Next to the hearth, the brushwood
was burning fiercely inside the dome-shaped bread
oven. The first batch of pan de blat, wheat bread, was
already standing on the table to cool. The smell made Ala?¨s
hungry.
"May I have one of those?'
The cook looked up, furious at the intrusion of a woman
into his kitchen. Then he saw who it was and his badtempered
face creased into a cock-eyed smile revealing a
row of rotten teeth.
"Dame Ala?¨s,' he said with delight, wiping his hands on
his apron. "Benvenguda. What an honour! You've not come
to visit us for quite some time. We've missed you.'
"Jacques,' she said warmly. "I wouldn't want to get in
your way.'
 "In my way, you!' he laughed. "How could you ever be in
my way?' As a child, Ala?¨s had spent a great deal of time in
the kitchen, watching and learning, the only girl Jacques
had ever allowed across the threshold into his male
domain. "Now, Dame Ala?¨s, what can I get you?'
"Just a little bread, Jacques, some wine too, if you can
spare it?'
A frown appeared on his face.
"Forgive me, but you're not going down to the river? Not
at this time of day, unaccompanied? A lady of your position
. . . it's not even light. I hear things, stories of . . .'
Ala?¨s laid a hand on his arm. "You are kind to concern
yourself, Jacques, and I know you have my best interests at
heart, but I will be fine. I give you my word. It's nearly
dawn. I know exactly where I'm going. I'll be there and
back before anyone even notices I've gone, really.'
"Does your father know?'
She put a conspiratorial finger to her lips. "You know
what he does not, but please, keep it our secret. I will take
great care.'
Jacques looked far from convinced, but feeling he'd said
as much as he dared, he did not argue. He walked slowly
over to the table and wrapped a round loaf in a white linen
cloth and ordered a scullion to fetch a jar of wine. Ala?¨s
watched, feeling a tug at her heart. He was moving more
slowly these days and he was limping heavily on his left
side.
"Is your leg still giving you difficulty?'
"Not much,' he lied.
"I can dress it for you later, if you like. It doesn't look as
if that cut is healing as it should.'
"It's not so bad.'
"Did you use the ointment I made for you?' she asked,
knowing from the expression on his face that he had not.
Jacques spread his podgy hands in a gesture of surrender.

"There is so much to do, Dame – all these extra guests,
hundreds once you count the servants, e´cuyers, grooms,
ladies-in-waiting, not to mention the Consuls and their
families. And so many things are difficult to find these
days. Why only yesterday, I sent—'
"That's all very well, Jacques,' said Ala?¨s, "but your leg
won't get better on its own. The cut's too deep.'
She suddenly realised that the noise level had dropped.
She glanced up to see the entire kitchen was eavesdropping
on their conversation. The younger boys were propped on
their elbows at the table, staring open-mouthed at the
sight of their quick-tempered master being told off. And
by a woman.
Pretending not to notice, Ala?¨s dropped her voice.
"Why don't I return later to do it, in return for this?'
She patted the loaf. "It can be our second secret, oc? A fair
exchange?'
For a moment, she thought she had been over-familiar
and presumed too much. But, after a moment's hesitation,
Jacques grinned.
"Ben,' she said. Good. "I will come back when the sun is
high and see to it. Dins d'abord.' Soon.
As Ala?¨s left the kitchen and climbed back up the stairs,
she heard Jacques bellowing at everybody to stop gawping
and get back to work, pretending the interruption had
never happened. She smiled.
Everything was as it should be.
Ala?¨s pulled open the heavy door that led into the main
courtyard and stepped out into the newborn day.
The leaves of the elm tree that stood in the centre of the
enclosed courtyard, under which Viscount Trencavel dispensed
justice, looked black against the fading night. Its
branches were alive with larks and wrens, their voices
warbling shrill and clear in the dawn.

Raymond-Roger Trencavel's grandfather had built the
Chaˆteau Comtal, more than a hundred years ago, as the
seat from which to rule his expanding territories. His lands
stretched from Albi in the north and Narbonne in the
south, to Be´ziers in the east and Carcassonne in the west.
The Chaˆteau was constructed around a large rectangular
courtyard and incorporated, on the western side, the
remains of an older castle. It was part of the reinforcement
of the western section of the fortified walls that enclosed
the Cite´, a ring of solid stone that towered high above the
river Aude and the northern marshlands beyond.
The donjon, where the Consuls met and significant
documents were signed, was in the southwest corner of
the courtyard and well guarded. In the dim light, Ala?¨s
could see something propped against the outside wall. She
looked harder and realised it was a dog, curled up asleep on
the ground. A couple of boys, perched like crows on the
edge of the goose pen, were trying to wake the animal up
by flicking stones at it. In the stillness, she could hear
the regular dull thud, thud of their heels banging against
the wooden railings.
There were two ways in and out of the Chaˆteau Comtal.
The wide arched West Gate gave directly on to the grassy
slopes that led to the walls and was mostly kept closed. The
Eastern Gate, small and narrow, was tucked between two
high gate towers and led straight into the streets of the
Ciutat, the Cite´, itself.
Communication between the upper and lower floors
of the gatehouse towers was only possible by means of
wooden ladders and a series of trap doors. As a girl, one of
her favourite games was to scramble up and down between
the levels with the boys from the kitchen, trying to evade
the guards. Ala?¨s was fast. She always won.
Pulling her cloak tightly about her, she walked briskly
across the courtyard. Once the curfew bell had rung, the
gates barred for the night and the guard set, nobody was
supposed to pass without her father's authorisation. Although
not a consul, Bertrand Pelletier occupied a unique
and favoured position in the household. Few dared disobey
him.
He had always disliked her habit of slipping out of the
Cite´ in the early morning. These days, he was even more
adamant that she should stay within the walls of the
Chaˆteau at night. She assumed her husband felt the same,
although Guilhem had never said so. But it was only in the
stillness and anonymity of the dawn, free from the restrictions
and limitations of the household, that Ala?¨s felt really
herself. Nobody's daughter, nobody's sister, nobody's wife.
Deep down, she had always believed her father understood.
Much as she disliked disobeying him, she did not
want to give up these moments of freedom.
Most of the night-watch turned a blind eye to her
comings and goings. Or, at least they had. Since rumours
of war had started to circulate, the garrison had become
more cautious. On the surface, life went on much the same
and although refugees arrived in the Cite´ from time to
time, their tales of attacks or religious persecution seemed
to Ala?¨s nothing out of the ordinary. Raiders who appeared
from nowhere and struck like summer lightning before
passing on were facts of existence for any who lived outside
the safety of a fortified village or town. The reports seemed
no different, neither more nor less, than usual.
Guilhem didn't seem particularly perturbed by the
whisperings of a conflict, at least not so far as she could
tell. He never talked to her of such things. Oriane, however,
claimed that a French army of Crusaders and churchmen
was making ready to attack the lands of the Pays
d'Oc. Moreover, she said the campaign was supported by
the Pope and the French King. Ala?¨s knew from experience
that much of what Oriane said was intended only to upset
her. Nonetheless her sister often seemed to know things
before anybody else in the household and there was no
denying the fact that the number of messengers coming
in and out of the Chaˆteau was increasing by the day. It
was also undeniable that the lines on their father's face
were deeper and darker, the hollows of his cheeks more
pronounced.
The sirjans d'arms on guard at the Eastern Gate were
alert, although their eyes were rimmed with red after a
long night. Their square silver helmets were pushed high
on their heads and their chain-mail coats were dull in the
pale dawn light. With their shields slung wearily across
their shoulders and their swords sheathed, they looked
more ready for bed than battle.
As she got closer,Ala?¨s was relieved to recognise Be´renger.
When he identified her, he grinned and he bowed his head.
"Bonjorn, Dame Ala?¨s. You're up and about early.'
She smiled. "I couldn't sleep.'
"Can't that husband of yours think of something to fill
your nights?' said the other with a lewd wink. His face was
pockmarked and the nails on his fingers were bitten and
bleeding. His breath smelled of stale food and ale.
Ala?¨s ignored him. "How is your wife, Be´renger?'
"Well, Dame. Quite back to her usual self.'
"And your son?'
"Bigger by the day. He'll eat us out of house and hearth
if we don't watch out!'
"Clearly following in his father's footsteps!' she said,
poking his ample belly.
"That's exactly what my wife says.'
"Send her my best wishes, Be´renger, will you?'
"She will be grateful to be remembered, Dame.' He
paused. "I suppose you want me to let you through?'
"I'm only going out into the Ciutat, maybe the river. I
won't be long.'

"We're not supposed to let anybody through,' growled
his companion. "Intendant Pelletier's orders.'
"Nobody asked you,' snapped Be´renger. "It's not that,
Dame,' he said, dropping his voice. "But you know how
things are at present. What if something was to happen to
you and it came out that it was I who let you pass, your
father would—'
Ala?¨s put her hand on his arm. "I know, I know,' she said
softly. "But really there's no need to worry. I can take care
of myself. Besides . . .' – She let her eyes slide sideways to
the other guard, who was now picking his nose and wiping
his fingers on his sleeve – "what trials I might face at the
river could hardly be worse than those you endure here!'
Be´renger laughed. "Promise me you will be careful, e`?'
Ala?¨s nodded, opening her cloak a fraction to show him
the hunting knife at her waist. "I will. 

