Be afraid, Be very afraid

Going to university can be a daunting affair. There are so many new experiences to try, so many responsibilities to handle and so many parent-shocking debts to be accumulated. What you really need to help you through it all is a best friend who'll show you the ropes, hold your hand when it needs holding and make sure you get to your lectures on time.

This book, unfortunately, isn't that friend. This book, even more unfortunately, is more akin to the kind of mate who doesn't get up until half past two, nicks your food from the fridge and, when you're both well wasted at some awful party you've gate-crashed, convinces you that Baileys, cider and Worcestershire sauce is a real cocktail.

Frankly, if you have even the slightest ambition to emerge from your time in 'higher' education with any kind of qualification whatsoever, it's best that you stop reading now. If, however, you insist on perusing the 'wisdom' contained within this highly disreputable tome, then please note that the author accepts no responsibility for the fact that you'll get a crap qualification, that your parents will disown you, that your subsequent career will go nowhere and, in all probability, your future marriage will end in an acrimonious divorce.

But all that lies way off in the future. So let's talk about Freshers' Week.

Freshers' Week

Parental advice

Before you go to university your parents will give you lots of advice. Now I believe that it's very important that while at university you always remember that advice. And should you ever find yourself following any of it, quickly do the opposite. 

Your time at university
- an analogy for freshers

Don't think of it as time spent studying, think of it as a Voyage Of Discovery. A voyage on which hearty new-found companions will make your acquaintance ready and able to accompany you on the Journey Of Life. A journey at whose end a whole new world of possibilities awaits you.

In fact, in many ways, being at university is just like a trip on the Titanic. And look how well that turned out.

What to say to friends from home who got into other universities

The key point here is to over-exaggerate just how great a time you're having, how stonking the nightlife is, and how you've hooked up with a gang of new mates who it feels like you've known all your life.

This gives you the best chance of making your old friends feel really bad about the place they got into.

Why halls of residence are often bleak, soulless, depressing places

It's a cunning ploy by the government to put you off a life of crime. As in, should you decide to turn to lawlessness this is the kind of accommodation that awaits you.

The other reason why halls of residence are often bleak, soulless, depressing places

It's a lot cheaper that way.

Posters

Many halls of residence explicitly ban the use of Sellotape or BluTack for sticking up posters in your room because of the damage these adhesives do to the walls. However, very few halls of residence have any instructions banning the use of glue or nails.

Act accordingly.

The main difference between school and university

The main difference is to do with responsibility. At school the key educational responsibility is for teachers to teach you. At university the key educational responsibility is for you to learn. Unfortunately most students don't learn this until long after they've left. I tell you this in the vain hope that it might galvanise you into taking responsibility for expanding your mind. But in the full knowledge that you won't. After all, you are a student.

Lazy sod.

Alarm clocks

It is vital that you take an alarm clock to university. This is not so that you can wake up in time for lectures or exams. This is so that you don't miss lunch.

Brightening up your room

Plants are a great way to make an otherwise uninviting environment homely. Unfortunately, buying plants from shops or garden centres can be very expensive. Luckily, most towns and cities have plenty of well-stocked municipal parks with pleasingly low fences.

Joining clubs and societies at Freshers' Fair

At Freshers' Fair you will encounter more activities, sports and obscure-sounding groups than you ever knew existed. And they'll all try to convince you that by joining them your time at university will be transformed into one non-stop round of excitement, achievement and enjoyment.

Unfortunately this isn't true.

But if you do join them you'll have the chance to encounter and observe the people who run the societies. This is important because these are the same people who will, in later life, end up running 'society' as a whole.

Which kind of explains why society is such a well-meaning but essentially amateurish affair.

The 'efficient use of your time' speech

At some point early on in your university career someone in authority will give you the speech about how it's up to you to make 'efficient use of your time'. 

In my opinion the most 'efficient use of your time' would be to ignore the speech. 

The two most important things to locate during Freshers' Week

Conventional wisdom would have it that the two most important things to find during Freshers' Week are your hall of residence and the library. 

In fact, the two most important things to locate are the whereabouts of the nearest kettle to your room and the nearest toaster. Get this sorted and the rest of the week will probably take care of itself. Indeed, many would argue that throughout your entire university career knowledge of the whereabouts of the nearest kettle and toaster is all you really need to survive.

Homesickness

If you're feeling homesick it's important you realise that you're the only person who's ever felt like this, you don't fit in, everyone else is having a great time, you can't cope, it's not ever going to get any better and you're just one great big loser.

Alternatively, everyone feels homesick from time to time, everyone else isn't having a better time (they're probably just better at disguising their worries), how to cope with it all is something you can and will learn in time, and things will get better especially if you stay sober enough to speak.

Mind you, you might still be a loser. But, hey, I can't help you with everything.

The real reason why your parents were so keen that you further your education by going to university

They wanted you out of the house.

The cuddly toy rule

First-year students of the female variety are often tempted to take a cuddly toy from home. The role of said cuddly toy is to keep them company in their room and to, metaphorically speaking, hold at bay the large and confusing world that is university.

On the whole this is inadvisable. That's because it reveals far too much about the fragile state of your confidence. What may come across as charming, childlike naivety when you were packing your stuff at home to head off universitywards is rarely seen in the same light by your fellow students.

However, if you must take a cuddly toy be sure to be well versed in the Universal University Cuddly Toy Rule:

1. One cuddly toy is OK for your first term if:

a. It is kept discreetly displayed by your bed.

b. It is never cuddled when in the company of other students.

c. You never reveal how close you are to tears when male student 'friends' play with it in a cavalier fashion, or decide to take it out on a bar crawl.

2. Two cuddly toys is pushing it a bit, but you might just get away with it if you strictly adhere to the advice outlined above and ensure that one of the cuddly toys is in some way 'ironic'.

3. Three cuddly toys is a definite no-no. Frankly, turn up at university with three cuddly toys and you might as well hang a sign around your neck that reads 'I am sad'. You should also prepare yourself for three years of social disappointment, eventual marriage to a terribly dull man called Malcolm, and no real experience of orgasm until you flee the marital home in your mid thirties and take solace in the delights of the love that dare not speak its name with a strong-wristed lady from Munich named Gerta.

Game over

There is, of course, an equally dubious male equivalent of the female student cuddly toy thing. I speak of the supposed delights of electronic gamery. And here's why.

To start with, one of the fundamental appeals of computer games is that they provide a world of excitement, adventure and conflict in which - and this is key - you ultimately have no responsibility for anything you do or how badly you behave. But isn't that why you came to university?

Frankly, if you haven't figured out that being a student is the only time in your life when you can act like you are in a computer game, then, metaphorically speaking, you're well stuck in Training Mode.

The second reason to put away all computer games at university is to do with girls. Girls don't really get the computer game thing. To them a bloke who spends hours at a time glued to a screen seems as absurd as if they themselves still spent whole afternoons playing with Barbie dolls. And it doesn't matter how macho the game is that you're playing. There isn't a girl in the land who sits around supping a Babycham and Baileys of an evening, eyeing up the talent and going, 'Phwoar, look at him, I bet he's on Level Six!'

So, chaps, if you want to have even the remotest chance of getting laid, then please lay down the controls of your console, or condemn yourself to a succession of solitary nights in your room, playing with your own joystick.

Gap kids

No, I'm not talking about the clothes store. I'm talking about students who've spent a year between school and university out in the big wide world.

If you are one of these, the course of action to create the maximum irritation is clear. Affect an air of condescending maturity and regale all those around you with endless tales of the fabulous places you've been and crazy things you got up to.

If you aren't one of these 'seasoned travellers' but have to endure their giga-boring Y.H.T.B.T.* stories, your best response is to try a bit of your own travelling whenever one of these dullards turns up.

Which isn't to say that travel doesn't broaden the mind, because it does. It's just that formalising and containing the possibilities that are inherent within cutting loose and seeing where the spirit takes you into something as ultimately conservative and conformist as a Gap Year is deeply suspect.

What I'm driving at is this. Why settle for a Gap Year when you could have a Gap Life?

*You Had To Be There
