TV Cops
"Having not watched the dross belching from my television
screen for many months,' writes our next TV licence
refusenik, Evi, "I figured it was a waste of time hanging on to
the set. This left me with two months to run on my TV
licence, on the reverse of which was a suggestion that I might
be entitled to some kind of refund.'
Evi then wrote to the powers that be and explained his situation,
only to be told that no refund was available as they can
only be given in periods of three months.
"I swallowed that with a little indignation, but hey – I wasn't
going to get all worked up for £20.'
Within a couple of weeks Evi received a red letter. "The letter
told me that my house was registered as having no TV licence
(as if I didn't know) and I had seven days to ring and explain.
Failure to do so would result in my details being passed on to
their Orwellian-sounding “enforcement officers”.
"I was getting annoyed. I had already explained my situation
adequately by mail, so why should I write or ring to explain
again? It would all cost me money and they had already had
£20 out of me for nothing.'
Evi swallowed his annoyance and rang the number. At the
other end of the line was someone who seemed to be briefed
to treat all such calls with extreme scepticism.
"Why are you ringing this number?' the man from the
TVLA asked.
"Because I was asked to by letter,' replied Evi.
"What letter?'
"A red letter, asking me to explain why I have no TV licence.'
"OK, why haven't you got a TV licence?'
"Because I don't own or have on my premises any receiving
equipment, so I don't need one,' explained Evi, as plainly as
he could.
This didn't seem to be enough for TV Licence Man. "If you
have got any equipment …'
"I just said I don't …'
"And I just said if you have got any equipment …'
"I just said I don't …'
The Licence Man persisted: "And I just said if you have got
any equipment and receive any broadcasts, you will be liable
to a fine of up to £1,000. We will be sending someone round
to your house to check if you have any equipment.'
Evi was reaching the end of his tether. "I wrote to tell you I
have no TV, I have now rung to tell you I have no TV. The
fact is clear: I have no TV. I am not worried about you fining
me, as I am doing nothing wrong. Goodbye.'
"They sent me a letter saying that someone would call at my
home to check whether or not I had any means to receive
specific broadcasts. If that person was satisfied that I had no
such means, then I would be left alone for three years, after
which time the process would begin again.'
"Now hang on a minute,' Evi notes with irritation, "my
home is my home – I don't want some great lumbering gorilla
rummaging around for a television I haven't got. Why should
I be treated like a criminal when my only crime is to loathe
watching TV?'
When a Tax Man attacks
Once upon a time, a man we shall call Dave had a lorry. Dave
was Value Added Tax (VAT) registered. Unfortunately,
Dave had to stop trading because of a family matter and
promptly informed the VAT people in the proper way – just
as it explained he should do on his VAT registration certificate.
Having satisfied all the legal requirements, he stopped
working halfway through January and closed the books at the
end of February. This enabled Dave to clear all the accounts,
get paid by his customers and pay his creditors for fuel and
other supplies.
The people at HM Customs and Excise sent Dave a letter
ending his VAT registration because he was no longer trading.
Simple.
Unfortunately, because he had to stop working so quickly
to look after his four children, Dave still had a lorry to sell. A
lorry that had cost him £63,000 for the tractor unit and
£19,000 for the sliding trailer. Both were less than one year
old, but £46,000 was the maximum amount he could get for
them. Five weeks after the books closed for trading, the lorry
and trailer were sold – for almost exactly what Dave owed on
them.
By the first week in April, it was all wrapped up: everybody
was happy, all paperwork was witnessed, signed and sealed
and everything was completely above board. Dave heaved a
huge sigh of relief.
He heard nothing more of it for four whole months. In
August of the same year he returned from two weeks camping
with his children to a substantial pile of letters on the mat,
including one that contained an unwelcome communication
from Her Majesty's Customs and Excise. The letter from the
VAT people told Dave that he owed them the VAT on the
£46,000 sale of his lorry. Suddenly, out of nowhere, he owed
the Customs over £8,000.
Dave immediately phoned them to remind them that they
had cancelled his VAT registration, as per the rules, and that
he hadn't charged VAT because he wasn't allowed to charge
VAT – he was not registered when the truck was sold.
This is when Dave found out that the one thing that
government departments and agencies can't stand is someone
who applies their own rules against them. Using their almost
unlimited powers of superhuman awkwardness, the Customs
and Excise then retrospectively registered Dave with a temporary
certificate for the two-week period that he sold the truck
in, and gave him a month to pay it.
Dave explained to Customs and Excise that he had stopped
trading because he had lost his wife and had four children to
look after. He had complied with all their rules yet was still
faced with an out of the blue demand for over £8,000.
He was determined to resist paying but, in a conversation
with a Customs and Excise official was told that proceedings
would be taken against him to recover the unpaid VAT. The
official explained that Dave's home was at risk. The official
didn't actually say that he didn't care about the four children,
but the evidence pointed to the true mark of the bureaucratic
jobsworth, and Dave couldn't help feeling that the VAT
official cared a lot more for the procedural niceties of tax
accountancy. In fact, when Dave asked the Customs officer
why he was taking this line – his reply was simple: "Because
I can.'
With his back against the wall, Dave contacted the haulier
he sold the lorry and trailer to in order to persuade him to
stump up the VAT due. After a lot of phone calls and worry,
he managed to persuade HM Customs and Excise to agree
that the buyer could make a late payment.
The new owners of Dave's rig agreed to make a claim via a
VAT invoice Dave sent him – this is the way VAT works; the
haulier wouldn't necessarily be out of pocket by paying VAT
on purchases like Dave's truck if he could offset it against tax
he owed to Customs that he had collected through his sales.
He sent a VAT invoice to the buyer, who then claimed it
back. The VAT people allowed the claim, so reducing the
VAT paid by him that quarter.
What makes this story of sociopathic bureaucracy a particular
favourite is that nobody was the richer. Indeed, it can be
argued that everyone that Her Majesty's Customs and Excise
dragged into this debacle was poorer, themselves included –
the administration involved in chasing payment and then
passing around £8,050 is not a trifling matter and the whole
affair contributed precisely nothing to the Treasury's coffers.
The sum of £8,050 was sent to Dave, who sent it to Customs
and Excise, who then deducted it from the VAT that the
buyer of the truck owed. It was merely a paper exercise instigated
by some pencil-faced bureaucrat who decided that he
would be a stickler for the procedural etiquette. It was as if
HM Customs and Excise were employing one man to dig a
hole and another to fill it in. No money actually changed
hands; it was all just a waste of time.
Only obeying orders
While it is true that some of the laws passed by governments
are inflexible, others are badly written and a few are just too
bloody silly for words, we accept that among all the authoritarian
dross and dreary regulation seemingly passed on a daily
basis, a number of laws are borne out of a need to address a
serious situation or to right some terrible wrong.
Some rules and regulations, however, come screaming out
of nowhere as a response to some phantom menace, while
others are cooked up by politicians in an attempt to appear
macho and not the bloated marshmallow prats we all instinctively
feel they are.
One such misguided law was the Computer Misuse Act,
1990. Though it sought to specifically outlaw hacking – and
defined it as the use of a computer without the owner's
consent – it forgot to define what a computer actually was.
Technically, it is now illegal to programme your best friend's
microwave oven without checking with him first.
However, the very worst rules become fashionable when
some random outrage or another inspires a general mood of
"something must be done' in the media. The Dangerous Dogs
Act, 1991, for example, was spawned in a fit of mediainspired
political panic after a spate of fatal dog attacks. The
Act prohibited the ownership of four types of dog: the pit bull
terrier, the Japanese tosa, the dogo Argentino and the fila
Brasileiro. Something had to be done, so God-like in its
omniscience, and therefore immune to the existential
dilemma of doing so, the government simply banned them
from existing. Widely regarded as a badly written law from
day one, the Dangerous Dogs Act came back to bite its
political masters repeatedly because of the impossibility of
its wording – distinguishing, as it did dogs by "types', rather
than breeds.
It should never come as a surprise, then, when any brand
new, zero-tolerance policy is drawn up in such a reactionary
lather and ends up on the statute books as the latest case of
drive-by legislation.
But it always comes as rather a depressing surprise when real
people start to do the same thing. When people have become
a little deluded by a whiff of power, no matter how trifling,
they can start to exhibit knee-jerk reactions and even make up
rules and regulations of their own. Governments have an
excuse: they are formed from groups of deeply flawed
sociopaths and egomaniacs with borderline personality disorders.
Normal people are different surely.
Well yes, but unfortunately many normal people are easily
led astray by the mirage of authority and end up obeying
orders if it means that they themselves can then exercise the
tiniest mote of power. So it is then that, even though it has
not quite fallen foul of Parliament yet, the current menace of
society, the scourge of all that is decent appears to be an item
of clothing, irrespective of who is wearing it and whether or
not they are remotely dangerous.
We are, of course, not only talking of the hoodie, but also
of the baseball cap – the headwear of choice for all clubbers,
Home Counties weekend rebels, simpletons and silage
dispersal operatives. It's all a question of context though, is it
not? A matter of where you draw the line, perhaps.
Sporting chance
For 61-year-old Corinne Chapman of Sittingbourne in
Kent, staff at the Vineyard pub crossed that line by asking her
if she would tuck away the hood of her pink cardigan if she
wasn't going to take it off, citing the oft-repeated phrase that
rules apply to everyone. Clearly struggling to draw a new line
in the sand, but obviously open to the fact that something
wasn't quite right, staff spontaneously rewrote the rules
and retrospectively decided to allow the top because "it was
not sportswear'.

