Love is all around us
It Will be something of a homecoming when Wet Wet Wet walk back into the limelight at the AECC next month. The Scots band launched the Aberdeen Exhibition and Conference Centre as a major concert venue back in 1990, with a gig described at the time as "the biggest rock event to take place in Aberdeen". 
And now they are returning to play one of the key dates of their reunion tour.
"When we come back to Scotland we always have a great time," said singer Marti Pellow, the smiling face and soaring voice of Wet Wet Wet.


"We always get looked after and we always have a good time in Aberdeen. It's special to us." But a lot has happened in the 14 years between those two concerts at the conference centre. 
Things like the band becoming a global phenomenon, with hits like Sweet Little Mystery and Love Is All Around.
Like playing some of the biggest stadiums and venues in the world, such as the Hollywood Bowl and Madison Square Gardens.
And the small matter of imploding messily and publicly in 1997 in a row over money and Marti Pellow's battle with drink and heroin.
There followed years of silence and animosity.
Now they are back, friends again, a greatest hits album in the stores and raring to get back to their first love of playing music, says Marti.
He's chatting minutes before an appearance on This Morning to sing Goodbye Girl. It's just another stop on the whirlwind of promotional appearances the band have been undergoing to launch the CD, the tour and the fact they are back.
"We've been around the whole of the UK and we have had nothing but goodwill and people remembering how much we brought to the table musically ... as well as our tight trousers," said Marti, with a laugh.
And the people who are turning up are, in his words, a mixed bag - mums and dads, sons and daughters.
"A very eclectic mix," said Marti. "And that's exactly the sort of music that Wet Wet Wet make.
"We make music and people of all ages seem to enjoy it, and for us that is, I guess, mission accomplished." The band have an extensive, and enviable, back catalogue of music to draw on and are now writing more.
Which begs the question, why? Why after such an acrimonious split and a seven-year absence are they back? "For me there were three reasons," said Marti.
"Do I want to write music with these guys again? Yes, because I had an enormous amount of happiness doing that.
"Do I want to entertain probably hundreds of thousands of people again with Wet Wet Wet? Yes I do.
"Do I want to make some money also? Yes.
"There doesn't seem to be anything bad about it." But there was something more personal that had to be dealt with.
"We all had to rekindle our friendships and that was paramount," said the singer.
It was the funeral of Marti's mother a year ago that finally got all the band members - Tommy Cunningham, Graeme Clark and Neil Mitchell - back under one roof for the first time in seven years.
"They were there for me and to show respect to my mother and give support to my family, which spoke volumes.
"At moments like that it puts it all into perspective and you see it for what it is." So they started talking, and realising that the bonds of friendship could be reforged ... and so could the band.
The period after the Wets saw Marti battling and beating his addictions. It's not a subject he's prepared to discuss, batting away a tentative question with a terse: "I'd rather not go there with that today." It's delivered with the edgy weariness of a man tired of having the word "troubled" attached to his name.
His solo career found mixed success, but his role as Billy Flynn in the musical Chicago garnered him critical acclaim in the West End and on Broadway. An achievement he is justifiably proud of.
Wet Wet Wet play the AECC on Friday, December 10.


Ocean colour scene tune up for lemon tree acoustic set

Rock stars Ocean Colour Scene are to play a special festive acoustic show in Aberdeen. The Britpop survivors will play an intimate set at the Lemon Tree next month. 

Having recorded their new album in Glenrothes, the Birmingham mod warhorses will play on Monday, December 20, as a thank you for the Scots' hospitality. 
The band will play in Aberdeen as a three-piece for the first time, having been whittled down to core members Simon Fowler, Steve Craddock and Oscar Harrison.
After a couple of years toiling in indie obscurity, Ocean Colour Scene hit the charts in the mid 90s.
They made it big after a series of dates supporting Oasis, including a fabled show at Loch Lomond.
With the support of Oasis songwriter Noel Gallagher, they rode the crest of the Britpop wave. Their 1996 album Moseley Shoals broke them into the mainstream.
From that album they then scored chart smashes with The Day We Caught The Train and The Riverboat Song.
Their chart fortunes took a dip after a golden couple of years, but the outfit still has a loyal following of fans.
The acoustic gig comes just over a year after Ocean Colour Scene's last barnstorming visit to Aberdeen and the Lemon Tree.
Tickets cost £18 and £12 for concessions.
Doors open at 8pm and the support band comes on at 8.30pm.
Rock stars Ocean Colour Scene are to play a special festive acoustic show in Aberdeen. The Britpop survivors will play an intimate set at the Lemon Tree next month. 

Having recorded their new album in Glenrothes, the Birmingham mod warhorses will play on Monday, December 20, as a thank you for the Scots' hospitality. 
The band will play in Aberdeen as a three-piece for the first time, having been whittled down to core members Simon Fowler, Steve Craddock and Oscar Harrison.
After a couple of years toiling in indie obscurity, Ocean Colour Scene hit the charts in the mid 90s.
They made it big after a series of dates supporting Oasis, including a fabled show at Loch Lomond.
With the support of Oasis songwriter Noel Gallagher, they rode the crest of the Britpop wave. Their 1996 album Moseley Shoals broke them into the mainstream.
From that album they then scored chart smashes with The Day We Caught The Train and The Riverboat Song.
Their chart fortunes took a dip after a golden couple of years, but the outfit still has a loyal following of fans.
The acoustic gig comes just over a year after Ocean Colour Scene's last barnstorming visit to Aberdeen and the Lemon Tree.
Tickets cost £18 and £12 for concessions.
Doors open at 8pm and the support band comes on at 8.30pm.


Factory boss and the :70m homes plan

An MP today demanded answers from the boss of a crashed Aberdeen textile firm. Frank Doran is urging Richards boss Ian Suttie to come forward and explain himself over the historic firm's collapse. 
The questions centre on the fact Mr Suttie is behind a £70 million housing plan for one of the firm's sites.
The Evening Express can reveal that Mr Suttie is the sole director of a firm that bought Broadford Works from Richards for £5 million in 2002.


That happened just two weeks after Mr Suttie led a consortium that bought over the Richards business during a previous financial crisis. 
As the Broadford Works site is not owned by Richards it cannot be sold by liquidators to pay off debts.
Mr Suttie's own firm - Hawkrow - is behind plans to transform the works into a £70 million urban village.
Today Frank Doran said: "It seems to me ... a totally callous disregard for the people who have been abandoned.
"I have had two meetings with Ian Suttie in the last week as part of a last-ditch effort to save Richards, and he said at the time how much money he spent on the company.
"But he didn't make me aware that he was the sole owner of this property." Mr Doran's parliamentary colleague, Malcolm Savidge, said: "He (Mr Suttie) needs to give a thorough explanation of his position and failing that an investigation into the circumstances of the sale has to be launched.
"The staff at Richards have already suffered uncertainty over their jobs and their pensions for far too long.
"I am appalled at the callous way in which they were thrown out of the factory without being paid immediately before Christmas and New Year.
"That will be particularly brutal for staff with families.
Yesterday it was confirmed that the 196 staff at the textile firm were to lose their jobs.
They had turned up to work at the firm's other base in Granitehill Road to be told the company was going into liquidation.
Mr Suttie stepped into save the firm back in December 2002.
It had gone into receivership the previous January after five years of heavy losses.
It finally succumbed after a failure to sell the Broadford works in the city centre.
This was combined with a £5 million shortfall on its company pension scheme and a downturn in trade after the September 11 2001 atrocities in the US.
Leading Aberdeen businessman Mr Suttie led a consortium to rescue the firm, which had debts of around £10 million.
The Registers of Scotland Executive Agency today revealed that Hawkrow Ltd shelled out more than £5 million to buy the Broadford site.
The company bought the site on December 24, 2002, two weeks after the multi-millionaire saved Richards from receivers.
Hawkrow was set up in November 2002.
Temporary liquidator Michael Reid, of Meston Reid and Co, today confirmed Richards had rented the property from Hawkrow since December 2002.
The Broadford Works site has been touted as a potential spot for Aberdeen's first £1 million flat.
Hawkrow submitted a planning application in July this year to build 400 new homes at the old textile factory to give the city centre its first urban village.
The plan includes 19 penthouses ranging from 80-127 square metres in size.
There would be 391 flats and nine houses at the redundant nine-acre works, between Hutcheon Street and Maberly Street.
A mini supermarket, unspecified "commercial" development and parking space for 250 cars would be included in the development.
Five flat blocks and the four-bedroom houses would be built from scratch.
The rest of the properties would be created in converted listed buildings, which the planning brief aimed to protect.
Mr Suttie was unavailable for comment.

Young mum dies one month after leukaemia comes back

A Young North-east mum has died of leukaemia less than a month after being told it had returned. Marie Wynne, 23, of Balmedie, who had been in remission since 2002, discovered the disease was back during a routine blood test last month. 

She had hoped her three monthly check-ups might be extended to six months, but instead went back to hospital for chemotherapy. 
Miss Wynne planned to marry her fiance, Simon Ruddy next year, but could not even hold her son on his first birthday because of the infection risk.
Mr Ruddy said: "She started her first course of chemotherapy on November 1 but it was just too much for her.
"All was going fine but then she got an infection." Miss Wynne was diagnosed with acute myloblastic leukaemia in June 2001.
She was given the all-clear after nine months of intensive chemotherapy.
Despite being told she could not expect to have children, Miss Wynne gave birth to Daniel at Aberdeen Maternity Hospital on November 5 last year.
Mr Ruddy, 32, who was with Miss Wynne when she died on Tuesday, said: "It doesn't seem fair for a 23-year-old to go through all that and then lose the battle." Miss Wynne's funeral will be in the West Chapel at Aberdeen Crematorium next Friday at 1.35pm.

