Bid to end Gypsy land scam

JOHN Prescott yesterday unveiled proposals to stop Gypsies and travellers from exploiting legal loopholes which have allowed them to buy up green belt land then set up camp. 
More than 4,000 of their caravans are currently thought to be established on green field or protected land in defiance of planning laws.
It can take councils years to move them on because they own the land.


And in some cases judges have ruled that travellers may not be evicted because of human rights rules giving respect to their home life, or because they are a special case and not subject to rules protecting green belt land. 
But yesterday the Deputy Prime Minister announced changes to planning laws which, he says, will enable the authorities to evict Gypsies as soon as they move on to an illegal site.
At present councils can issue a 'stop notice' which prevents new people joining a site and prohibits further illegal development, but the amended legislation will also allow the removal of caravans or buildings.
Keith Hill, planning minister in Mr Prescott's department, said: 'We must act to stop the scourge of unauthorised sites which can blight local communities.' But he added: 'This is a two-way process. We want to see councils taking a more proactive approach to delivering authorised sites for Gypsies and travellers.' However, the rules say councils will only be able to act in 'extreme' circumstances where they believe the damage caused by a site is intolerable.
Last night the Tories said this will mean evictions are unlikely to happen.
Sir Sandy Bruce-Lockhart, Conservative chairman of the Local Government Association, said the plans likely to come into force in January sounded 'like a step in the right direction'.
But he added: 'The question is: can it be overruled by the Human Rights Act?
'In the past three or four years Government planning inspectors have interpreted planning law much more in favour of travellers but the only other thing that has changed is the Human Rights Act.
'The Government will have to look at the Human Rights Act if it wants to do anything about the problem.'

He'll be cleared says Blair

TONY BLAIR threw a protective shield around David Blunkett yesterday, insisting he would be cleared of using high office to help his ex-lover Kimberly Quinn. 
But critics accused him of pre-empting the inquiry by Sir Alan Budd into claims that the Home Secretary fast-tracked a visa application for Mrs Quinn's Filipina nanny.
The Prime Minister also appeared to give carte blanche to his Cabinet Ministers to do what they like in their private lives as long as it does not have an impact on their 'public duty'.
Declaring his total confidence in Mr Blunkett and insisting he 'is, and will continue to be, a first-class Home Secretary', the Prime Minister added: 'I have no doubt at all that he will be exonerated.' Mr Blair's wholehearted public support conceals private dismay in Downing Street that the Government's flagship pre-election policies on security and law and order are being spearheaded by a Home Secretary mired in a protracted sleaze inquiry.


The Blunkett/Quinn row overshadowed yesterday's launch of legislation setting up national identity cards as part of the battle against terrorism and crime. And the uncertainty is expected to continue for weeks as Sir Alan investigates an allegation which would, if true, cost Mr Blunkett his job. 
It leaves the spectre of sleaze which derailed the last Tory government hanging over Labour, possibly into the New Year when the expected general election will be just a few months away.
Mr Blair, who declared soon after taking office that Labour had to be 'purer than pure', was asked at his monthly Downing Street news conference what principles he applied when deciding on his ministers' behaviour.
He replied: 'The principle I apply is to do with the performance of a politician's public duty.
'Politicians are entitled to private lives the same as anyone else.
'If there is an interference with the performance of their public duty because they did something improper in relation to their public office, that is another matter.' As Mr Blair offered his unstinting support to the embattled Home Secretary, Number 10 ordered a massive shoring-up operation.
Cabinet policy supremo Alan Milburn said Mr Blunkett had demanded the independent inquiry 'to make sure everybody is clear about what the facts are'.
He added: 'David is a really great Home Secretary; he is doing a really great job of work.
'He has got my full backing and, more importantly, he has got the Prime Minister's backing.' Chancellor Gordon Brown praised Mr Blunkett as 'an excellent Home Secretary who has the confidence of all the Government'.
Mr Blunkett's deputy Des Browne, the Immigration Minister, told the BBC: 'He is a straighttalking, straightforward, completely transparent man. I have never, ever, ever discovered him to say one thing in private and another thing in public.' And senior Labour MP Clive Soley, a former chairman of the Parliamentary Party, suggested that the Quinn allegations were exaggerated.
'At the end of these relationships people often do say and do things which may be taking the evidence beyond what it ought to be.' The extremely restricted terms of reference of Sir Alan Budd's investigation angered opposition politicians.
Sir Alan, architect of the Government's review of the gambling laws that have led to plans for supercasinos, will investigate only the claim that Mr Blunkett helped Mrs Quinn get a visa for her nanny Leoncia Casalme, who was seeking leave to remain in the UK. But Sir Alan will not look at other claims from the Quinn camp that the Home Secretary divulged secret information in 'pillow talk' with Spectator publisher Mrs Quinn, gave her a free MP's rail ticket, ordered his Government chauffeur to drive her between London and his Derbyshire home, stationed a policeman outside her Mayfair home during a May Day riot, and took her to Spain accompanied by bodyguards at taxpayers' expense.
Sir Alan would have been given no choice over the terms of reference for his inquiry. If he was not happy with the scope it afforded him then his only option would have been not to take it on.
The terms would have come from the Government. Home Office Permanent Secretary John Gieve would have told Sir Alan what he would be investigating.
It is likely that the Government's top legal expert, the Lord Chancellor Lord Falconer, would have been heavily involved in deciding what should and should not be investigated.
Shadow Home Secretary David Davis said: 'We think a judge would have been a more appropriate choice.
'The terms of the inquiry are narrowly defined and will answer just one question, not the many. All of this could have been resolved quickly but there will now be many unanswered questions hanging over Home Secretary's head.' But the Tories were treading carefully, wary of making political capital so soon after their arts spokesman Boris Johnson editor of the Spectator was forced to quit following lurid allegations about his private life and with allegations recently surfacing about another senior frontbencher.
Party leader Michael Howard voiced the hope that Mr Blunkett would be exonerated. 'I hope they clear him,' he said. 'I bear him no ill will.'


Pounds 100 to buy an ID card and a Pounds 2,500 fine if you don't

COMPULSORY identity cards could cost every adult in Britain more than Pounds 100 each, it emerged yesterday. 
Failing to register for one will mean a Pounds 2,500 fine, according to David Blunkett's Identity Cards Bill published yesterday.
And forgetting to tell the authorities about a change of address could mean a Pounds 1,000 fine.


The Bill also reveals that ID cards, originally priced at about Pounds 80, could become compulsory sooner than predicted. 
Ministers had said they would wait until 80 per cent of adults had registered for a voluntary scheme expected to be between 2010 and 2012 before making it mandatory.
But the Bill makes no reference to this and ministers admitted they could bring forward the crucial switch.
Mr Blunkett believes the cards will eventually become the standard proof of identity, with 40million adults forced to produce one every time they visit the doctor, claim benefits or change jobs.
He says they will help to tackle fraud as well as terrorism and illegal immigration.
But the costs will be vast, at more than Pounds 3billion, and only income from organisations paying to make use of the scheme will balance the books.
If this revenue falls short, the cost to individuals forced to buy or renew their cards could rise well above the Government's 'best estimate' of Pounds 85.
The middle classes could also be made to subsidise the poor, with cheaper cards for those on low incomes funded by 'higher charges for other parts of the scheme.' The ID cards will be voluntary at first, but anyone applying for a passport from 2008 will have to pay extra for a biometric ID card.
Dozens of offices will be set up across the UK with scanners to record individual's fingerprints, facial features and iris scans.
This data will be stored on computer, along with a person's name, address, age, gender, nationality, immigration status, signature, a unique national identity number and details of other official documents.
Public services such as the NHS will then be expected to invest in a network of card readers and biometric scanners costing up to Pounds 750 each, to verify users' identities.
Eventually the Government will ask Parliament to make it compulsory for all over-16s, including foreigners living here for more than three months, to own a card.
Carrying it will not be compulsory.
Officials estimate annual running costs at Pounds 135million, on top of Pounds 415million a year to introduce biometric passports.
Using a card fraudulently will be a serious crime carrying a 10-year maximum jail sentence, while those obtaining or possessing a card fraudulently could be jailed for two years, as could officials who misuse data.
Immigration minister Des Browne yesterday swept aside objections from civil rights campaigners who see ID cards as a dangerous step towards a police state.
He said the scheme was not about the State gathering 'profiles' on individuals, adding: 'Far more information is collected for store loyalty cards in terms of people's behaviour.' The Bill gave no new powers to police although officers would be able to use the database to check the identity of arrested suspects.
Mr Browne added: 'We never said it will eradicate terrorism. The choice is whether we do the best we can or throw up our hands and say it's too difficult.' The Bill faces a rough passage, with Liberal Democrats pledging outright opposition.
The Tories also have serious misgivings and many Labour backbenchers are uneasy over the impact on civil liberties.

