3 BLACK WATCH HEROES DIE IN SUICIDE ATTACK; BOMB INJURES 8 SOLDIERS

THIS is one of the brave Black Watch soldiers who were brutally slaughtered in an Iraqi rebel's suicide bomb attack yesterday. 

Paul Lowe, 19, from Kelty, Fife, and two colleagues were killed in an ambush which ripped apart an armoured patrol vehicle. Eight other hero squaddies were hurt in the attack. 
Soldiers of the historic regiment, which has its spiritual home in Perth, were on the first full day of their controversial mission in the notorious Iraqi Triangle of Death.

ARAFAT IN A COMA

PALESTINIAN chief Yasser Arafat was clinging to life last night amid reports he was only being kept alive by machines. 

The 75-year-old former guerilla leader had slipped into a coma in the French military hospital where he was being treated for a serious blood condition. 
Close aides denied he was dead, but said his condition - which was already "critical" - had worsened. They admitted that the outlook was bleak.
Arafat has never groomed a successor and there were fears that his death could leave a dangerous power vacuum in the Middle East.
Last night some of his powers were handed over to Palestinian Prime Minister Ahmed Qurie, who is described as a leading moderate.


BUSH OFF, GEORGE; STRAW RULES OUT BRITISH ATTACK ON IRAN

FOREIGN Secretary Jack Straw yesterday vowed there was no chance of Britain joining President Bush in an invasion of Iran. 
He warned an attack on the rogue Islamic state that involved British troops was "inconceivable".


His comments came amid fears that Bush could launch a military strike on the state he suspects is continuing with its nuclear weapons programme. 
But his stand could put him on a collision course with Tony Blair who wants to maintain his tough international alliance with President Bush.
Mr Straw revealed growing differences at the heart of the Government about how tough to get with Iran.
The Foreign Secretary said: "I don't see any circumstances in which military action would be justified against Iran."
And Mr Straw added:"Not only is that inconceivable, but I think the prospect of it happening is inconceivable."
The chances of another war in the near future were "pretty remote", Mr Straw claimed.
During the run-up to the war in Iraq, Mr Straw had urged Mr Blair to be more cautious.
Leaked Cabinet documents revealed his fears that the invasion may have been illegal.
And the Prime Minister was backed by hawkish Defence Secretary Geoff Hoon, who has said more wars were likely in "the foreseeable future".
But many Cabinet Ministers are desperate to stop Britain being dragged into another conflict.
In a magazine interview, Mr Hoon said: "I suspect that all sophisticated countries with significant military are going to be involved in these kinds of operations at least for the foreseeable future.
"It is partly the inevitable consequence of the end of the Cold War."

CIVIL WAR ON CUTS

HUNDREDS of thousands of civil servants will stage a 24-hour strike today over job cuts. 
The action will cause disruption to many services, including jobcentres, benefit offices, driving tests and even museums.


Today's walkout by the Public and Commercial Services union will be the biggest in the civil service in over a decade. 
Picket lines will be mounted at Government offices. The union is protesting at plans to axe more than 100,000 jobs and is warning they will have a "devastating" impact on services to the public.
General Secretary Mark Serwotka said: "These cuts will do nothing to improve service delivery and mean people will have to travel further to access services.
"Decent public services need civil servants to deliver them."

3 BLACK WATCH HEROES KILLED BY SUICIDE BOMBER; LORRY BLAST AS IRAQIS LAUNCH MORTAR BLITZ

THREE British squaddies were killed yesterday in an Iraqi suicide attack. 
Eight other Black Watch troops were injured by shrapnel in the lorry-bomb and mortar ambush on their armoured patrol vehicle.
An Iraqi translator was also killed as the Warrior was rammed by a suicide truck bomber then bombarded with mortar fire. The Warrior was torn apart.


The carnage, described last night by Armed Forces Minister Adam Ingram "as a co-ordinated, well planned attack" came on the first full day of the regiment's controversial mission - codename Operation Bracken - in the Iraqi Triangle of Death. 
The killings sparked new anger over Tony Blair's controversial decision to send soldiers to the danger zones south of Baghdad.
Earlier, the Prime Minister had promised the troops would be "home by Christmas".
But last night, the three soldiers' devastated families were told they would never be coming home again.
One of the victims, 19year-old Paul Lowe, had been due to return home to Kelty, Fife, last week.
Paul, a private in the Pipes and Drums Decoy 1 Black Watch, had a 17year-old brother Craig in the same regiment.
The two other victims have not yet been named.
The eight injured in the bomb attack were not seriously hurt. Six returned to the 850-strong battlegroup after treatment and the other two were expected to be released last night.
The patrol was thought to be attempting to wipe out rebels who have been bombarding the Black Watch's Camp Dogwood site with mortars since the troops arrived.
The bomb exploded just as Britain's top military officer, Chief of Defence Staff General Michael Walker, was visiting the base to boost morale.
Gen Walker was briefed on the attack before being whisked away minutes later in a US Black Hawk helicopter, cancelling a planned press conference.
The Black Watch are taking over from US troops preparing for a massive attack on the rebel stronghold of Fallujah.
Mr Blair's spokesman said last night: "The Prime Minister's thoughts are with the Black Watch and the families of the Black Watch ."
But critics were already lining up to blame the Prime Minister for the soldiers' deaths.
Roseanna Cunningham, the SNP Scottish Assembly member for Perth - home of the Black Watch - described the attack as "utterly horrifying and, sadly, what we feared would happen".
She added: "My deepest sympathies go out to all the family and friends of those killed.
"It's doubly disgraceful that when Black Watch soldiers are dying in Iraq, the Prime Minister wants to disband the regiment."
At Westminster, MPs were sombre as Mr Ingram gave the first news of the attack.
Asked later if the soldiers' lives were a price worth paying for the war in Iraq, the Minister said:
"The Iraqi people are the best to judge that. They want their country back."
Mr Ingram sent his "condolences" to the families of those killed.
The attack came as the troops began patrolling the east bank of the Euphrates river, a network of canals and swamps infested with rebel killers.
The Black Watch had already met a ferocious welcome after arriving at Camp Dogwood this week.
The base has been peppered with a series of mortar strikes.
Two more rockets hit the area yesterday, but failed to explode.
And another of their Warrior vehicles was ripped apart by a roadside bomb on Wednesday.
The crew radioed for help, but as a second Warrior in the patrol sped to the rescue a huge mortar exploded just feet away.
Luckily, no one was killed.
The death of three Black Watch soldiers takes to 73 the number British service personnel killed in Iraq since March 2003.

DEN AND BURIED; PERVY STAR GETS EASTENDERS AXE . . . AND IT'S FINAL

SEX shame star Leslie Grantham has been sensationally axed from EastEnders. 
The Dirty Den actor has been battling to save his £275,000-ayear role since he was exposed as a kinky internet pervert.
But now bosses of the BBC1 soap have told the 57-year-old dadof-three his days in Albert Square are over, just as the Daily Star told you way back in May.


Grantham - Britain's highest paid soap star - will leave early next year in a sizzling exit storyline. 
And a senior BBC source insisted: "This time there'll be no way back - the coffin lid will be nailed firmly shut. It is going to be one of the most explosive and sensational departures from a soap ever. It will be huge."
Officially, the top BBC1 soap will claim his departure is by "mutual consent" - but insiders claim that is far from the truth.
"They can dress it up as much as they like but the fact is Grantham was told he was finished, " said an EastEnders source. "There is no future for him in the show.
"Bringing back Den was a bold move which worked for a while - but ultimately proved a disaster.
There's a feeling among senior executives that Grantham's antics over the past year have caused the show immense damage.
"Everyone now wants to move on and take the show forward.
Getting rid of Leslie is seen as being an important part of that.
"It was impossible to sack him for his original antics because he hadn't done anything illegal. He was also involved in too many major storylines to be dumped before they ran their course.
"However, his card was marked and it was clear he would be axed at the first available opportunity.
"Apart from anything else, there was a feeling he had become a joke figure - which meant Den couldn't be taken seriously."
Grantham lives at his family home in Wimbledon, south London, with his wife of 25 years, Jane, 54, and their three sons.
For four years until 1989 he ruled the roost as publican Den Watts. His stormy marriage to boozy wife Angie (Anita Dobson) proved a huge hit with viewers, attracting a record 30 million viewers for a 1986 episode.
He received an offer he couldn't refuse to bring back Dirty Den from the dead last September - 14 years after the character faked his death in an apparent shooting.
But within a few months Grantham heaped shame on himself - and the show - when his sleazy internet sex sessions with strangers were exposed.
He was first accused of sending naked pictures of himself to a 23-year-old blonde. But he also slagged off his co-stars, claiming many of them took drugs.
Grantham outraged his bosses by branding actress Jessie Wallace "a vile dog" and co-star Shane Richie "a bighead".
He also allegedly pleasured himself via a webcam on one occasion while still dressed in his Captain Hook panto outfit.
After the cybersex revelations, the actor was suspended and told to apologise to his fellow actors.
But the axe fell in a meeting last week with new EastEnders boss Kathleen Hutchison.
"Leslie took it pretty well, it wasn't exactly unexpected, " claimed the source. "Kathleen very much wants to make a clean sweep of what's gone before."

RUSHING BRIDE; NEWLYWED'S 96MPH TO HONEYMOON

A LOVED-UP bride was left blushing after cops nicked her racing to get to her honeymoon at almost 100mph. 
Newlywed Amanda Aitken, 31, pictured, was banned for a year and fined £400 yesterday after she admitted driving dangerously on the A9.


Computer programmer Aitken was caught by Tayside Police as she sped past a roadside speed trap at 89 mph. 
Officers set off after her and pursued her as she accelerated past a number of vehicles and finally reached a speed of nearly 97 mph.
When they eventually stopped Aitken she explained she was just married and was rushing to her honeymoon hotel.
Fiscal depute Dawn Samson told Perth Sheriff Court: "At 3.45pm two officers carrying out speed checks detected the vehicle travelling at 89 mph.
"It passed the service road where they were parked.
They made after the Ford, which was seen overtaking other vehicles travelling at around 70 mph.
"They used a device to detect the speed and it was recorded at over 96 mph."
Solicitor Gwen Wood, defending, said: "She and her husband were en route to Elgin for their honeymoon.
"They had a time limit to be at their hotel. She has never been in any form of trouble before and is desperately upset."

