'GET OUR BOYS OUT... NOW'

THE RAW anger of Black Watch families spilled over today after three men of the regiment were killed by an Iraqi suicide bomb. 
Emails posted by relatives urged Tony Blair to pull the Scottish regiment out and "let President Bush take care of his own mess". Internet message boards revealed the horror over the deaths south of Baghdad.
A civilian Iraqi interpreter was also killed and eight Black Watch soldiers injured in last night's attack on the second day of the controversial deployment to replace US troops. The Black Watch men killed were named today as 19-year-old Paul Lowe from Fife, Sergeant Stuart Grey and Private Scott McArdle.


The soldiers were manning a roadblock on the eastern side of the Euphrates when the bomber struck. The tragedy poses huge political risks for Mr Blair and he was today warned by Labour MPs that further deaths were likely unless Britain changed tack. 
Critics also said that the tragedy proved that the Government had underplayed the dangers of the move north into the "triangle of death".
As the Scottish flag flew at half mast at Camp Dogwood, the regiment's base in Iraq, internet chatrooms revealed the depths of the fears of the soldier's relatives.
One mother wrote: "We all need to get on at our MPs to get our boys out of there. I just hope Tony Blair can sleep at nights."
Another woman wrote: " Getting worried for the boys out there. I too think that Tony Blair should do something and let Pres Bush take care of his own mess."
Another mother said: "I am so sorry to hear of these lads losing their lives. I have spoken with my son a short time ago and they are very close friends of his. He is absolutely gutted. I agree that if MPs had sons out there fighting they would soon bring them home."
The sister of one soldier said: "My thoughts are with the families of the soldiers who died today. I can't imagine how they are feeling. Just bring the boys home." Some of the messages were from wellwishers who had suffered in the same way. "My heart breaks for all the families of the Black Watch soldiers killed in Iraq," wrote one woman. "This Government has blood on its hands once more. More families with lives shattered in grief and pain. I know this."
One Black Watch officer said that troops would today continue to go out and meet local Iraqis. "They're not all bad people," he said.
It emerged today that Prince Charles will comfort grieving families of Black Watch in a visit to their barracks in Warminster tomor row.
Charles, who is colonel-inchief of the regiment, spoke of his "deep sadness" at the fatalities.
The Prime Minister has vowed to bring all of the Black Watch home by Christmas, although they may be replaced by other regiments.
In an interview given before he learned of the news, Mr Blair insisted that his alliance with America would not change. He said: "I do not feel we have been acting out of blind loyalty or out of compulsion as an ally. I am not being dragged reluctantly to support President Bush.
"Maybe that makes it worse for people, I don't know, but I believe it is an important part of our security."
Former ministers joined forces with opposition MPs to pay tribute to the Black Watch, but many made clear that the Prime Minister had to change tack over the deployment.
Doug Henderson, a former defence minister who voted against the war, warned that the deaths underlined the need to get British troops out of the country as smoothly as possible. He said: "The main implication is that unless there is an exit strategy, inevitably we will be drawn more and more into whatever military conflict there is in Iraq.
"Not only do we need a new road may in the Middle East, we need a road map in Iraq."
Former armed forces minister Peter Kilfoyle echoed the views of many Labour MPs that the deployment of British troops near Baghdad "may serve the political interests of the US but it doesn't serve the British national interest".

Ken to spend £100,000 in new Trafalgar battle over Mandela statue

A NEW feud has begun over plans to erect a statue of Nelson Mandela in Trafalgar Square. 
Ken Livingstone has announced he will spend up to £100,000 challenging a decision to refuse permission to build it in the square.
He is furious that Westminster council chose to reject the plans for a 9ft bronze to honour the antiapartheid leader.


But the Mayor has been strongly criticised for his plan to use public funds, continuing his battle with the council when a compromise deal has been suggested. This would see the statue placed outside South Africa House, on the east side of Trafalgar Square, rather than on the pedestrianised north terrace, as wished by the Mayor. 
Mr Livingstone's decision to set up a fighting fund to appeal against the decision in July by the council'splanning committee emerges today in his monthly report to the London Assembly.
The cash will be used to lodge an appeal to Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott and pay for lawyers to argue his case. He believes that locating the statue on the edge of the square diminishes Mr Mandela's status as a world statesman.
But Westminster council believes the effigy, by sculptor Ian Walters, would be too small and of insufficient architectural merit to deserve a central position on the square.
They say it would be best suited to a location in front of South Africa House, since that was where vigils were held during Mandela's years in jail and where he addressed crowds upon his release.
Dee Doocey, the Liberal Democrat London Assembly member who uncovered the £100,000 fighting fund, called for the two sides to compromise to stop thousands of pounds being wasted in legal fees.
She said: "It is a sad state of affairs when a statue of one of the true modern-day icons is dragged into expensive legal bickering.
"It is time that Westminster council and the Mayor buried the hatchet and found a way to resolve their differences."
But Westminster was in no mood to back down, accusing the Mayor of trying to "bully" it into reversing its decision. Kit Malthouse, the council's deputy leader, said: "I always suspected Ken Livingstone was crazy and this confirms it.
"Spending £100,000 of taxpayers' money to move a statue 50 feet seems nuts to me. Maybe he thinks that is a useful use of public money.
But we could find a lot better use for it in social services or our schools."


Man wanted after gay-hate knife attack

POLICE are hunting this man after a 25-year-old was stabbed four times in what officers believe was a homophobic attack. 
The victim and a 38-year-old male friend were returning home on a bus from a night out in the West End when the assailant struck.
Police believe they were deliberately targeted by their attacker who followed them on to a night bus in the Tottenham Court Road area at about 4am yesterday.


Scotland Yard today released this CCTV image of the suspected attacker on board the N20 bus near Highgate. 
The attack happened as the bus travelled past Highgate Underground station in Archway Road.
It came five days after the murder of gay barman David Morley, 37, who was beaten to death by teenage thugs on the South Bank.
Mr Morley survived the Soho nail bomb attack in 1999 at the Admiral-Duncan pub in which three died. A vigil will be held for him at the pub at 6.30 tonight.
In the latest apparent gay-hate attack, the victim was stabbed in the neck, arm and leg. His injuries are not thought to be life- threatening. A Yard spokesman said: "We are treating this as a homophobic attack."
The suspect is believed to have boarded the bus at Camden and then sat behind the two men as they cuddled on the top deck. He became annoyed at their apparent gay relationship and began shouting abuse at them and hurling food.
It is understood he was thrown off the bus but forced the rear doors open and got back on as it resumed its journey. He then carried out the stabbing.
The attacker is of Mediterranean-or eastern European appearance and aged about 25, with proportionate build and a north London accent. A redandwhite baseball cap was left at the scene and a detailed search for fingerprints on the bus has been carried out.
The victim had exploratory surgery at the nearby Whittingham Hospital and is expected to be discharged over the weekend.
Police have ruled out a link between the attack and the murder of Mr Morley.
Six people are being questioned today in connection with his killing.
Detectives are also investigating a separate attack in Turnpike Lane on Sunday evening when a man in his twenties was beaten up on his way home from a local gay bar.
Anyone with information on the night bus stabbing should contact Haringey Community Safety Unit on 020 8345 1866 or Crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555 111.

Pounds 340m payout as Caz ties the knot with JP Morgan

STAFF and shareholders of the Queen's stockbroker Cazenove are to share in a £340 million bonanza as it ties the knot today with America's JP Morgan in an investment bank joint venture. 
Cazenove's return of capital will hand about £5.5 million to chairman David Mayhew from his 1.6% holding as he takes the same role in the new venture, JPMorgan Cazenove.
Robert Pickering, Cazenove's chief executive who also takes the same role in the new set-up, gets £4 million from his stake while veteran dealmaker John Paynter collects £5 million and becomes one of the new venture's four vice-chairmen.


Former Cazenove senior partners, including David Barnett and Mark Loveday, stand to gain around £3 million each. Anthony Forbes and Sir John Kemp-Welch who led the firm in the early 1990s are expected to pick up around £2 million each. 
The rest, worth about £1.50 a share, will be spread between current employees who, with management, own 57.4% of the firm, and institutional shareholders including Axa, Standard Life, Legal &amp; General and 3i, who together own 10.2%.
Today's deal effectively ends 181 years of independence for Cazenove as it transfers its entire investment banking operation of 750 staff while JP Morgan adds 70 staff, comprising about 50 of its top financiers.
It comes after months of internal wrangling over Cazenove's future and follows approaches earlier this year from other banks including Lehman Brothers and Barclays and three years after the broker said it intended to float on the stock market. The deal could yet lead to a full takeover of Cazenove with both sides granted an option to buy out the other's share in the venture in five years.
JP Morgan is paying Cazenove's holding company £110 million as compensation for the UK broker's larger contribution of staff for the venture, into which the US bank is putting its entire UK mergers and acquisitions, debt and equity capital markets teams.
Cazenove will have access to the US firm's entire global investment banking network and much larger balance sheet, while JP Morgan gains access to Cazenove's highly-prized client list as broker to 43 of the companies in the FTSE 100.
Cazenove's asset management business is excluded from the deal.

