Small shops in revolt against Post Office: Restrictive practices and demands for bigger payments could stop local operations by convenience store owners

The Post Office was accused yesterday of undermining its own network of sub-post offices with demands for huge levies and restrictions on the services branches can offer. 
Convenience store owners, many of which have recently taken over local post office services, said the demands by the state enterprise that they pay large commissions from their other commercial activities to the Post Office were a restrictive practice that could drive many to close the sub-post offices in their shops.
Demands by the Post Office for bigger payments from convenience store owners were also discouraging independent shops and chains of convenience store owners from taking over post office services, depriving many areas of the country of a branch.


Store owners said the move could lead to more closures - beyond the 2,500 already shut down or earmarked for closure - should only a few incentives remain for them to step in and take over the local franchise. 
Postwatch, the consumer watchdog, and the industry regulator, Postcomm, highlighted problems with the contract offered by the Post Office in the autumn.
Last month the Association of Convenience Stores complained to the Office of Fair Trading that the new contract offered by the Post Office was an attempt to boost its own profits at their members' expense.
Yesterday MPs joined the clamour for the Post Office to withdraw the demands which they said were a restrictive practice and could undermine the entire network.
Liberal Democrat spokesman Malcolm Bruce said the Post Office was shooting itself in the foot when it demanded high levies on shops, many of which were already operating on low margins.
"It raises the question of whether the Post Office is interested in protecting the network or just wants as much cash as it can grab. It seems to me like a further backdoor closure programme and hang the consequences," he said.
The Post Office triggered a rebellion among convenience store owners following the introduction of a new contract that forces those offering sub-post office services to switch from free cash machines to fee-paying alternatives.
In many cases, the Post Office and its business partner, the cash machine operator Alliance &amp; Leicester, demanded shops charge customers £1.50 a transaction. Between them they take the majority of the revenues.
The move follows a longstanding contractual arrangement that convenience stores hand over 20% of their Lotto takings to the Post Office, whether the sale took place in post office hours or not. The contract also bans convenience stores from offering many other services.
The Association of Convenience Stores, which represents 32,000 shops - more than 10,000 of which include post offices - said it hoped the OFT would support its claim.
The association's chief executive, David Rae, said: "The government and the public at large wishes to see a viable network of post offices serving the community. The contract as it stands undermines the network by giving a disincentive to retailers to incorporate the Post Office in their stores.
"Consumers would benefit from fair remuneration for sub-postmasters and a removal of the restrictions currently imposed on retailers by Post Office Limited."
A spokesman for the Post Office said the decision to switch to fee-paying cash machines would be taken by the supplier, not the Post Office.
However, a convenience store would be in breach of contract if it sacked Alliance &amp; Leicester in favour of another supplier.
He added: "With regard to the levels of commission subpostmasters receive for ATM transactions or lottery sales, these are contractual matters with our partner companies and are commercially confidential."


Tsunamifamilies left in legal limbo: Families in limbo

The families of more than 900 British people still missing but presumed dead in the tsunami disaster are being warned by the Foreign Office that they could be left in legal and financial limbo for seven years unless the bodies of their relatives are found. 
Without properly issued death certificates, the financial affairs of the missing will be frozen, making it impossible for relatives to claim inheritance or to sell the assets of those who have disappeared.
They may also not be able to claim life insurance.
Yesterday the Foreign Office said the seven-year rule - enshrined in English law - would cause unprecedented problems, because of the numbers involved, and it was reviewing whether special arrangements could be made to help bereaved families.


As well as those whose bodies may never be found, there are thousands of bodies of different nationalities to be identified in Thailand and it is likely to be as much as a year before any positive identifications are announced. 
Since the Boxing Day disaster, 51 Britons have been confirmed dead. Hundreds of others are posted as missing.
One of them is Barry Lloyd-Jones, whose wife, Kath, yesterday urged a rethink of the law to avoid "years of distress and hardship for the bereaved". She was having breakfast on the beach in Thailand with her husband, a journalist, when the wave struck.
"From every point of view, for bereaved people to have to wait seven years for a death certificate so they can tidy up their affairs is a terrible prospect, both from a practical point of view and what is called closure. We are being left in limbo."
Mrs Lloyd-Jones was caught by the wave, swept up the beach, and tumbled over and over in the debris before managing to cling on to trees. The water swept back into the sea taking hundreds of people with it, many of whom have never been found. She searched for her husband for more than a week before returning home, but no trace has been found.
"The point of the seven-year rule, I presume, is that in some circumstances people may have taken the opportunity to dodge their responsibilities," she said.
"In this case I cannot see it. No one knew the tsunami was coming, and you would have to be very quick-thinking to see the wave and think this was a good opportunity to do a runner.
"I suppose it is possible that one or two people might use this disaster to disappear, but it is worth the Foreign Office taking the risk to avoid years of distress and hardship for the bereaved who need to get on with their lives."
The probable victims have been divided into two groups.
There are 349 people in category one, where the missing person was seen in the water, or in a building that was destroyed or damaged in the disaster.
Included in this group are people known to be in the vicinity who could reasonably be thought to have been caught but have not been seen since the waves struck, and could reasonably have been expected to make contact if they had survived.
The second group, now reduced to 568 people after hundreds of those originally posted missing were traced, are those backpackers and others thought to have been in the area who have not been seen or contacted.
Elizabeth Hamer, a partner at Brethertons solicitors in Rugby who specialises in wills and probate, said the government could change the rules for this particular case of a disaster on an unprecedented scale. "Everything has to be held up until it's been established that the person is dead," she said. Families could apply individually to the probate court to have their relatives declared dead sooner, but it would not be easy to reduce the seven-year period.
It is up to families to provide the evidence for this, in the form of travel documents proving their relatives were with them in Thailand, evidence that their accounts had not been touched and that they have not been in contact since the tsunami.
If a missing person is not legally declared dead, the relatives will also have difficulty claiming any life insurance they are due before the seven years are up. But the Association of British Insurers said life assurance firms had made clear they would deal with each case sensitively and not automatically demand that the family wait for seven years.


Ministers at war over pub closing time

Whitehall ministries were last night close to open warfare over the government's plans to introduce flexible drinking hours after culture ministers resisted Home Office-backed pressure to make licensed pubs and clubs pay the cost of policing the predicted Saturday night "mayhem". 
MPs in all parties are joining' a growing campaign to cancel or amend the new 24-hour licensing scheme, which comes into force on February 7.
Critics say the reforms, which have been in preparation since the late 1990s, have been overwhelmed by the re cent surge in binge drinking among young people, especially women under 25, who are being admitted to hospital for alcohol-related problems in growing numbers.


"There has been a massive change in the drinking culture which no one spotted over the past five years," a senior ex-minister said last night. "It's not about country pubs at Sunday lunchtime. It's about vertical drinking in huge standing-room pubs in cities. It's overtaken the act." 
But Richard Caborn, minister of state at the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, who is in charge of overseeing the change, used an interview with the Guardian yesterday to reject police demands that licensees and the chains that own them should face a levy on any extra police costs.
"The industry says it is already paying over £20bn to the exchequer in taxes, more than most, and making its contribution to society far beyond what it costs," said Mr Caborn.
His comments came 24 hours after the home secretary, Charles Clarke, appeared to give support to police demands for someone else to pay the cost of policing inner city centres at weekends.
Labour and Conservative local authorities are also united in their opposition to the legislation. Simon Milton, Conservative leader of West minster council, said the government was "in a mire" because of the evident reservations among Home Office ministers and chief constables.
"Some statements from ministers have been misleading to the point of downright lies," he said. "It is clear the Home Office is coming out on the side of the police."
It has been no secret that the Home Office, under both David Blunkett and Mr Clarke, has been unenthusiastic about the department's 2003 Licensing Act.
But Mr Caborn, a former Sheffield shop steward and 40 year veteran of Labour politics, insisted the reforms will work because:
* they simplify complex licensing laws and give control to councils, not magistrates;
* they give local businesses and voters new powers to register objectives and assert "democratic accountability";
* they cut bureaucracy, including £15m of police paperwork, and the number of likely licence applications from 1.7m a year to 200,000;
* contrary to tabloid claims, virtually no licence will be sought or granted for 24-hour drinking seven days a week, and flexible hours in Scotland have reduced closing time "flashpoints".
But Mr Milton contradicted the minister's claim that the new licensing authorities would be able to stagger licensing hours. "The truth is that if one bar stays open until 3am, its competitors will do the same thing because otherwise they will lose business."
Matters may come to a head next week when the department decides on the fees councils can charge for the new licences, possibly £80-£500 for an application, and £40-£225 for the annual licence.
They will be granted from February 7, with all premises converting to the new system over the next six months. The legislation will be fully implemented by November.

