Time folks, please! Murray's Pub Landlord relocates to LA

It could prove the most challenging test yet for United States television audiences' new-found love affair with ironic British comedy.
Al Murray - xenophobe, old-fashioned sexist and purveyor of bigoted barroom wisdom - is about to open the doors on a US version of his hit show The Pub Landlord, according to Variety magazine
Following in the transatlantic footsteps of other unlikely recent UK hits, most notably the US-version of Ricky Gervais's The Office, Murray - the Oxford-educated great-great-great grandson of William Makepeace Thackeray - has signed a deal for a pilot show with Rupert Murdoch's Fox television.
It is difficult to know what politically correct American television audiences will make of his rants against the French and demands that female drinkers stick to white wine or fruit-based cocktails. Or whether viewers in the American heartland will spot the joke that Murray's real views are in fact the exact opposite of those so enthusiastically espoused by the landlord.
With the working title Union Jackass, set in Los Angeles' Santa Monica seafront district, it could prove a pivotal moment in the career of the Perrier award-winning stand-up. A source close to the show sought to play down suggestions that it was a cultural jump too far. "These are very early days but they came looking for us," he said. The new show is premised on Murray relocating to the Golden State in pursuit of his ex-wife and son.
Union Jackass is being made by Fox TV and the UK independent producer Avalon, which also made Murray's Sky One show, Time Gentlemen, Please, which ran for two series.
Avalon's Jon Thoday, Richard Allen-Turner and David Martin - who joined the firm from Fox Television Studios to run its US operation last summer - will act as executive producers for the programme.
The Fox pilot is to be written and executive-produced by Dan O'Keefe, whose previous credits include The Drew Carey Show, a US sitcom.
Murray began his career in the Oxford Revue, where he appeared alongside Stewart Lee, Ben Moor and Richard Herring.
After successfully submitting scripts for Radio 4's Week Ending and Spitting Image he began developing a solo routine. After supporting Frank Skinner in 1992 with a bizarre sound-effect-based routine that saw him imitate animals, guns and just about anything else, his career took on new life after meeting Harry Hill at a Radio 4 commissioning meeting.
The two performed onstage together at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival and in 1994, at the suggestion of Hill, Murray developed The Pub Landlord character.
The comics continued their successful association, Murray playing Hill's broth-er Alan in The Harry Hill Show from 1997 to 2000.
Murray won the Perrier at the fourth time of trying in 1999. Success led to stage shows including And A Glass Of White Wine For The Lady, My Gaff, My Rules and Who Dares Wins.
He also appeared in Hell's Kitchen with Gordon Ramsay He has just completed a sold-out national tour and is expected to announce a new television deal with a UK broadcaster soon.

Another Tory boy for David and Samantha Cameron

David Cameron became the father of a 7lb 3oz boy yesterday. His wife, Samantha, gave birth to their third child by Caesarean section at St Mary's Hospital, Padding-ton. The baby's name has not yet been announced. The Tory leader, who rushed to his wife's side for the birth, announced afterwards: "Everything is fantastic, it's really exciting."
Speaking outside the hospital, Mr Cameron added: "He's lovely, he has blue eyes and black curly hair. It was all over very quickly. Everything seemed fine Sam is doing really well, she's sitting up and will be here for a couple of days."
The Camerons have a severely disabled son, Ivan, born in 2002, and a daughter, Nancy, aged two.
The Tory leader will now take two weeks' paternity leave. The shadow Foreign Secretary, William Hague, will stand in for him today at Prime Minister's Questions, pitting him against Tony Blair for the first time since he stood down from the Tory leadership in 2001.
The Prime Minister's office said Mr Blair would congratulate Mr Cameron "in the appropriate way at the appropriate time".
The shadow Health Secretary, Andrew Lansley, jubilantly told MPs the Valentine's Day addition to the Cameron family was just one of four children fathered by Tory MPs in quick succession. The partners of Adam Afriyie and Greg Hands, the Tory MPs, respectively, for Windsor and Hammersmith and Ful-ham, have recently given birth, and the MP for Mon-mouth, David Davies, is due to become a father soon.
"We on this side are doing our bit to defuse the demo-graphic time bomb," Mr Lansleyjoked.
Until recently, it was unusual for major party leaders to become parents in office, since most were of an age when their children were growing up. But Tony Blair led the way with the birth of Leo Blair in 2000.
Charles Kennedy became a father during last year's general election campaign. The next high profile political birth is scheduled for July, when Sarah Brown, wife of the Chancellor, is expecting their third child.
Yesterday, Mrs Brown launched a campaign against domestic violence, for the charity Women's Aid. Mrs Brown, who is involved with a number of charities, said: "Domestic violence remains a taboo issue for many and we hope to get everyone, not just those in violent relationships, to think and talk about the reality for hundreds of thousands of women every year."
The campaign includes posters related to Valentine's Day. One has a single red rose and the caption " Suzy, I told you to shut up, you stupid cow. It's your fault I hurt you. Pete."


Two Iraqis threaten to sue over abuse by soldiers

Two Iraqis who claim to have been victims of the filmed abuse by British soldiers said last night that they would sue the British Government.
The threat of legal action came as 1,000 demonstrators in Basra burnt the British flag, and the city's governing council declared that it was cutting ties with British authorities.
The Royal Military Police said last night that two more soldiers from the 1st Battalion The Light Infantry were under arrest in connection with the assaults in Maysan province, southern Iraq, in January 2004.
They followed the arrest of Cpl Martin Webster who is alleged to have filmed the beatings. However, the continuing British investigation did little to assuage the growing backlash in Iraq.
The Iraqi protesters marched on the British consulate in Basra with banners saying "No to Tony Blair" and "Put British soldiers on trial" before burning British flags.
Major-General Hassan Suwadi, the Basra police chief, said that his men would no longer carry patrol with British troops.
Meanwhile, two men, Bassem Shaker and Tariq Abdul-Razzak, claimed they were among those who were arrested and beaten by British soldiers when the video was made.
Speaking at a press conference, at the offices of the Shia militia leader Muqta-da al-Sadr, Mr Shaker, 27, said: "I was one of 250 unemployed people demonstrating in the streets in 2004. When we reached the governor's mansion we were surprised by the presence of British forces. We started throwing stones at them because we believed that they were behind all our misery ... A group of British soldiers rushed out from their base and arrested nine of us ... They were beating us with fists and batons, and kicking us. Then they cuffed our hands and dragged us to their base... where they beat us and frightened us with dogs before releasing us before sunset."
Mr Shaker said he had not reported the alleged abuse because he did not trust the British authorities to provide justice.
"But when we saw this tape and the amount of anger it caused inside and outside Iraq, we decided to come today to the al-Sadr office because we need them, after God, to help us to sue the British forces and compensate us," he said. "Those troops humiliated us and violated our rights."
The rising tension comes at an already fraught time in southern Iraq, with clashes between British troops and Shia militias who had infiltrated the Iraqi police.
In London it was unclear last night whether Cpl Webster had been freed after his arrest on Sunday. His father, Jim Webster, said "We have spoken to Martin, during a phone call. He has been released, but whether he will have been re-arrested we can't say." The Ministry of Defence refused to comment on whether Cpl Webster was still in custody.
Mr Webster, 57, a builder from Falmouth in Cornwall, said that in his view British troops should not be in Iraq. "The politicians don't have a clue what is going on.'

Wakeley's glamour paves way for cutting edge

It is undeniable that London Fashion Week, which opened yesterday, is the world's most fertile seedbed for young design talent. It does not, however, have a good reputation for retaining those designers who,once they achieve fame, transplant to Paris or New York.
The established British designers that remain in London tend to be of the ilk of Amanda Wakeley, who presented her autumn/winter collection yesterday in the mar quee venue at the Natural History Museum. That is, solidly commercial types who, while they're unlikely to set any seasonal trends, know their clientele - in Wakeley's case, willowy west London women and celebrities such as Natasha Richardson and Minnie Driver.
As she proved yesterday, Wakeley can certainly cut an elegant bias-cut gown from silver liquid silk satin, or another in loden green jersey with ruching that snaked around the waist. But classical glamour isn't what made London a force to be reckoned with back in the Nineties, when Alexander McQueen and Hussein Chalayan held spectacular shows in the city.
In fact, despite yesterday's slow start, this season's five-day event has a stronger than usual lineup of upcoming designers, with Gareth Pugh and Roksanda Ilincic being among the most hotly tipped. On Saturday, talent scouts will attend the graduate show of the fashion college Central Saint Martins, alma mater to McQueen, Chalayan and numerous other stars.
The organisers of London Fashion Week are determined that the event should improve its status as a runner-up to Paris, Milan and New York. Last December, the British Fashion Council appointed a new chief executive, Hilary Riva, who has a track record of turning around fashion retailers in her former role as managing director of Rubicon, the owner of Principles and Warehouse.
It has also shifted its position in the international collections schedule forward, to encourage non-European press and fashion buyers to fly into London before going directly to Milan fashion week, which begins on Sunday. "I was very much in favour of the date changes, because it enables press and buyers, who might otherwise be limited by finances, to come," said Alexandra Shulman, editor of Vogue.
According to organisers, the event can still pull in more than 5,000 visitors, with the US Vogue editor, Anna Wintour, being this season's most-wanted guest. British-born Wintour, roundly acknowledged as the most powerful figure in fashion, returns this week to London's front rows after a lengthy absence.
On Friday, Wintour is due to co-host a party with Shulman to shore-up support for the Metropolitan Museum's "Anglomania" exhibition of British fashion, which opens in New York in May and is partly sponsored by CondZ Nast, publishers of Vogue.

