Warning over Leeds's rising tide of rubbish

HOUSEHOLDERS in Leeds face huge council tax rises unless the city drastically reduces the amount of rubbish dumped in tips, a senior councillor has warned.
Failure to hit strict Government and European Union landfill reduction targets could land Leeds with fines that would add up to £160 to an annual band D council tax bill, said Coun Andrew Carter, the council's deputy leader.
The council has drawn up a waste strategy that hopes to nearly double the amount of rubbish recycled to over 50 per cent and find a "technological solution" to deal with the remainder.
An energy from waste plant - an incinerator that can generate electricity - emerged as the council's preferred option last year, although it has stressed no decision has yet been made and other non-burning methods, such as mechanical biological treatment (MBT), are under consideration.
Four sites in the Cross Green area have been identified for whichever kind of plant is chosen and the council is bidding to win Government approval for a £60m Private Finance Initiative (PFI) project to build the facility.
Full public consultation has been promised before any final decision is made.
Labour and Green councillors launched an attack on the council's ruling Liberal Democrat-Conservative administration urging it to ditch incineration as a possible option.
Coun Judith Blake (Lab, Middleton Park) said she was dismayed incineration was still being considered when other local authorities were looking to more sustainable solutions.
Coun Ann Blackburn (Green, Farnley and Wortley) said: "The Greens do not agree with building an incinerator anywhere in this city. There will be no incentive for the public to reduce and recycle waste because they will take the view it can be burned.
"We are making a choice that our grandchildren will be lumbered with."
Coun Bill Hyde (Con, Temple Newsam) said the sites identified were for a treatment facility, not necessarily an incinerator.
He said a decision would be taken in 2010 following full public consultation.
Coun Mark Harris, council leader, challenged Labour to spell out how they would tackle the problem and reveal where they would site a waste treatment plant.


Trap house snares its first burglar

A HI-TECH police sting has netted its first criminal.
The YEP can reveal that a number of houses have been fitted with specialist equipment - including hidden cameras and smartwater technology - to trap burglars in the act.
Already the initiative has resulted in a teenager being arrested after he broke into one of the houses in south Leeds.
The YEP understands he was caught on camera as he searched the house for anything worth stealing.
The use of "trap houses" is the latest weapon being used by police in south Leeds, as part of a county-wide crackdown on burglaries.
Today police in the City and Holbeck police division, which covers a large part of south Leeds, confirmed the initiative but were keeping tight-lipped about where any other "trap houses" might be - for obvious reasons.
But, they are known to select properties in high-risk burglary areas and install hidden cameras to catch intruders.
They also use smartwater devices, which spray intruders with a near-invisible mist of water that carries a specific DNA.
Police can then compare the DNA on suspects and their clothing to the DNA of the smartwater in a particular house.
Acting Det Insp Stuart Piper, of City and Holbeck CID, said: "This is only part of our continuing crackdown on burglary offences.
"As part of the overall strategy to reduce burglaries we have also arrested 14 people, using traditional methods such as increased patrols, in the last 10 days.
"The use of trap houses means that criminals will have no idea where they are. Hopefully it will make them think twice about breaking into other people's houses."


Horse centre refusal: Plans panel attacked

A PLANNING committee which refused permission for an equestrian centre at a Harewood farm "misdirected itself," an expert witness claimed.
Planning consultant Simon Chadwick told a public inquiry that Leeds East plans panel acted unreasonably in refusing consent to the trustees of the Harewood Estate.
They wanted permission to create an equestrian centre, outdoor arena and cross-country course at Wikefield Farm, Harrogate Road.
The plans panel turned them down because they feared the Queen's cousin, Lord Harewood's tenant farmers, Michael and Barbara Harrison, would be given notice to quit.
They would lose their business and home and this would cause them hardship.
But Mr Chadwick claimed the panel attached too much importance to the alleged hardship.
"It does not exist to the degree that the Harrisons have made out," he declared."I do not think their personal circumstances carry enough weight to override the presumption of approval in this case."
The trustees were appealing at a two-day hearing for permission to create that equestrian centre.
Ian Ponter, counsel for Leeds City Council, asked him why the trustees had wanted planning permission when they could have opted instead to seek a certificate of lawful use. Equestrian activities had taken place at the farm for many years.
Mr Chadwick said a planning application would "regularise" activities and enable improved accesses to be built.
Mr Ponter suggested that accesses could have been created without the need for permission.
"If a certificate of lawful use had been issued, the trustees would have no right to serve an uncontested notice to quit on the Harrisons," he pointed out. That was the real motive.
Clive Beer, chartered surveyor, said he had advised the trustees not to issue a notice to quit on the farmers as it was inappropriate. He agreed with Mr Ponter that since 2004 relations between the trustees and the Harrisons had been "less than cordial."
Mr Ponter said: "It seems to me on reading correspondence between them that the trust between the parties had broken down. Do you agree?"
Mr Beer replied: "The landlord's objective was to achieve a proper rent level and then to move forward and rebuild bridges, and I don't see that as being an impossibility."
He said the trustees' proposed new rent level was far below the £100,000 which Mrs Harrison suggested in evidence.
David Cullingford, the inspector who conducted the inquiry, visited the farm with interested parties and then heard closing submissions.
He expects to give his decision before the end of the year.


Crack cocaine problem at Armley

LEEDS prison HMP Armley has been described as having the largest crack cocaine problem outside of London.
And a group of MPs have described the number of drug addicts at the Leeds prison as "staggering".
How should the authorities deal with this? Email us you r thoughts by clicking here or clicking comment below. We'll publish the lot.
The all-party parliamentary group on prison health chaired by Leeds North East Labour MP Fabian Hamilton has discovered that between 85 and 87 per cent of new inmates at Armley test positive for drugs and said it has the largest crack cocaine problem outside London.
The MPs have urged ministers to devote more resources to treat inmates for their addiction and help them to detox.
Prisoners who are unwilling to commit to detoxification should have substitute drugs like methadone made available as part of maintenance therapy. The report also calls for an end mandatory drug testing, except for newly arrived prisoners.
The MPs argue that drug testing is counterproductive because it deflects attention and funding away from the treatment of addiction.It also increases tensions in jails and adds to the workload of already overburdened staff.
Prisoners at HMP Wakefield who test positive for drugs are not punished if they agree to treatment.
Mr Hamilton said: "Health issues in prison, including drug treatment, need to be consistently and appropriately addressed to cater for the individual needs of prisoners."
The group, who visited Leeds Prison in July 2005, said a radical shake-up proposed by former Chief Inspector of Prisons, Lord Ramsbotham, should be considered.
Lord Ramsbotham believes drug-taking prisoners should be confined to separate wings and have privileges removed.
The group praised HMP Wormwood Scrubs for introducing a net over the walls to prevent drugs being thrown over and urged other jails to do the same. It also criticised the Department of Health for cutting the Integrated Drug Treatment System, which gives prisoners a choice of treatment, by 60 per cent.


Music firm EMI to get tough with 'lazy' stars

The record company behind Kylie Minogue and Robbie Williams has warned it will drop artists who fail to work hard enough.
Bosses at music industry giant EMI also threatened to withdraw stars' lucrative advances if record sales are disappointing, an internal memo disclosed.
Williams' latest album received mixed reviews and was overtaken in the sales charts by his former band, Take That.
He was paid a reported £80 million to sign to the label in 2002.
Guy Hands, boss of Terra Firma, the private equity firm which bought EMI in August, told staff it would dump artists who did not spend enough time promoting their work.
The company would in the future be "more selective in whom we choose to work with", he said.
He wrote: "While many spend huge amounts of time working with their label to promote, perfect and endorse their music, some unfortunately simply focus on negotiating for the maximum advance...advances which are often never repaid.
"However, once EMI has the best products and services in music and the best culture for working together then, as already exists within some of our labels, it will be open to us to choose which artists we wish to work with and promote."
Parts of the music industry have struggled in recent years with price pressures and the rise of the internet.
EMI was bought by Terra Firma in August in a deal which valued the company at £3.2 m.
The deal was completed just before the world credit crunch, which analysts fear may put the company under pressure to cut budgets.
Music industry executives, who have traditionally been lavishly rewarded when signing new artists, also face losing their lucrative bonuses in the shake-up.
Mr Hands said it would take time to unpick the firm's existing pay structures. EMI sales fell 10 per cent last year.
l British Airways today said pre-tax profits soared by more than a quarter to £593 million in the first six months of its financial year.
The profits increase comes despite the rocketing cost of fuel, which the group said will cost it a record £2 billion over the full year.
The weak dollar has also been a challenge for the group, with BA today revising full year revenue growth down from 4pc to about 3pc to 3.5pc .
But the dollar's weakness has also helped trim costs, excluding fuel, by 4pc in the six months to September 30, and BA hopes full-year costs will be £100m less than last year.


Spice Girls launch new single

The Spice Girls have been given a sophisticated makeover for the video of their new single.
Headlines (Friendship Never Ends) will be broadcast for the first time tonight, following an introduction from the Spice Girls.
The song is one of two new tracks the Spice Girls have recorded for their Greatest Hits album.
In the video, Geri Halliwell rests her head on Victoria Beckham's lap while Mel C lounges on a chaise longue.
The broadcast, at 7.55pm on BBC1, launches the run-up to Children in Need Night on November 16, when the group perform the song live.
The Spice Girls' last single release was in November 2000, when the band topped the UK chart with the double A-side Holler/Let Love Lead The Way.
Headlines is available for download from Monday and hits the shops on November 19.
Profits raised from single sales of the song will go to Children in Need.

