pounds 1.3m dirty money funds crime blitz

Criminals' dirty money is helping to fund a South Wales crime blitz.
Police are ploughing pounds 1.3m already seized from fraudsters and drug dealers into expanding a team of investigators dedicated to making sure crime does not pay.
And they are warning that there is a greater chance of those that break the law losing their houses, cars and cash.
'Some people have no conscience about taking resources out of communities already unduly affected by crime, but we will do all we can to stop them,' a spokesman said. 'Criminals beware: we're ending your jet-set lifestyles': Cash confiscated from drug dealers and fraudsters is being used to expand a crime-busting team.
South Wales Police is taking on 50 per cent more fraud investigators, whose job will be to identify the money and assets acquired through criminal activity, seize them and plough the money back into communities.
Detective Inspector Dave Lowe, head of fraud and financial investigations, said the pounds 1.3m seized following investigations in the 2005 and 2006 financial year was being ploughed back into the force to pay for eight more investigators to join the 16-strong team.
He said: 'Our message to criminals is we are coming for you and your house and your car and your plasma TV.
'This 50 per cent increase in staff is in recognition of the importance of this area, but also recognition of the success of the current staff.'
South Wales Police's financial investigation unit was set up in 2003 following the introduction of the Proceeds of Crime Act.
It allows police to seize cash totalling more than pounds 1,000 from anyone who cannot give a reasonable explanation as to how they got it.
It also allows the assets acquired by criminals through crime, such as houses, cars and boats, to be confiscated and the cash ploughed back into the communities they profited from.
Det Insp Lowe said: 'If you have decent people living in a community and working hard and you have a guy down the road who has a big car and plasma screen televisions and no legitimate means of paying for them, then we will go after him.
'We are acutely conscious that people involved in drug dealing can have a devastating affect on a community and we are keen to stop people profiteering from others' misery.'
South Wales Police's team of financial investigators, who are based in Rumney, Cardiff, Bridgend and Swansea, have access to bank accounts and a whole array of financial information in order to help them identify criminals' cash and assets.
The pounds 1.3m seized last year was among the most gathered by any police force in the country and Det Insp Lowe is keen to build on that success.
'What we are doing is part of a national campaign called Pay Back - Taking The Cash Out Of Crime.
'We have been extremely successful so far and these extra investigators reinforce our commitment to Pay Back.
'Criminals used to go to prison and come back out and resume their Champagne lifestyle, but not any more.
'If they don't pay up they get time added to their sentence and the debt also stays with them, so if they still don't pay but acquire assets and money when they get out of jail, we can go back and take that off them.'
Detective Sergeant Barrie McGregor, who is based at Rumney Police Station, said they also hoped the campaign would send a positive message to the community. 
'We hope this will motivate people not to tolerate criminals and to come forward with any suspicions they have.' Taking back the proceeds of evil crimes: Dozens of criminals have already been hit where it hurts by South Wales Police's fraud and financial investigation unit. They include:
Drugs baron Raymond Legall, who supplied rising Welsh soccer star Leon Jeanne with cocaine, was ordered to pay back almost pounds 150,000 he made from dealing last year following his conviction three years ago. Legall had lived a Champagne lifestyle funded by drug dealing, driving an Audi TT sports car and living in a luxury apartment in Cardiff Bay.
Hasmukh Kunvarji, of Roath, Cardiff, was convicted of possessing cocaine with intent to supply. He was deemed to have earned pounds 58,000 from drug dealing and after financial investigators identified assets in excess of this amount, a judge ordered him to pay back the full pounds 58,000.
Convicted cannabis dealer Paul Xuereb, of Llanrumney, Cardiff, had more than pounds 99,000 in assets identified and was ordered to pay back pounds 22,000.


A poignant show honours tragic Joshua

A night of glitz and glamour lit up a comprehensive school hall last night in honour of a special former pupil.
Former classmates of Joshua Cornelius, who died from cancer nine years ago, set up a catwalk, sold tickets and donned dinner jackets to raise money in his memory. 
Pupils confidently strutted their stuff to the latest chart hits and with an array of flashing lights behind them as parents, pupils and staff clapped and cheered.
The money they raise for the Joshua Cornelius Foundation Oz Experience is divided between paying for dream holidays for children suffering with terminal cancer - and funding a trip to Australia for them.
Joshua's mum, Sarah Cornelius, who also used to be head girl at the school, spoke at the St Cenydd Comprehensive School, Caerphilly, event last night.
She told the audience: 'These youngsters get the chance of a lifetime and it's great we can all be involved in these kinds of events.
Sarah set up the foundation after her son died from abdominal cancer in 1998 at the age of seven.
She told the audience the pinnacle of the fundraising events would be the 10th anniversary of her son's death next year when she will travel with his friends to Australia.
She said: 'When we travel to Australia next year I'll make sure I'll be in the same group as Joshua's very close friends.
'We will climb the Sydney Harbour bridge. It will be a privilege to be with Joshua's special friends.'
Year 11 pupils Frazer Richards, Becky Davies, Lee Cochram, James Buckthought, Mark Jones and Ben Hammond, all 16 and from Caerphilly, organised the event. They persuaded local businesses to donate top designer wear, luxury chocolates and gifts for a raffle.
By raising pounds 2,500 each, the 'Oz Kids' help to pay for dream holidays and experiences for children suffering with terminal cancer, and their families.
The rest goes towards a three-week adventure holiday where the teenagers carry out vital conservation work, as well as seeing the sights in Sydney and Melbourne.
Since the charity began it has raised more than pounds 3m to help children and families.
The St Cenydd students will travel to Australia with other 'Oz Kids' from across the UK in July 2008.
All six who organised the show are three weeks away from sitting GCSEs, and prepared for the event between revision and coursework.
They modelled clothes from high street shops including Miss Selfridge and Peacocks who donated clothes for the show, as well as the foundation's own clothing range, Live42Day.
Joshua's friend and compere for the night James Buckthought said a lot of local businesses helped out.
'We went around the shops and explained what we needed the clothes and raffle prizes for,' said James. 'We had a fantastic response.'


Sorry I can't come to the phone... I'm fighting the Taliban

A soldier fighting for his country in Afghanistan has come under fire on the front line - from a car loans repayment company.
Dad-of-one Shane Nash, 23, received the first phone call after he had been serving in Kabul, 3,700 miles away, for less than a month.
The soldier, who is in the logistics division with the Pioneer Corps, is paying off a loan for a pounds 9,000 Renault Laguna, which was written off in an accident last year.
His anxious mother Angela James, 42, said she was disgusted to hear her son, who can call home just once a week, was being hassled on the front line of a war zone by finance staff demanding payment.
'My son is out in Afghanistan and these people have been onto him,' said the care assistant from Tonyrefail. 'How they got hold of him I don't really know.
'I think it's absolutely disgusting. They're worried about money? I'm worried about my son's life.'
Mr Nash, who also served in Iraq, was paying pounds 218.71 to loans company Welcome Finance.
Mrs James said he had probably forgotten his monthly payment due to his experiences in conflict.
'I told them that he was out in Afghanistan and the person said that they had already spoken to him and had got in touch with the Army barracks and his commanding officer,' she said. 'Now he's been told that when he comes home from Afghanistan, he will not be able to go on leave. He's obviously in trouble over this. It's making him terribly upset.
'He's having a hard time as it is fighting a war, but now he's got to put up with this kind of hassle as well.'
Welcome Finance corporate affairs manager, Greg Stevens said he was investigating the complaint. He said: 'Our customer- facing personnel are trained to deal with difficult circumstances in a non-judgemental and considerate manner.
'We appreciate the difficult and emotional situation for Mrs James, with her son engaged in active duty and regret any further anguish caused.
'As a responsible and regulated lender, and following the issue raised by Mrs James, we will be reviewing our processes in the light of the outcome of this investigation.'


Sex accuser, 10, watched net porn

A 10-year-old has been accused of making up detailed sex allegations about a businessman after watching pornography on the internet.
The child has accused Thomas Antley, 52, a dental technician who runs his own business in Bridgend, of touching her indecently and enticing her to touch him.
She claimed Antley was fond of massaging people - adults and children - at parties where groups of people would be present and that he had offered to massage her when she found herself in his company.
He told police that massage was something he perfected because of his bad back.
The girl claimed Antley said after the alleged abuse, 'don't tell anybody or we could get into serious trouble'.
She accepted she had watched explicit sex on a computer with friends but claimed Antley too had watched it with her.
He denied her allegations in interviews with police who arrested him last year but has chosen not to give evidence in his own defence in a trial at Cardiff Crown Court on charges of sexual assault and inciting a child to engage in sexual behaviour.
Yesterday, his barrister David Aubrey QC told the jury of nine men and one woman that that was his right and it would be unfair to hold it against him.
He suggested Antley, of Broadlands, Bridgend, had said everything he needed to say in his hours of interviews, when he answered all the questions put to him.
The QC said the child making the allegations was not the normal 10-year-old one would expect to have no knowledge of sex.
He told the jurors: 'We all know what concerns there are about children seeing these things on the television and the internet. It's horrifying but she has been exposed to an adult world.
'This is a 10-year-old who knows more about sex than perhaps many adults.'
Jeremy Jenkins, prosecuting, said the child had made a complaint to her parents bit by bit, after watching an episode of TV's Heartbeat in which a boy had a secret he could not tell his mother, then seeing a celebrity Who Wants To Be A Millionaire where money was being raised for a children's charity.
She told police: 'I felt really bad, like I was one of those children who couldn't tell anyone.'
Judge Christopher Llewellyn-Jones QC asked the jury: 'Did she strike you as devious, dishonest and manipulative or straightforward, uncomplicated and honest?'
(proceeding)

