Rachel recruited for new business

Launched just 10 months ago, business activity for CV Recruitment has been thriving. Business partners Vikki Yarwood and Charlotte Owen opened the prominent offices in Merrial Street, Newcastle, last June. Due to their continuing success and a growing client and candidate database, they have recruited a new recruitment specialist, Rachel Higginbotham.
Vikki stated: "Our first aim was to concentrate on marketing within the industrial and commercial sector, but we've found increasing interest shown from both new and existing clients, to assist with their recruitment of management and executive positions. Having successfully recruited into management positions, it has given us the opportunity to move to the next stage of our development and business plan.
"Our business statement of The Right Candidate for the Right Position, dictates that we ensure that we do just that, and Rachel's role is to expand into management and executive recruitment."
Both Vikki and Charlotte consider Rachel's skills and personal attitude will enable her to fulfil the role of marketing and managing this demanding section, and is a much-needed and welcomed member to the team.
Vikki said: "We will shortly be celebrating 12 months in business, and throughout that time have successfully supplied both temporary and permanent members of staff to a wide range of companies. Clients recognise the quality of our advice and our support levels. We're not just another recruitment agency - we pride ourselves in the amount of care we take over our selection processes."
Added Charlotte: "Although we ensure we provide a quality service to our clients, we must emphasise that candidates are also of most importance. We treat candidates with respect, and acknowledge that every candidate has their own individual skills and attributes. We have had many recommendations from previous candidates, and that stems from the quality of service we provide. We aim to be honest in our assessments and interviews.
"A number of people locally are informing us that they are currently facing redundancy, and we, as an agency, are keen to offer support. Being made redundant is never easy, but it's even more difficult if you have worked for one company for a long time. We can offer help and advice in the search for other posts," Vikki added.
CV Recruitment is seeking experienced customer service, sales and administration staff. Within the management and executive division, vacancies include a field sales executive, health and safety manager, and a senior team manager for a local utilities company. Candidates can download their CV on to the website: www.cv-recruitment.co.uk or telephone the team on 01782 662612, or call into the office at CV Recruitment, 3 Merrial Street, Newcastle.
Clients can contact the team on 01782 662612, with any recruitment requirements.

Bill feathers his nest

Barn Owl Bill, pictured, shares his home with 70... well, the clue's in his name I suppose.
Six live in the front room. To be fair, he's got a sheet up to stop them fouling his wedding picture.
Wife Carol puts up with Bill's passion for owls, but admits it's done little for her social life.
"When you get visitors and they see these things plopped around in corners, it can be off-putting," she says. "They tend to think they're ornaments - until they move."
Foodwise, Bill gets through 5,000 frozen chicks a month. Thinking about it, I believe I've seen Kerry Katona holding up a bag on one of those Iceland ads.
Bill defrosts them in the kitchen, and then cuts them into beak-sized pieces with a pair of scissors.
A word of warning - if you ever find yourself round at Bill's house, always refuse the offer of a sandwich.
One bird in particular has a special relationship with Bill. His "best friend" Paulie pines and goes on hunger strike whenever he is sick or away on holiday. She even travels on his shoulder when he drives, depositing pellets in his lap as he goes along.
"This is what's left of a baby chicken," said Bill, as the bird retched again, "all nice and gooey."
For some reason, Carol felt more comfortable sat in the back. Paulie could be the first-ever owl to be named in a divorce petition.
Bill got into owls after contracting multiple sclerosis and spongilosis, he claims as a result of being mugged 27 years ago. Locked in a self-destructive cycle of binge drinking, pills and depression, he was given a barn owl to look after, and it proved to be his salvation. Someone might want to think about getting one for Robbie Williams.
"I had to feed it because my ex-girlfriend wouldn't, which then meant I couldn't keep going to the pub," Bill explained. "If it were a choice of giving these up and going back to the beer and 80 tablets a day, which is a damn sight easier life, I'd rather do this, even though it hurts like anything."
Carol is a different kettle of fish to Bill's ex. "Me and Carol's been together five years," he says. "She knew what she were getting into when she moved in. I love Carol to bits, but she knows that these are my life, and she accepts that."
If I were her, I'd start my own hobby. Personally, I've always fancied a seagull.


Dozens sign up to save Callum's life

Teachers at leukaemia sufferer Callum McGough's school are among dozens planning to sign up to become potential life-savers.
The nine-year-old, pictured, is searching for a bone marrow donor after being diagnosed with the disease for the second time.
The Anthony Nolan Trust (ANT), which recruits donors, is setting up two sessions in North Staffordshire later this month and staff at the St John the Evangelist Catholic Primary School, in Kidsgrove, has said they are keen to get on board.
Callum's teacher, Rachel Shaw, aged 26, is one of several at the school planning to sign up. She said: "With Callum being in my class it brings it home. I would do anything I could to help the children, and there are thousands of children and other people out there with the same disease.
"Callum has touched a lot of people in this school and the staff were very keen to be tested."
Callum was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukaemia - a cancer of blood-forming cells in the bone marrow - 18 months after being given the all clear from an unrelated form of the disease he contracted aged four.
The first donation session will take place at the school on May 23, between 3pm and 7pm.
New donors must be aged between 18 and 40, and in good health. They remain on the trust's register until the age of 60.
Acting headteacher Kate Smith said: "All the teachers know Callum because it is a small school and there is a real strength of feeling about this."
There will also be a session at Callum's GP's surgery, on Dunning Street, Tunstall, on May 31, between noon and 6pm.
His GP, Dr Ian Leese, said: "After reading the story in The Sentinel, I really wanted to do something about it. The age restriction stopped me from giving a sample, but I wanted to run a donation session.
"People from Tunstall want to help and this will allow them to, without travelling across town."
According to ANT, there are currently 7,000 patients awaiting a bone marrow transplant in the UK.
Bone marrow tissue houses infection-killing blood cells and can become damaged during chemotherapy and other treatments.
Potential donors would have to take a blood test and, if they are a match to a sufferer, they would have to spend between five hours and two days in hospital to donate marrow which is then injected into the patient's blood stream.
Laura Turner, ANT donor recruitment manager, said: "There have been lots of enquiries coming in because of Callum.
"People are wanting to join because it is hitting home that it is someone local.
"The sessions are a chance to support Callum and his family. But people are not just donating for one person, they are donating for the 7,000 that come to us every month needing a bone marrow transplant."
Callum's father Tim McGough, aged 42, of John Rhodes Way, Tunstall, said: "It is an opportunity to give somebody a life, for just a few hours of discomfort. I am sure the vast majority of people will be willing to help someone out. There are hundreds of thousands of people affected across the world and when something like this happens to you, you realise how precious life is."

Hospital lifts ban on mobile phones

Patients and visitors will soon be allowed to use their mobile phones on some wards at Staffordshire's biggest hospital, for the first time in 11 years.
The University Hospital of North Staffordshire is set to ease a blanket ban in force since 1996, when it was feared mobile phones would interfere with highly-sensitive medical equipment.
Officials at that time were so worried that someone could be killed by malfunctioning devices, that the phones still have to be switched off within 10 metres of hospital buildings.
But a government body regulating the use of healthcare products, has now issued new advice that some departments are so distant from equipment that there is no risk from mobile phones.
The University Hospital responded by setting up a working party to draw up a new policy, detailing which parts of the complex can be removed from the restrictions.
Current rules allow for people found continually flaunting the ban to be ejected from the premises, but that sanction has never had to be used.
The changes - also covering the use of laptop computers - will be backed by notices placed throughout the sprawling Hartshill site, showing the exact areas where the ban remains in force.
Both doctors and patient groups welcomed the move as "a victory for common sense" - but still urged people not to overuse their mobiles and disturb others who need peace and quiet to recover from illnesses and operations.
The new policy - likely to come in this summer - lifts the ban on places such as canteens, offices and corridors, but asks ward managers to carry out risk assessments, helped by technology experts, as part of the mobile phone review in areas under their control.
Besides looking at the chances of radio waves interfering with instruments, they will also weigh up possible annoyance to other patients.
A hospital spokesman said: "The assessments could conclude that day rooms are okay, but clearly intensive care areas are not.
"Other areas will fall somewhere between, and could include conditions such as phones being kept on silent for incoming calls, and their use being forbidden at night.
"The new policy goes before the trust's executive board on June 20, with the assessments due to start shortly afterwards.
"Eleven years on from the blanket ban a lot more is known about how waves from mobiles affect equipment.
"The new policy provides guidance to staff on what are classed as high-risk areas where mobiles remain prohibited, and how to undertake risk assessments in areas of uncertainty.
"The signs we will put up will leave no confusion in the public's mind about which area they are in."
Paediatrician Dr Warren Lenney, above right, welcomed the relaxation, and revealed he had once been asked to stop using his mobile while in a newsagent's at the hospital's entrance.
He said: "I think common sense has won out, as there are clearly areas in the hospital where phones can safely be used. But hospitals should be also offer tranquility for people to recover, and I just hope this is respected in the new policy."
Ian Syme, of patients' campaign group Healthwatch, added: "This change had to come, but people have got to be discreet about using their mobiles, and show some social responsibility instead of yelling where they happen to be."
What do you think about people using mobile phones in hospitals?

