AAM results show storming recovery

ABERDEEN Asset Management has completed the latest stage in its remarkable recovery from near collapse just four years ago, with record new business levels, a 118 per cent rise in profits, and a prediction of a strong year to come.
AAM said profits before tax, exceptional items and amortisation of intangibles rose to GBP 79 million in the year to end-September from GBP 24.8m a year before. Assets under management rose to GBP 73.2 billion from GBP 59.7bn.
Removing the one-off items, full-year pre-tax profit jumped to GBP 53.8m from GBP 31.6m, allowing AAM to increase its total dividend by 46.7 per cent to 4.4p a share.
AAM bought the UK arm of Deutsche Asset Management in July, the latest move in a dramatic recovery from the days when the firm was mired in the aftermath of the split capital investment trust debacle.
This year new business worth GBP 5bn was added. AAM also said new mandates totalling GBP 1.5bn had been won since the year-end. The City liked what is saw as the figures beat analysts' forecasts, with AAM's shares closing up 3p at 175.25p.
AAM came close to collapse during the split caps scandal during 2001-3. Chief executive Martin Gilbert and two of his senior directors appeared before the Treasury select committee to explain a scheme that lost investors millions. The firm, the biggest involved in selling the produces, was fined GBP 78m by the Financial Services Authority.
Yesterday Gilbert said he was "very pleased" with the figures, adding that good investment performance had helped to attract new clients. "We have been fortunate that, for the past three or four years, our performance numbers have been very good - and are still very good," he said.
Gilbert said the contribution of Deutsche had been crucial. "It has been an acquisition that you get once in a decade. The legacy Aberdeen business has shown phenomenal growth but the Deutsche business is starting to show some very good numbers now. It's been a really good acquisition for us."
Gilbert said the integration of Deutsche's back-office was complete and all that remained was to integrate its US operations, which would be finished by 31 March.
Analysts were upbeat about the figures. Catherine Heath of Cazanove said: "This is a good set of figures, ahead of consensus for the 2006 year. The dividend in particular has surprised and showed that the momentum that drove the business has not slackened into the new financial year."
Bridgewell was more cautious about the future. "Despite the group's confident outlook statement and the higher than anticipated 4.4p dividend, we believe it would be prudent to trim our 2007 estimates at this stage to reflect recent dollar weakness, affecting around one-third of group revenues," it said.
Gilbert ruled out any further acquisitions in the immediate future, saying the group wanted to concentrate on organic growth.


Executive 'airbrushed' criticisms from report on youth crime courts

WHEN Reece Walters saw what had happened to his research, he was shocked and appalled.
He and colleagues at Stirling University had been tasked with providing an independent report to ministers on youth court pilot schemes, but Mr Walters says he soon found the real limits of academic freedom.
His fight for what he sees as the truth set him at loggerheads with the Scottish Executive and the university, leading to his resignation.
Stirling received a GBP 330,000 commission from the Executive three years ago to conduct an evaluation into the flagship youth courts in Hamilton and Airdrie. But alarm bells quickly began sounding when the researchers were denied access to the architects of the policy to understand their thinking behind the initiative.
The team did interview sheriffs, who raised concerns the courts may be in breach of human rights legislation as they identified the accused at the outset as having previous convictions. Young offenders reportedly complained that they did not understand the process.
The researchers complained that negative points were being omitted from successive Executive progress reports, but the policy was being publicly praised.
Cathy Jamieson, the justice minister, said the research "shows that it has made a promising start". Last month, she announced that up to three new youth courts would be set up on the "success" of the pilots.
Frustrated by the Executive, Mr Walters and a co-author this year wrote an article for a criminal studies journal airing some of the issues he claims were absent from the published evaluation reports. He claims the Executive "hit the roof" when it was published and complained to his paymasters that a breach of contract had occurred.
According to Mr Walters, James Sheffield, the head of the Justice Department's analytical services division, petitioned the university directly.
The university instigated disciplinary procedures against the pair, but a four-month inquiry found there was no case against them - although the university denies claims that it caved in to pressure from the Executive. Mr Walters told The Scotsman last night: "They are preventing critical inquiry in order to support policy and that means policies are flawed. Not only is that unjust and clearly undemocratic, it's arguably corrupt."
Mr Walters also told Holyrood magazine that the Executive had created an environment where "universities are terrified about losing contracts and academics are looking over their shoulders, being careful not to say anything critical of the Executive". He said: "One of the hallmarks of a democratic society is the free and open flow of information and a state that prevents, disrupts or misrepresents that flow is acting in a way that is, I would argue, corrupt."
He told The Scotsman: "I don't think this is an isolated issue."
Fiona Hyslop, the SNP's education spokeswoman, said: "I am writing to Sir John Elvidge, head of the Civil Service in Scotland, to ask that he conduct an inquiry."
Robin McAlpine, a spokesman of Universities Scotland, said "cherry picking" research commissioned by governments and private companies was a concern. "Universities are bodies which seek the truth, not convenient truths," he said.
An Executive spokesman last night strongly denied Mr Walters' claims: "We may ask for changes to the reports to ensure they meet the required standards of quality and clarity, but we entirely reject the claim that we seek to change, water down or manipulate research.
A spokeswoman for Stirling University denied its internal inquiry was carried out as a result of pressure from Executive.
Mr Walters says the issue triggered his resignation. He is moving to the Open University.
UNDER THE INFLUENCE
CONTROVERSY has often surrounded the extent to which outside influences can restrict academic freedom.
In some cases, it can manifest itself in the cherry-picking of certain research findings which suit an organisation's agenda. In others, influence can be exerted on academics, often by private companies, to come up with research findings which suit their own commercial agenda.
Research funded by the pharmaceutical industry into the effectiveness of new drugs has come under the microscope. Last year Dr Aubrey Blumsohnan, an academic at Sheffield University, was suspended after he raised concerns about research carried out on an osteoporosis drug manufactured by Procter and Gamble.
The research was released under the name of Sheffield researchers although they had not carried out their own, independent analysis of the firm's drug-trial data. When he raised his concerns, Dr Blumsohnan was told the drug firm was "a good source of income".
Governments have also been accused. Sir John Krebs, the former chairman of the Food Standards Agency, said moves to ban junk food from schools were approved without any evidence that they would reduce obesity.

Need to know: Call for increase in annual savings limit

CITY experts are pressing for the Chancellor to increase the individual savings account limit in this week's pre-budget report.
There has been no increase in the annual GBP 7,000 limit since the tax-free accounts were introduced seven years ago.
Nationwide building society, in a submission to Gordon Brown, called for a new allowance of GBP 9,000.
Executive director Stuart Bernau wrote: "The tax breaks for aren't worth what they were and Nationwide believes it is time to redress the balance."
The Association of Chartered Certified Accountants and business adviser BDO Stoy Hayward agreed.
Fightback
Airbus launched a pre-emptive strike against Boeing over subsidies as it drew a veil over the funding of its own A350 mid-sized jet. The company complained Boeing's rival 787 model had been given government aid. But, anxious to avoid fuelling a transatlantic dispute, Airbus refused to say whether it would apply for government development loans for the jet.
Profitable PR
Freshwater UK, the PR and marketing group with bases in Edinburgh and Glasgow, has recorded a sixth consecutive year of profitable growth. In its 2005-6 report yesterday, the group, which has its headquarters in Cardiff, announced a rise of 78 per cent in turnover to GBP 4.1m. Freshwater also reported an increase of 81 per cent in gross profit to GBP 2.81m.
SNP in Spanish talks over ScottishPower
THE SNP's deputy leader and shadow enterprise minister, Nicola Sturgeon and Jim Mather, respectively, will today meet with the management of Iberdrola - including president Ignacio Sanchez Galan - the Spanish company that is seeking to buy ScottishPower.
Sturgeon said: "The SNP has called for this takeover to be blocked pending an EU investigation into Spanish tax subsidies. We remain of the view that the takeover of ScottishPower is not in Scotland's national interest.
"However, we will be seeking assurances from Iberdrola about its plans for the future of ScottishPower in the event that the takeover proceeds."
Standard Life trust value rises 26.9 per cent
A STRONG European private equity market resulted in Standard Life Investments' European Private Equity investment trust recording a 26.9 per cent rise in net asset value (NAV) over the 12 months to 30 September.
In the five years since the trust was listed, the NAV has risen by 84.5 per cent, compared to rises of 6.9 per cent in the FTSE All-Share Index and 8.2 per cent in the MSCI Europe Index.
Chairman Scott Dobbie said: "As the acceptance of private equity in Europe expands, the importance of a skilled manager becomes even more critical. The board remains confident of the manager's ability."
Hedge fears
Hedge funds have shown few signs of major fraud. But cases of wrongdoing may rise if more of these investment vehicles are sold to mass-market savers, according to the International Organisation of Securities Commissions yesterday. The industry has come under growing scrutiny from regulators worried over financial stability.
Bookies combo
Leisure and hospitality firm Alphameric has teamed up with Racecourse Media Services to provide a new betting and data channel for bookmakers. The firm also said trading at its hospitality arm had been adversely affected by customers "postponing investment decisions", although it expects a significant improvement in market conditions next year.
Home buyers 'need government help'
MORE than 80 per cent of adults believe the government needs to help young people get on the housing ladder. The survey, commissioned by the influential Council of Mortgage Lenders, revealed that more than half of respondents agreed it is now "more difficult than ever before" for young people to buy their first home.
Nearly all expressed concern over the level of debt young people now take on at an earlier age, while 78 per cent said something should be done to make it easier for first-time buyers. Those asked said 80 per cent said government should take action while 61 per cent said mortgage lenders should help.

