Roy swears by his public

You won't see Roy "Chubby" Brown's shows on mainstream TV and yet based on DVD and concert tickets sales, he is one of the most popular comedians in the country.
"I have a very passionate and loyal following," says the chunky stand-up, who comes to the Royal Concert Hall for two shows November 22 and 23.
"I've released one DVD every year for the past 18 years, and we sell in excess of 300,000 copies every year. Ten years ago, I went with my manager to Wembley Stadium for the Cup Final. He said, 'Look around this stadium. Everyone here has bought three of your DVDs this year.' That made me stop and think.
"Everywhere I go, people come up to me and say, 'I've had all you DVDs for years.' Quite often a bloke will approach me with 18 DVD sleeves for me to sign, so that can add an extra hour to my journey home. But I'll always be grateful to those fans - without their loyalty, I'd be knackered!"
Roy, who was crowned earlier this year as The King of Blue in ITV1's programme, "Roy Chubby Brown: Britain's Rudest Comedian", may deliver near-the-knuckle material but maintains his humour stems from affection rather than malice.
"I laugh with people, not at them," he says,.
"If you're laughing with each other, then you're not fighting each other.
"The British sense of humour has always been cruel and sarcastic and spiteful, but that's what gets us through the day. If I had a pound for every time someone came up to me and said 'you fat b*****d,' I'd be one of the wealthiest people in Britain."
He adds, "If everyone I make jokes about took offence, there wouldn't be a Blackpool landlady or a takeaway restaurant manager or a councillor who would ever speak to me again!"
The 63-year-old comic, who performs hundreds of gigs every year, asserts, "It's not what you say, it's how you say it. And I always say it with affection. It's like Tommy Cooper: he could say the worst swear-words and get away with it because he was such a well-loved character.
"But the character of Chubs is totally different from me. I'm quite able to distinguish between what I am and what I do. Some people think I go down the shops in the flying hat and goggles. I've lost count of the number of times someone in the street has asked me, 'Where's the helmet?' But I actually get embarrassed when people eff and blind in public."
Roy Chubby Brown: The Good, the Bad and the Fat B*st*rd DVD is out now. Tickets for the Royal Concert Hall shows are available from the venue on 0115 989 5555.


Readers, I married him, forty years ago!

Sandra Benton was quite literally the girl next door when she first met Stuart Hollingsworth. She had moved to Nottingham from Harborne, Birmingham to become children's nanny for doctors John and Betty Davies, but work still needed to be done on the new surgery house in Aspley.
So Sandra and the Davies family moved into temporary accommodation at Cinderhill for a few months - and the Hollingsworths came to live next door.
Sandra recalled: "I met Stuart's sister Sue first , and the Hollingsworths were a very hardworking family.
"Eventually I met Stuart. He travelled around on a little moped and then he bought a Ford Popular. We used to go on outings together, but I remember it was sometimes freezing cold because the car had no heater!"
Stuart was an active member of the Air Training Corps based in Beeston.
Romance had blossomed with Sandra by the time he left Nottingham in August 1966 for Germany with a large contingent of cadets from the Air Training Corps.
The Evening Post covered their departure and a photographer told Sandra: "You are the only girlfriend here. So I'd like a picture of you giving Stuart a farewell kiss.
"I was really embarrassed when I saw the picture. Some parents sent the photograph to Germany.
"When the cadets came back the film about Elsa the lion [Born Free] was on at the cinema. To kill time while waiting for Stuart, I saw the film through at least one and a half times.
"I was still waiting for ages on the platform at Nottingham Midland Station!"
Eighteen months later they were married at Harborne Baptist Church, Birmingham. As Stuart recalled: "I knew a good thing when I saw it."
Stuart's parents Cybil and Ken Hollingsworth ran a cafe in Nottingham. They also owned the Blue John Cafe in Matlock, which Stuart gradually bought; it became the newlyweds' first home. Sandra said: "Above the cafe was a big Victorian apartment, which I loved."
Stuart then ran a transport cafe on Forster Street, Radford, struggling through power-cuts and the three-day week to make it a success before taking over a Wimpey Bar in Grantham.
He then bought the Maid Marian Cafe near the subway on Nottingham's Maid Marian Way.
Sandra said: "Around the same time he acquired the Hollies Cafe in Upper Parliament Street when it was just one unit. It had previously been called the Golden Egg. Radio Trent DJ John Peters kindly came in to do the official opening. For a time Stuart was working a 17-hour day, keeping both places going.
"He later sold the Maid Marian Cafe and extended the Hollies into a 165-seater cafe. We have a lovely, long-serving team of staff and lots of loyal customers.
"Some elderly people make a special journey into town just to visit the Hollies."
Sandra worked in the cafe when needed, but devoted most of her time to bringing up their three children. The couple now have five grandchildren - and somehow Sandra also found time to be a caring childminder at their home in West Bridgford.
"Children keep you young," says Sandra, who was nominated in 2005 for the Evening Post Person of the Week award, sponsored by Pontins.
An active member of West Bridgford Baptist Church, she has followed the progress of the children she has cared for during the past 25 years.
"My first full-time child, Joe Dempsey, is now a well-known actor and currently appearing in the TV drama Skins.
"His sister Lauren, who is now 18, was born with cerebral palsy. For our 30th wedding anniversary we had a party at the Western Club in Derby Road, Nottingham. Friends helped us raise about £1,300 for specialised equipment for Lauren. It was a great evening."
When Sandra celebrated her 60th birthday earlier this year, Stuart brought all the family from Birmingham, Hereford and Nottingham together for a surprise party.
"I was over the moon. It was marvellous of him to do this for me, because I know the kind of hours he works and he still found time to put something like that together - after starting with hardly any addresses."
Now the couple are looking forward to celebrating their 40th wedding anniversary tomorrow with family, friends and neighbours.
Sandra said: "Throughout our married life Stuart has always been there for me.
"He's wonderful."


Police step up patrols

Police are increasing their patrols in Sneinton after a spate of burglaries.
Thieves have targeted around 40 homes in Sneinton Hermitage and the old Bendigo pub during the last five weeks.
They have struck in Sneinton Dale, St Stephen's Road, Lees Hill Street and Hermitage Square.
While more police officers, Police Community Support Officers and Community Protection Officers are on the streets, the public are also being urged to take steps to ensure their property remains secure.
Almost a third of burglaries take place through unlocked doors and open windows.
Sergeant Richard Hunter, based at Sneinton police station, said: "While there has been a number of walk in burglaries, thieves are also getting into homes by breaking doors and windows. We have a number of free window alarms for residents of Sneinton, and we would remind people to take advantage of other free crime prevention methods."
SmartWater, a property-marking solution which can be applied to items of value, including laptops, televisions or games consoles, is available free of charge from Nottingham City Council's Burglary Reduction Team on 0115 915 3701.
People are also advised to list their items on the Immobilise website, www.immobilise.com, a free property register which increases the chance of stolen property being returned and is a tool for police to prosecute thieves.
For a window alarm, or to give information about burglaries in Sneinton, contact Sgt Hunter on 0115 9670 999 ext 6861. Crimes or suspicious activity can be reported anonymously to Crimestoppers: 0800 555 111.


Great lengths for our maddi

When Hannah Bignall swims to raise money for children's brain tumour research tomorrow, she will be doing it for her cousin Maddi.
Hannah, ten, from Keyworth, lost her cousin to a brain tumour and said goodbye at her funeral on Tuesday.
The pair were the same age, grew up together and were as close as sisters.
After Maddi's tragic death, Hannah and her mum saw a poster about the Million Metre Swim at a swimming gala at the University of Nottingham.
The event will raise money for Nottingham's Children's Brain Tumour Research Centre and will be held at four baths tomorrow.
The aim is to raise £100,000 for the charity to fund vital research and treatment of a disease which accounts for 25% of all childhood cancers.
The event will see around 625 swimmers notch up a total of one million metres, with each participant swimming one mile.
Hannah's mum, Nicola, said: "We saw the poster about the sponsored swim and it was almost like it was fate. I said to Hannah, 'have a read of this, do you think you can do it for Maddi?'.
"Hannah and Maddi were so close and that's why Hannah wanted to do something in Maddi's memory."
Hannah, who competes for Nottingham Leander Swimming Club, said: "I've never swam this far before but I am looking forward to it because I can do it at my own pace.
"I will swim 64 lengths which I do in my training sessions, I usually stop in between lengths at training but I think I can do it."
The Bignall family will be cheering Hannah on, at Beechdale Swimming Centre, wearing Notts County shirts with Maddi's name on the back.
Maddi Bignall, from Aspley, was a big Notts County fan and her wake was held at Meadow Lane.
More than £1,200 has so far been pledged for Hannah's swim. Nicola said: "The first target we set was £250 but it went past that quite quickly. We had sponsor forms at Maddi's funeral and £500 was collected there.
"It's amazing how generous people can be."
Maddi's parents, Matthew and Jane, are planning to set up a memorial trust for things close to Maddi's heart.
To support the cause, Hannah's donations page can be found at www.justgiving.com/hannahbignall.


PO closure 'may hit OAPs' health'

A Warden claims closing a post office could endanger the health of elderly residents in her care.
Woodland Grove post office, in Mansfield Road, Woodthorpe, is on a list of 33 in Notts earmarked for closure.
It is the nearest counter for residents at Brookdale Court, The Cedars and Valley Court.
If it closes, they will have to use Sherwood post office, which residents claim is already too busy.
Pat Hall, warden of Brookdale Court, said: "I've already driven past and seen people queuing outside.
" I'm concerned about my residents, who range from 70 to 102, standing outside in the cold, bringing on health problems."

