
I WANT MY REVENGE ON CANNIBAL KILLER

AN alcoholic who strangled his friend told police he wanted to go to prison so he could exact revenge on a cannibal killer. 
Alan Taylor had never got over his girlfriend being beheaded and partially eaten by Darlington psychopath David Harker, who was jailed for life in 1999.
Teesside Crown Court heard how Taylor throttled his friend after an early-morning drinking session.
After drinking some more, he called police to confess to the killing.


When he was arrested he told officers: "I want Harker next. It's unfinished business." 
He asked to be sent to Wakefield Prison, where he believed Harker was a prisoner.
Details of both killings in Darlington were outlined yesterday by Toby Hedworth, prosecuting, on the first day of Taylor's trial.
The 41-year-old denies murdering John Morrison on October 21, but has admitted manslaughter on the grounds of diminished responsibility.
A jury has been told that Taylor will claim his thinking was impaired at the time of the killing by his alcoholism and the post-traumatic stress disorder he is said to have suffered since his girlfriend's murder.
Julie Paterson was murdered in 1998 by Harker, then aged 24, who was given an indeterminate life sentence the following year.
Taylor said his life was never the same after seeing his partner's dismembered torso.
Her body was found in Polam Lane - without its head and limbs.
Harker, who admitted eating part of her leg with pasta, has never revealed where the remains are hidden.
Taylor once told The Northern Echo he used to dig holes around the town in the search for the missing head.
The court heard yesterday that Taylor and Mr Morrison, 45, had been "sometime friends" because of their heavy drinking, but in the weeks before he died, the victim had been trying to avoid Taylor.
Mr Hedworth said Mr Morrison began drinking following the death of his mother, Lily, in 1994, after he had nursed her through a terminal illness.
Taylor was living at a Salvation Army hostel in Tom Raine Court, Darlington.
Officials and residents at the hostel described him as somebody who was "fine" when sober but "mouthy and agitated" when drunk.
On October 21, he is said to have got up at about 5am and arranged for a taxi to collect him from the hostel and take him to an off-licence, before going to Mr Morrison's home.
Taylor arrived at the flat at about 5.45am with four cans of strong lager and a two-and-a-halflitre bottle of cider, and the two friends began drinking, said Mr Hedworth.
Neighbours did not report hearing any argument, but several were woken by the men talking, and told police that they thought the men sounded drunk.
After his arrest, Taylor claimed he had confronted Mr Morrison about allegations he had slept with his girlfriend while Taylor was serving a prison sentence three years earlier.
Taylor claimed his friend confessed, but Mr Hedworth told the jury that it was probably untrue that the relationship between Mr Morrison and the woman was anything more than friendship.
The jury heard that Taylor called police at 11.09am and told the operator: "I'm very sorry to say, but I've just killed someone.
He went with my wife when I was in jail."
As the operator traced the call, he repeated: "He went with my wife, my good lady, when I was in jail and it has come to pay-back time. You know what I mean? I strangled him. He is dead."
Taylor told police he had throttled Mr Morrison and then took the belt from his trousers and tightened it around his neck before he strangled him some more.
People in the public gallery - believed to be Mr Morrison's family - left the court in tears as Mr Hedworth gave details of the victim's final moments.
He revealed that Mr Morrison's body was found on his sofa, hidden with a quilt, and with a photograph of his late mother placed on his chest by his killer.
Taylor told officers he had put the duvet over his friend and said a prayer for him before he fled the flat, bought more lager and went to a phone box to call the police.
When officers arrived and took him to Darlington police station, Taylor is said to have told them that Mr Morrison asked him to kill him, and said: "There's more to come."
Mr Hedworth said Taylor told detectives: "I hope to go to Wakefield. I want Harker next - bastard Harker. I want him as well - unfinished business."
When he was examined by a police surgeon, Taylor said he threatened to kill Mr Morrison and that his victim put up no struggle after he replied: "Go on then."
Later, he told police he did not realise how little effort it took to strangle his friend, and said it only took a few seconds before he died after he put the belt around his neck.
Mr Hedworth said a pathologist would give evidence to the jury to prove that it would take firm and continuous pressure for up to 30 seconds for death to take place.
He said the Crown had to prove that Taylor meant to kill or cause grievous bodily harm to Mr Morrison at the time, and that he was not suffering from an abnormality of the mind.
He said: "Mr Taylor must have intended at least to do serious harm, and, in fact, to kill.
"Why else deliberately apply the ligature in that way?
"Even if the deceased offered no resistance and may have appeared to have been submitting to whatever the defendant was doing, that is - and can be - no excuse."
The trial, which is expected to last five days, continues.


US MAY INTERVENE ON SHIPS

THE US Government may end the saga of the "Ghost Ships" by recalling them. 
Reclamation company Able UK has been battling for more than three years to carry out an (GBP) 11m deal to scrap 13 former US Navy ships at its Teesside site.


The US Maritime Administration has suspended its shipscrapping programme and will review the Able UK contract. 
Spokesman Sean Connaughton said: "This is one of those situations where we have got to make some decisions as to whether the contract can be performed. If it cannot be performed as we originally envisioned, what do we do next?"
An Able spokesman said: "We remain committed to completing the work for our client and we would like to begin work on recycling the vessels at the earliest opportunity."


SPY SUSPECT EXPECTED BACK HOME

A HUMAN rights activist from the region who was arrested by Angolan authorities on suspicion of spying was due to arrive back in the UK last night after authorities allowed her to leave. 
Sarah Wykes, from York, who was arrested last month and freed on bail after four days, was expected in London after she left Angola late on Sunday.


Angolan authorities last week granted Ms Wykes permission to leave on condition she returns to Angola if police decide to bring formal charges against her. 
Officials said that under Angolan law, police had six months to complete their investigation.
Espionage carries a maximum jail sentence of eight years.
Ms Wykes was working for Global Witness, a private group that campaigns for human rights and focuses on how the exploitation of natural resources in poor countries can fuel corruption and repression, when she was arrested.
Global Witness said the charges were unfounded.

SUPERMARKETS PRESCRIBED AS REMEDY FOR GP SHORTAGE

MAJOR stores such as Boots and Tesco were urged yesterday to end the GP crisis in parts of the region by opening up surgeries within their shops. 
Retailers in two towns - Easington and Hartlepool - will be invited to open their doors to family doctors, under the radical scheme unveiled by Health Secretary Patricia Hewitt.
The initiative will be extended to other parts of the North-East, possibly South Tyneside, Sunderland and Middlesbrough, later this year.


All the areas have long been recognised as "under-doctored", where attempts to woo more GPs by offering them "golden hellos" of (GBP) 10,000 have had little effect. 
Now private companies, as well as entrepreneurial GPs, will be asked to team up with large retailers, which would provide space for surgeries in convenient locations.
Private firms would not be covered by the controversial GPs' contract - which allowed them to opt out of providing 24-hour cover - and so could offer evening and Saturday morning appointments.
It is expected the Easington and Hartlepool surgeries will be opened later this year, after the areas were picked to pilot fiveyear contracts to be advertised later this month.
Ms Hewitt said: "GPs are largely providing a good service, but there are still areas where NHS patients cannot rely on traditional practices.
"Thousands of NHS patients who would have otherwise found it difficult seeing a GP will benefit from new deals between the NHS and new providers.
"NHS patients will also see extended GP opening hours, including evening and Saturday morning surgeries, thanks to the new contracts."
The GP crisis gripping Easington was revealed last year - just 46.5 family doctors per 100,000 patients, compared to more than 70 in prosperous parts of the South.
Also struggling were South Tyneside (47.4), Hartlepool (47.5), Sunderland (48.8), Derwentside (49.9), Middlesbrough (50.1), Gateshead (50.6), Newcastle (51.4) and Sedgefield (52.2).
Hartlepool will gain three extra general practices, including one with urgent care services, and County Durham a single extra GP.
In future, services including smoking cessation, minor surgery, contraception implants, drug misuse, sexual health and physiotherapy could be provided.
However, both County Durham and Hartlepool primary care trusts (PCT) said it was too soon to say whether the new surgeries would be hosted by major stores.
Pat Keane, director of business development at County Durham, said: "We are carrying out consultation with patients and local stakeholders on the proposal."
A spokeswoman for Hartlepool PCT said: "This programme will help to deliver more accessible, flexible primary medical care services, which are more responsive to patient needs."
However, the British Medical Association (BMA) has criticised supermarkets as inappropriate places to have health services, because they also sell alcohol, tobacco and junk food.
Hamish Meldrum, of the BMA's GPs committee, said: "Existing NHS GPs must have equal right to bid for contracts. We do not want this becoming a backdoor privatisation of GP services."


BATTERY THIEVES PUT LIVES OF CARE HOME PENSIONERS AT RISK

THIEVES put the safety of dozens of elderly and vulnerable people at risk for the sake of a few hundred pounds, say police. 
Specialised batteries used to operate a warden-controlled Careline service were stolen by raiders in Chester-le-Street.


The 12-volt batteries provided back-up for the system, which gives vulnerable people a 24-hour link to the outside world. 
Seven of the rechargeable leadacid batteries were found to be missing from locations across the town on Friday morning.
The batteries were inside metal cabinets located at the roadside, and connected properties to the council-run system.
In the event of a power cut, the batteries were designed to kick in and keep the lifeline system running for up to three hours.
A spokesman for Durham Police said: "If the batteries are missing, then potentially up to 30 vulnerable older people could be left without access to the Careline service if there is a problem with the power supply."
No one from Careline could be contacted for comment yesterday, but police said that each battery costs around (GBP) 50 to replace.
Anyone with any information on the theft is asked to ring police on 0845-60-60-365, Crimestoppers on 0800-555111 or the Careline office on 0191-388-7588.

