Pupils in race abuse probe

FOUR pupils have been suspended from a Birmingham school following allegations of racial abuse between two football teams during an educational away day.
The incident, which is now being investigated by the city schools involved, took place at Park View secondary in Naseby Road, Washwood Heath, on Thursday.
Pupils from Holy Trinity Catholic secondary, in Oakley Road, Small Heath, were visiting Park View School for an educational day as part of their GCSE Physical Education course work.
But the visit apparently turned sour when football teams representing the two schools took part in a friendly match on Park View playing fields.
The game had to be abandoned after racial taunts, apparently coming from the predominantly Asian pupils who make up Park View School, were directed at a number of boys of African Caribbean origin playing for Holy Trinity. Teaching staff from Holy Trinity, who were accompanying their 15-year-old pupils to Park View School, immediately returned them early to their own school.
Police were notified of the alleged racial incident by senior staff from Park View, but officers did not attend in person.
The head teacher of Park View, Lindsey Clark, declined to comment. But a spokesman for Birmingham City Council said: "Park View School does not tolerate any form of racist behaviour. As a result of an incident on Thursday, four pupils at Park View School have been given fixed-term exclusions whilst the matter is being fully investigated by the school."
The mother of a Holy Trinity pupil, who asked not to be named, said: "Our boys were obviously very distressed by the abuse, and my son was absolutely distraught.
"They were supposed to be there all day but it was cut short after boys from Park View were chanting racist abuse from start to finish."
She said the pupils from Holy Trinity, who were mostly mixed race African Caribbean, were returned to their own school and parents notified in order to collect them early.
Mark Crawford, acting head teacher of Holy Trinity Catholic School, said: "An incident happened which we are currently investigating. Our pupils did come back early after finishing one of the exercises they had gone there to do."


Doc's pounds 35,000 benefits con

BIRMINGHAM doctor who defrauded the NHS and taxpayers out of nearly pounds 35,000 has been given a suspended sentence.
Bahadurazi Najak falsely claimed that his wife was working with him as a practice manager at Blakesley Road Surgery in Yardley for nearly seven years.
Birmingham Crown Court heard that, during the course of the deception, his wife visited the surgery just six times a year and when she did drop by "she caused havoc", according to genuine practice staff.
Meanwhile Dr Najak, 61, pocketed his wife's National Insurance contributions, wages and pension payments, all paid for by the Eastern Birmingham Primary Care Trust and totalling pounds 34,864.
Dr Najak, of Beech Road, Hollywood, was given a nine-month prison sentence suspended for 12 months and ordered to pay back pounds 9,333 in legal costs by January 31, 2008.
The court heard how Dr Najak told the PCT that his wife was working as a manager from April 1997 to March 2004.
Tim Hannam, prosecuting, said: "His wife turned up half a dozen times a year and her visits were fleeting.
"When she did, she caused havoc because she did not have the faintest idea what was going on.
"When colleagues asked about his wife's absence he said that she was working from home."
Mr Hannam said that when a real practice manager joined the surgery in 2004, it became obvious that his wife had never worked there and an investigation was launched by the NHS Counter Fraud Service and West Midlands Police.
Dr Najak, who pleaded guilty to one count of obtaining a money transfer by deception, paid back all the money he had siphoned from the PCT by drawing a cheque on his wife's account, soon after he was caught out.
The court heard that, during the deception, Dr Najak was suffering from a number of mental health problems and that he is currently living on a disability allowance of pounds 71 a week and is an outpatient at the Priory Hospital.
Passing sentence, Recorder John Edwards said: "I know that you are ashamed of what you did and these offences in the course of your professional career are a complete aberration."
Two other counts of theft were ordered to lie on file. 
Julia Dillon, of the NHS Counter Fraud Service in the West Midlands, said after the case: "Dr Najak abused a position of trust within the NHS and the local community to line his pockets with taxpayers' money. He betrayed the NHS, his profession, his staff and most of all, his patients. 
"Our findings will be referred to the GMC for disciplinary action. We hope this sends a strong deterrent message to potential fraudsters that if you defraud the NHS, you face a criminal record."


I'm disgusted with the things I've said
BIG BROTHER: Evicted Jade says sorry after seeing 'racist' footage

JADE Goody - who has been at the centre of the Celebrity Big Brother race row - said last night she was "disgusted" with herself after watching footage of her behaviour.
Following her eviction from the house, Goody told Davina McCall that watching the video clips of her attacks on Bollywood actress Shilpa Shetty had made uncomfortable viewing.
"It's nasty," she said. "In all honesty I am disgusted with myself witnessing what I have seen.
"I do not approve of any of my actions and I do not approve of the words that came out of my mouth."
Goody, aged 25, added: "I'm not racist but, looking at that film, I can see why it has had the impact it's had.
"I look like one of those people I don't like."
Instead of emerging from the house to a crowd - which is usual for an eviction show - Goody was taken straight to a studio for an interview with host McCall.
She looked visibly shocked when McCall showed her clips from TV news headlines about the row - revealing to Goody that her comments and behaviour in the house had become the subject of questions in the House of Commons and of public debate in India.
She was silent for a few seconds before she said: "That's intense."
Goody, who received 82 per cent of the total votes cast, added: "I apologise to anyone I offended."
Goody, who rose to fame in the non-celebrity version of Channel 4's Big Brother in 2002, already had an inkling there had been a furore around her alleged racist comments before leaving the house.
She made up with Shetty before the eviction, with Shetty saying she did not believe Goody was racist.
Viewers have accused Goody, as well as former S Club 7 singer Jo O'Meara, model Danielle Lloyd and Goody's boyfriend Jack Tweed of bullying Shetty.
Comments have included Goody calling Shetty "Shilpa Poppadom" in a comment to another housemate.
When asked about claims of bullying, Goody told McCall: "I can see why it looks like bullying."
She insisted on the show that she "didn't say Shilpa Poppadom in a racial way" and that she does not judge people "by the colour of their skin".
The furore has seen politicians including Tony Blair, Gordon Brown and David Cameron drawn into the row, while 35 MPs have signed a motion condemning the programme, although Channel 4 has stood by it.
Bookies were left counting the cost of Goody's eviction after more money was placed on her being booted out in the last 24 hours than on any contestant before.
Punters were so sure that she would be the next person to leave the house that one person in Newcastle bet pounds 7,300 that she would go and won just pounds 212.
Channel 4 announced that it would be donating profits from last night's eviction vote to charity.


BA to change uniform rules; 
CRUCIFIX ROW: Airline's staff can now wear 'symbol of faith'

BRITISH Airways is changing its uniform policy to allow staff to wear a "symbol of faith" openly, it announced last night.
The airline said it had taken to decision following a comprehensive review of its uniform policy and in consultation with a wide range of religious groups.
The decision comes in the wake of the row over a check-in worker who was told to stop wearing a cross.
Nadia Eweida, 55, had refused to go to work at Heathrow Airport after being told she could not wear a necklace bearing a small cross over her uniform.
The airline said it had consulted staff and customers on the issue as well as seeking the views of representatives from the Church of England, the Catholic Church and the Muslim Council of Britain.
The review had concluded that the uniform policy should be amended to allow a lapel pin symbol of faith with some flexibility for members of staff to wear a symbol of faith on a chain. 
The airline has come under increasing pressure over recent months to change its uniform policy after Miss Eweida lost her appeal against BA's decision banning her from wearing a cross.
The airline's chief executive, Willie Walsh, said that BA had "unintentionally" found itself at "the centre of one of the hottest social issues in current public debate" as a result of its decision.
He said: "Most of those consulted felt that a lapel pin was an acceptable and reasonable option however some respondents believed that limiting the change to a pin would not satisfy all Christians. Comparisons were made between the wearing of a cross around the neck and the wearing of hijabs, turbans and Sikh bracelets.
"For this reason, we have decided to allow some flexibility for individuals to wear a symbol of faith on a chain."
Miss Eweida said at her home in Twickenham, south west London, that she welcomed the announcement.

Buses drive me round the bend!;

RETIRED factory worker Ted Whan's life has been made hell by queues of bendy buses blocking his drive.
The 75-year-old of Stornoway Road, Castle Vale, says he has suffered abuse and intimidation from drivers, had his car hit twice and often cannot get in or out of his garage.
He had enjoyed free access to his garage, off Turnhouse Avenue, for 35 years, but since last year has more often than not had to wait for a bus to move before he can come and go.
The pensioner, who used to work for Hardy Spicer, was assured that buses would not block his drive or "inconvenience him in any way" when the road was chosen as a terminus. He claimed he had since been abused by and had rows with No 67 bus drivers when he asked them to move along.
He said: "Some are happy to move, but others have used the most foul language and I've had a bottle of urine left on my Ford Focus, and a bottle thrown over the garden fence. They have also deliberately blocked my car in and even hit it twice. Once the bus company had to lend me a car while mine was being repaired."
He also claimed he and wife Iris cannot enjoy their garden because of the noise and fumes from the buses ticking over and passengers on double deckers peering over the wall.
He claimed to have made more than 300 complaints in writing and phone calls to Travel West Midlands and its Perry Barr depot since the arrival of the lay-by.
And Mr Whan said drivers added insult to injury by sarcastically sending him a Christmas card signed "all the '67' drivers".
"I lived here 35 years without interference, but since this happened our lives have been hell, we have suffered so much stress," he added.
The lay-by was selected as it is the only stretch of road near the recently redeveloped Reed Square area with enough room for an extra-long bendy bus to rest between journeys.
Travel West Midlands spokesman Phil Bateman said: "Our drivers are under instruction to not block Mr Whan's drive and to switch engines off.
"I further understand that the local authority is well aware of the problem and has been actively involved in trying to solve it.
"The current situation is that because of the size of the vehicle it is the only place that can allow the bus to stand."

