Pair accused in 21/7 bomb plot joke as they buy chemicals

GRINNING at each other two days before the July 7 attacks, alleged members of the July 21 gang pick up a huge supply of hydrogen peroxide for their homemade bombs.
The men were seen in CCTV pictures chatting with staff before waiting, one with arms folded, the other with hands in his pockets, for their delivery to be sorted out.
Muktar Ibrahim and Manfo Asiedu left the beauty products shop in Finsbury Park, North London, with about 46 gallons of hydrogen peroxide, an order so large that the suppliers had to make another batch to fill it.
The hydrogen peroxide was allegedly reduced down in a flat in Southgate, North London, and mixed with chapati flour to make the explosive mixture.
Ibrahim, Asiedu and four others are accused of plotting to blow up passengers on London transport in a series of co-ordinated suicide attacks two weeks after July 7.
The prosecution say the attack was not a hastily arranged copycat but one planned long before July 7. They point out that, as with July 7, the bombers planned to attack tube lines with a later attack on a bus.
Pak Cosmetics in Finsbury Park, North London, had only had one delivery of hydrogen peroxide in four years before the huge order was placed.
Adel Yahya, the alleged sixth bomber in the plot who left the country six weeks before July 21, was the first to inquire about the chemical.
"He asked what was the highest percentage we could get him,'' Muhammed Atif, a salesman at Pak, said. "I said I would contact our suppliers.''
Mr Atif said he asked later what the hydrogen peroxide was for. "He said they were a firm of carpenters using it to wash wood.''
When Yahya returned and was told the maximum was 18 per cent, he asked if he could order 100 litres, which is about 22 gallons.
"I wasn't sure we could get that much quantity and I said I would call him,'' Mr Atif said. About two weeks later Ibrahim and Asiedu appeared at the shop saying the other man was working, and were told the order could go through.
The men negotiated a 10 per cent discount but said they would have to return with the cash for the deposit.
When they returned a few days later, on June 21, they laid down a pounds 100 deposit but demanded a bigger discount and in the end ordered 200 litres, around 44 gallons.
Simon McPartland, general manager of Professional Beauty Systems in Renfrewshire in Scotland, which supplied the shop, said: "It was a very unusual order. A batch had to be made on June 24 2005 in order to fulfil it.''
In CCTV footage from the shop, watched by a jury at Woolwich Crown Court yesterday, Ibrahim was seen in a white shirt with Asiedu in a blue shirt and grey top collecting 13 boxes, each containing four 4-litre bottles. They laid another pounds 170 in cash on the counter and used trolleys to wheel the boxes to Ibrahim's silver Austin Montego outside, where the boxes filled the boot and the back seat.
Asiedu and a friend had earlier bought the entire stock of 16 litres, or 3.5 gallons, at the maximum 18 per cent strength from the Hairways shop in Tottenham, North London, and asked if he could order more.
But the manager, Giovanna Lanza, said she was concerned what they wanted it for.
"They said it was for stripping wallpaper from walls. I said surely peroxide burns the skin and he said we wear protective clothing.
"Being in the trade I knew that if you get it on your fingers they go white.''
They had also bought 218 litres, or 48 gallons, between May 5 and June 30, from Sally Hair and Beauty Supplies in Finchley, North London, nearly half the amount supplied to the entire country in that time. Most of the empty bottles were recovered at Yassin Omar's flat in New Southgate when police raided it four days after the attacks.
Omar, 26, Ibrahim, 28, Asiedu, 33, Yahya, 24, Ramzi Mohammed, 25, and Hussain Osman, 28, all from London, deny conspiracy to murder and cause explosions.
The trial continues.


City analyst suing call girl he fell in love with

A CITY analyst who fell in love with a call girl after his marriage fell apart is suing her for pounds 600,000.
Michael Stewart, 40, met Michelle Howe through an agency and after two meetings he was in love. They travelled to New York and Amsterdam and after he proposed they bought a house together.
Almost nine years later, the computer expert is suing Miss Howe, who had an affair and is now living with another man, through the High Court for debts run up in his name.
Miss Howe, 43, claims she was spending Mr Stewart's money because he was paying her to be his escort.
She claims in High Court papers: "[Mr Stewart] required exclusivity of [Miss Howe] and she in turn willingly acquiesced to be his exclusive companion and courtesan. [Miss Howe] continued to supply regular sexual services in return for money and gifts.''
Mr Stewart, from north London, said yesterday: "You can't describe an eight-year relationship as a business relationship. We were engaged and I was in love.''
Mr Stewart, who earned pounds 6,000 a month, met Miss Howe in April 1998. Miss Howe, who also worked as a pounds 20,000-a-year hospital secretary in Croydon, agreed to marry him and said she would give up escort work, for which she earned pounds 250 an hour.
In 1999 they bought a home in Acton, west London. The mortgage was in her name but he claims to have paid the deposit and legal fees. In May 2002 they sold the house at a pounds 60,000 profit and bought a five-bedroom semi-detached house in Ealing, west London. Again, that home was in Miss Howe's name.
Mr Stewart also claims to have supported her to the tune of pounds 146,778 while she ran up pounds 40,000 debts on his credit cards and borrowed pounds 35,000 in his name.
He is asking the court to order that the house be sold, the proceeds split and for Miss Howe to repay what he claims she owes, plus pounds 250,000 in compensation.

Credit card borrowing dips at last but we are finding other ways to get money

BRITAIN is finally falling out of love with the credit card, figures showed yesterday.
Credit card lending fell last year for the first time since records began, as customers looked for cheaper ways to fund their spending.
Figures from the British Bankers' Association (BBA), showed that the amount lent on credit cards fell by pounds 1.8 billion last year, the first fall since the group began compiling data in 1993. David Dooks, director of statistics at the BBA, said that customers were squeezed by interest rate rises, increases in energy bills and rises in transport costs.
"People are looking more closely at their borrowing decisions,'' he said. He added that there had been a decrease in the number of popular nought per cent credit deals offered by credit card providers, which has put some borrowers off making further credit card purchases or applying for new cards.
The amount of money British people put on their credit cards has been soaring since they were introduced 40 years ago.
When Barclays sent the first credit card to just 40 loyal customers, many were baffled by the concept. Now there are more than 1,300 cards to choose from and the average amount spent by a consumer on their cards is pounds 4,600.
The fact that credit cards are so easy to obtain has led to them being blamed for a pounds 1.2 trillion debt mountain and rising levels of insolvency and bankruptcy.
However, the BBA figures also showed that people were borrowing more through overdrafts, unsecured loans and mortgages.
Net mortgage lending rose by pounds 66.8 billion last year, 20 per cent more than the rise in 2005, while loans and overdraft borrowing also increased by pounds 4.2 billion. Sue Edwards, senior policy officer at Citizens Advice, said problems with housing debt, whether mortgage repayments or rent arrears, were one of the fastest growing problem areas for the charity, up 20 per cent last year.

Exeter: the capital city of blandness can't break the chain

TWO years ago the cathedral city of Exeter was branded Britain's blandest clone town.
A study into the decline of small independent shops by the New Economics Foundation found that the main shopping street had the greatest proportion of chain stores of any surveyed.
Today, little has changed. Shoppers strolling along the Devon city's pedestrianised high street, with its black and gold cast iron street furniture and big name stores, could be walking in any town or city in Britain.
All the usual suspects are there. Waterstones nestles alongside Burger King, HMV sits next to McDonald's and Jones the Bookmaker next to Phones4U.
The clone town report found that the main shopping street had just one independent shop out of 50 - a small family tobacconist squeezed between Next and New Look.
The picture was very different 30 years ago before the national and multinational chains moved in.
Some of the names on the shop fronts would be familiar to modern shoppers, but for every H Samuel, Exeter High Street had a Waltons - a fondly remembered old-fashioned clothes store. Locals point out that independent stores are thriving in the cobbled side streets where the rents are less crippling.
At the time, the city centre's manager John Harvey said the so-called clone shops were not necessarily a bad thing.
"Today's independents are tomorrow's chain stores and the shops that thrive are the ones that people spend their money in,'' he said.

Rainbow coalition out to save the high street

A BILL that would give town halls powers to save small shops and reverse the decline of Britain's "ghost towns'' was yesterday backed by MPs.
The private member's Bill, from the Conservative MP Nick Hurd, is designed to restore the fortunes of ailing high streets and prevent the closure of more post offices, greengrocers, butchers and banks.
It comes amid growing concern that supermarkets, out-of-town retail parks and internet shopping are draining the lifeblood of villages, towns and cities.
The Sustainable Communities Bill would give local authorities powers to challenge Government spending plans and redirect cash towards restoring local shops and services. It would also ensure that local people had powers to block the closure of vital amenities.
However, ministers say the proposals are needlessly bureaucratic. Without Government support, the Bill is unlikely to succeed.
Over the past decade Britain has lost a fifth of its post offices, a quarter of its independent greengrocers, a quarter of its banks and more than 30,000 independent retailers.
The Government has no coherent strategy to tackle the problem, Mr Hurd said during the unopposed second reading of his Bill yesterday. He claimed the proposals had cross-party backing and the support of dozens of community groups. "What drives this rainbow coalition?'' he asked. "It's a common concern about what appears to be remorseless community decline in Britain and what that means for the quality of life. It's a decline driven by the loss of key local services, often the hubs of the community.'' Under the proposals, local authorities would have the right to demand a breakdown of Government spending on their services - and, after consulting with local communities - go back with alternative plans.
That could give councils powers to levy domestic rates on out-of-town supermarket car parks, or offer discounted rates to independent stores that sold local produce, the Bill's supporters say. Town halls could do more to promote local businesses and block the closure of post offices and GP surgeries.
Inspiration for the Sustainable Communities Bill came from a report into the decline of independent high street stores two years ago by the New Economics Foundation.
The survey found that 41 per cent of urban centres were "clone towns'' where independent stores were in short supply, and where major chains such as Starbucks, McDonald's and Tesco dominated. Exeter topped the poll of Britain's clone towns with just one independent store out of 50.
The Bill has the support of 80 campaign groups including Age Concern, the Campaign for Real Ale, Help the Aged, the National Federation of Sub-Postmasters, the National Federation of Women's Institutes and Postwatch.

