Full steam ahead for Balmoral

Historic pleasure cruise ship the Balmoral returns to Bristol next week after a journey around Europe.
She will start a seven-week sailing programme of day trips from both Bristol and Clevedon Pier.
The daily journeys, from the Cumberland Basin, under Plimsoll Bridge and from Clevedon Pier, include trips to the island of Lundy and cruises around the Holm Islands.
The ship has recently had a £1 million revamp, and is now returning to home waters for the bicentenary of the birth of Isambard Kingdom Brunel.
From Friday, passengers will be able to join in the celebrations and take a trip which tours Brunel's acclaimed works - sailing up the River Avon and under the Suspension Bridge and disembarking for an open-top bus tour of Bristol.
Organisers promise the trips will be a great day out for all. Kathleen O'Neill, general manager of Waverley Excursions, the company that operates the Balmoral, said: "Whether you want to take the kids on a day out or spend a relaxing afternoon cruising, there is something for you."
The Balmoral is expected to carry more than 55,000 people on day cruises over the next seven weeks, more than half her annual passenger capacity of 90,000.
She is consort to the paddle steamer Waverley, which will also be taking day trippers out from Clevedon Pier and Weston's Knightstone Harbour over the coming weeks.
The Balmoral will be also retracing its steps on historic routes, including a trip to Minehead to join Brunel's Great Western Steam Railway for a journey through the West Somerset countryside. The Balmoral was built in Southampton in 1949 and has worked as a car ferry, a floating disco and now a passenger ferry.
She is Britain's most widely travelled excursions ship.
Facilities on board the ship include a restaurant, two bars, heated lounges and a souvenir shop.
Her visit comes after a trip to Calais to celebrate the port's 150th anniversary and taking part in the Volvo Ocean Race in Rotterdam.
The trips will be taking place until September.
A range of routes are to be travelled and prices vary depending on the route. Children under five travel free and those up to the age of 17 pay half fare.
For tickets and more information, contact your local Tourist Information Centre, visit www.waverley excursions.co.uk or phone 0845 130 4647.


Rubbish or a resource?

Major consultation is under way to see how best to deal with waste across the region over the next 25 years.
The four main local authorities in the area are asking for the public's help in finding a way to deal with residual waste - the rubbish that is left over when all possible recycling and composting measures have been taken.
Bristol, South Gloucestershire, Bath &amp; North East Somerset and North Somerset Councils say they have had a "very encouraging" response from the public since they launched the consultation exercise, Rubbish or Resource? two weeks ago.
They hope to get as many views on the subject as possible through roadshows and public information evenings in advance of drawing up a strategy for the problem.
The roadshow has already toured shopping centres in Bristol, Bath, Keynsham, Midsomer Norton and Nailsea.
South Gloucestershire is next on the list with events taking place in Yate today and Emersons Green and Kingswood tomorrow.
Councillor Shirley Potts, executive member for communities in South Gloucestershire, said: "We have been really pleased with the response. It shows that people are well aware of waste issues and keen to get involved. Lots of people said they would like to do more recycling, especially plastics, and many people said councils should be looking for alternatives to landfill."
More than 4,000 surveys have been handed out in shopping centres and nearly 1,000 of these have been completed and returned.
The action is being taken partly in response to European laws which require all local authorities to reduce their reliance on landfill and, if action is not taken soon, councils will face fines.
Landfill sites are rapidly being filled-up and they generate greenhouse gases, so there is an increasingly urgent need to find a better way of dealing with the residual waste.
Councillor Gerry Curran, executive member for environment and sustainability at Bath &amp; North East Somerset Council, said: "We want to hear the public's views on this important matter before we plan a strategy for the next 25 years."
The Rubbish or Resource? survey is available in libraries, council offices and information centres and can be viewed and completed online at www.rubbishorresource.co.uk.
The website also has information about alternatives to landfill and people can respond via email.
Anyone is welcome to attend the evening meetings where they can learn more and contribute their views.
The next meeting takes place on Wednesday at Chipping Sodbury Town Hall starting at 6.30pm and finishing by 8.30pm.


Shocking crime is thankfully rare in our city

The attack that left Donna Small and Asha Jama on the brink of death shocked Bristol because shootings are rare in the city.
The two women suffered life-shattering injuries when a second-long burst of Mac 10 sub-machine gun fire was sprayed point-blank at the convertible Saab they were back seat passengers in - innocent victims of an alleged assassination gone wrong.
An end-of-terrace house on Lyndale Road in Redfield, where the Saab was targeted, still bears the bullet-riddled scars of the night alleged conspirators hunted the vehicle down and homed in for the kill in October 2004.
Detective Chief Inspector Geoff Spicer, the deputy senior investigating police officer in the case, said that, in Bristol, incidents involving guns were reducing.
He said that from April 2004 to April 2005 there had been 129 recorded incidents in Bristol in which guns were fired or used to threaten.
From April 2005 to April 2006 recorded incidents of that kind fell to 83, representing a 35 per cent drop.
DCI Spicer said: "The reason we are not Nottingham, Birmingham or South London is because of our strategy to take gun crime down.
"There is a clear message to those who carry, use or involve themselves in the criminal use of firearms.
"Police in Avon and Somerset and its communities will not tolerate that crime.
"We will do all in our power to identify all those involved whether they carry firearms, pull the trigger or plan to use them in any way. We will identify you and bring you to justice."


Blockbuster story down at the library

From today, people in Bristol will have access to almost two million books, CDs and DVDs thanks to a new computer system linking the West's libraries. KIRSTY PUGH looks at the benefits of combining resources to help bring libraries into the 21st century.
I
A new computer system, which is being launched today, is being implemented by Libraries West, a consortium of libraries in Bristol, North Somerset, Bath and North East Somerset, Somerset and South Gloucestershire.
Benefits introduced through the system include being able to use only one membership card to access all libraries in the consortium's area, and access to 1.7 million books, CDs and DVDs.
The service will allow library members to use all 100 libraries from Yate to Yeovil and to borrow up to 20 items at a time.
A Libraries West website has also been set up to allow people to access the libraries' combined catalogues and make reservations online.
Central Library's ICT development manager Stan Tattersall has been instrumental in bringing the system to Bristol.
He said: "The Libraries West scheme aims to give our customers a better experience of using libraries in the area.
"Now people can use libraries across the West without having to re-register. They can pick items up while they are at work and drop them off from home.
"It will also clear up confusion for people about which council authority certain libraries belong to, as it simply will not matter any more.
"People can also log on to the website and select any items they want to be delivered to their desired library. We can also inform them by text message or voicemail when a book is ready.
"This system has helped bring the library into the 21st century. It will give people access to a huge variety of books and other items that no one authority could afford."
A total of 230 staff in Bristol have undergone intensive training in the new system to make sure they are able to help the public when the system goes live today.
In Bristol alone there are 450,000 lending books available on the shelves, 200,000 reference books and 46,000 CDs and DVDs.
Libraries West say the new service will benefit 1.5 million people and users will be able to reserve books and other materials from the other consortium authorities.
Bristol's head of libraries, Kate Davenport, hopes the new system will get more people using the city's libraries.
She said: "One of the weaknesses we had in Bristol was the number of books on offer, but Libraries West is going to change all that.
"This has been a great opportunity for us to work together with our neighbours to offer people more flexibility in the way they use libraries.
"People will have complete freedom in how they use our services and it couldn't be easier. They can borrow a book from one library and return it to any other in the area. We are giving people straightforward access to a lot of extra stock. It will be just as easy to borrow a book from Taunton as it would be from Henleaze. We hope this encourages more people to use their local library."
In May, the Evening Post launched the More Than Books campaign to show people how the Central Library and the city's other 27 libraries have changed.
In the past 18 months three new libraries have been opened to help reach a new generation of users.
Bristol's newest library was opened in Knowle's Broadwalk Shopping Centre in February, and new facilities were also established in Bedminster and St Paul's in 2005.
The Bristol library service has been hard at work, bringing its libraries into the 21st century. And now the service wants everyone to know there is more to a library than a load of dusty old books.
As well as hundreds of thousands of books of all kinds, all 28 libraries across the city now have free computer use, allowing visitors to browse the internet and helping children to do their homework.
There is also a wide range of children's services, including regular story times and story tapes.
Access to reference books and other resources also make libraries an attractive prospect for the city's large student population. And library members can hire out a range of films, music and computer games for a small fee.
The city council's executive member for culture and leisure, Simon Cook, said: "I am delighted we are working with four neighbouring councils to offer Bristol residents a larger range of services. The latest computer systems bring a speed and efficiency to library services that would have been impossible just a decade ago."
For local library information, go to www.bristol-city.gov.uk/libraries. Find out more about Libraries West at www.librarieswest.org.uk.


Make a wish and cyclists can help out

Around 300 cyclists set off from Castle Park on a 40-mile ride to raise money for Make-A-Wish Foundation UK.
They were taking part in the first ever Wish Pedlars South West bike ride, which is due to become an annual event on the Bristol cycling calendar.
Make-A-Wish Foundation grants wishes to children and young people living with life-threatening illnesses.
The largest team consisted of 56 riders from Alexandra Workwear, in Thornbury. The Alexandra team, called the RAP Pack, were cycling in memory of colleague Martin Power's son Ross, who died in February aged just 16.
Make-A-Wish gave Ross a laptop just before the relapse of the cancer that claimed his life.
The laptop became a lifeline for Ross when his illness kept him confined to hospital and his home.

