It's KySpace

Pop princess Kylie launches her own version of MySpace
POP princess Kylie Minogue is taking on MySpace-by becoming the first chart star to launch her own social networking website.
The pioneering singer, 39, wants her millions of fans across the world to chat to each other using their own profiles.
Users of KylieKonnect.com will even be able to contact the star via her profile-as well as read her blog, see sexy pictures of her, and watch an exclusive behind-the-scenes video.
They can also hear tunes not available elsewhere and download her hits.
The launch of the website, expected this week, will follow today's online release of the star's latest single 2 Hearts.
It is part of Kylie's comeback after her breast cancer and painful split from long-term boyfriend Olivier Martinez.
A source close to the project told the News of the World: "This is a very big move for Kylie, as no other pop star has ever tried anything like this before. It will make her an instant internet entrepreneur-and shows the way the music industry is heading."
Kylie and her record label Parlophone have been working secretly on the site for months.
They hope it will rival hugely popular networking brands like MySpace and Facebook.
The source said: "Kylie's fans are very loyal to her, so it is hoped a large number of them will decide to join her network.
"That could quickly make Kylie a big player in this big business. But there's also the risk that her fans will only want to stick with their existing sites.
"It is a bold step for her to take. But it shows she is serious about becoming more than just a pop star and taking control of the business side."
A message on the page yesterday said: "KylieKonnect allows you to blog and upload pictures from your mobile phone-so you can go to a concert and upload pictures of Kylie live on stage to let your friends know what they're missing."
The star-who also has a conventional website for fans-is also busy with the launch of her new album X, released at the end of the month. Her new single will be on CD in a week's time.
The source said: "Kylie will be 40 in a few months but she has no plans to quit music. This is all about trying different things.
"She's very proud of being the first singer to create a social networking brand."

Is she trying to kill me?

Paul fears she's turning daughter against family
Horror as Bea tells him: Mum's sad..Stella's bad
Heather demands £ 12m home -or she'll tell all
Then says she wants cosy Xmas together!
MACCA'S SECRET DESPAIR AFTER MUCCA'S TV MELTDOWN IN public rock legend Paul McCartney shrugs off this week's frenzy of abusive attacks by ranting estranged wife Heather Mills. But in private he is DISTRAUGHT and fears she will hound him to his GRAVE.
After a tense face-to-face confrontation between the warring couple on Friday, angry Macca asked an aide: "Is Heather trying to kill me?"
At the end of a week of bizarre twists in the tale we can reveal 65-year-old pop knight Sir Paul is:
CONVINCED daughter Bea's mind is being poisoned against his family.
STUNNED by a demand from Heather that he hand over his beloved £ 12million Peasmarsh estate home.
ANGRY at her threats to "tell the world everything" because "I've got nothing to lose".
ASTONISHED by her preposterous suggestion they spend a cosy family Christmas together!
Strain Mucca's bizarre outbursts in meltdown interviews on GMTV, This Morning, Radio 5 Live and US TV show Extra have convinced Paul he must go for temporary full custody of four-year-old Beatrice while the divorce is finalised.
He has already been in talks with lawyers.
He fears the strain of the very public break-up is now badly affecting their daughter.
Hysterical Heather has claimed to have received DEATH THREATS from an "underground movement", talked of SUICIDE, and fears HITMEN are out to get her. In tense phone conversations on Friday evening, as Macca drove Beatrice to hand her over to her mum for the weekend, Heather even begged Macca to let her have his historic Peasmarsh estate so she can enjoy the benefit of its state-of-the-art security.
A friend revealed: "Paul's main concern is Bea's safety and well-being. Going for full custody is a last resort but he's really scared for his child. He doesn't feel he's got a choice now.
"And if Heather's life is at risk, then so is Bea's. Paul feels he just can't take the risk any more and wants to know that his daughter is safe and well-and that means being with him.
"Paul did plead with Heather to consider Bea before she went on these TV shows, but she ignored him. Now he's deeply concerned their daughter is growing more aware of the public war between them."
Macca also fears 39-year-old Heather's actions are turning Bea against his family, especially fashion designer daughter Stella, 36-branded as "evil" in the TV rant.
Last week Paul watched open-mouthed in astonishment as Bea hid behind his legs when big sister Stella called her over.
Friends say he was even more gobsmacked when the child referred to his daughter as "that bad woman" and told him: "Mummy's so sad."
Our insider said: "Bea's obviously being influenced by what's going on around her and Paul's worried it's very damaging for her.
"He's always been very private and pretty much kept quiet since this started.
"But making all those claims on TV and radio Heather's simply stoking up public interest. Paul is absolutely furious she's brought the glare of the world's media back on herself, him and especially Beatrice.
"She's so young and vulnerable and he's very worried about her being psychologically damaged."
Macca now believes Heather-who also raged about her treatment by the media and compared herself to Princess Diana and Kate McCann-needs professional help.
Twist
Just 48 hours after her raving interviews flashed around the world she rang Paul and said: "Look, you know there's nothing new there.
"I haven't done anything wrong, but I had to get my side out."
Perplexed Paul apparently exclaimed: "This is completely ridiculous! What on earth are you talking about? What are you doing? Have you completely lost your mind?"
She angrily admitted: "I've been pushed to the edge!"
But Heather's case wasn't helped by veiled threats to "put everything in the public domain".
A pal said: "In the Friday night phone chat she told Macca she had nothing to lose by going public on their relationship. Although God knows what she can say now.
"She can't work out why the public hates her.
"She kept saying, 'They twist everything I say. Why don't people like me?'"
Earlier this year the News of the World revealed Heather's plans for a tell all book, documentary and possible appearance on Oprah Winfrey's prime-time US talk show.
They are understood to be a sticking point in the divorce negotiations. Macca is devastated that things have come to this.
A friend said: "Paul's just absolutely gutted that he's had to get the lawyers involved over Bea.
"But what do you do when your estranged wife goes on TV and says one jaw dropping thing after another?
"The whole thing is absolutely barmy."
And the madness continues with the goalposts constantly shifting.
After Heather's on-screen onslaught at Paul, astonishingly she told him privately that she wants to settle the divorce by Christmas-so the family can all have a relaxing festive period together and put the whole saga behind them for Beatrice's sake!
A source close to Macca said: "All these outbursts from Heather are completely out of order. Paul doesn't know what's going to happen from one day to the next."
When Paul and Bea arrived at Heather's home in Robertsbridge, Sussex, for the Friday night hand-over there was a frosty stand-off on the driveway.
Heather kept them waiting for several minutes before walking out to their car.
Livid
But furious Macca, with the memory of her relentless stinging string of TV outbursts still fresh in his mind, was determined not to give her the satisfaction of seeing just how hurt he was.
Instead he merely asked sarcastically: "Have you been up to much lately?"
The former Beatle's caustic put-down left Mills livid. She shook and turned red with rage. Last night one aide told the News of the World: "Paul wanted to make a point in what Heather thought would be her moment of glory.
"He was extremely nervous about how the meeting would go and felt an argument was on the cards.
"But he was determined to rise above it and show he wasn't giving in. Afterwards Paul felt quite drained by the whole experience.
"The last few weeks have really hit him hard. Over the summer he genuinely believed that the war with Heather was over after they agreed on support packages for Bea and a proposed divorce deal.
"But she's pulled the rug from under him. It's been a tough few days for him.
"He's looking like a deeply hurt man who's realised he'll never escape this women's wrath until the day he dies."
It's not been a good week for Heather, dubbed Mucca over her porn and vice girl past. Her PR manager Phil Hall quit because he disagreed with her decision to do the sensational interviews.
And now her lawyers are currently in talks deciding their position in the light of her outbursts.
She has already admitted she is £ 1.5million in the red over legal fees to end the four-year marriage.
Macca's friend revealed: "Paul really fears she's lost the plot. Her paranoia risks spinning wildly out of control, which is dangerous for her.
"But more worryingly, it could be dangerous for Bea as well."

Baby joy of tragic TV Ronni

TELLY funnygirl Ronni Ancona is pregnant again -a year after having a stillborn baby boy.
The impressionist, 41, is expecting a girl in January but said the recent tragedy has left her terrified.
She told a pal: "I haven't really been able to enjoy this pregnancy, I'm so worried about last time."
Ronni, married to doctor Gerard Hall, gave birth to her first child Lily in 2005.
Last year she fell pregnant again but had to be induced after the unborn baby's heartbeat stopped.
The source said this time Ronni and the baby appear to be in perfect health, adding: "She is looking forward to the new arrival."
Ex-teacher Ronni found fame with Alistair McGowan and went on to have her own BBC show.
Her popular take-offs include Victoria Beckham and Judy Finnigan.


Soap ace Harold's quitting

NEIGHBOURS legend Ian Smith is QUITTING the soap after 20 years.
The 69-year-old actor, who plays Harold Bishop, will film his final scenes this month before retiring.
But he has agreed to several special appearances next year.
The departure is a huge blow to show bosses, who are still reeling after a recent relaunch failed to pull in more viewers.
Ian first left the show in 1991 when Harold fell into the sea and was presumed dead. He returned in 1996.
In Britain next year the Aussie soap moves from BBC1 to Five.

Blasted bomber

THE blast from a World War II German bomb detonated yesterday by Royal Navy divers was heard 15 miles away.
It sent a huge plume of water 300ft in the air.
The bomb, containing 1,500lb of explosive, was dredged up by the trawler Millenia off Margate, Kent.
It was taken half a mile out to sea and exploded at the second attempt.
People called a local radio station fearing there had been an earthquake.
The Millenia caught a similar bomb in its nets three weeks ago.
When that was safely exploded off the Kent coast the reverberations were registered by the British Geological Survey in Edinburgh.

