

Jude: News of the World saved me

He thanks us for exposing affairs
JUDE LAW has admitted he is GLAD the News of the World exposed his wild sexual antics.
We revealed how the Hollywood actor indulged in group sex while married to Sadie Frost and cheated on fiancee Sienna Miller with his children's nanny.
Jude said: "I'm not happy I hurt people, but I'm kind of happy it was on such a public level.
"In a way it was like washing your laundry in public and, yep, there you go, you've seen my underwear, you've seen all the rubbish, you've seen me putting out the trash.
"And now I feel like there's nothing left, you've seen it all and I can get on.
"In a weird way that's kind of wonderful."
In 2005 nanny Daisy Wright told of her wild sex sessions with Jude while he was engaged to Factory Girl beauty Sienna. They included a time they were caught in bed by one of his three children by Sadie.
It later emerged that Jude and Sadie had engaged in group sex -romping in a Greek villa in 2001 with pretty singer Pearl Lowe and her partner, Supergrass drummer Danny Goffey.
Alfie star Jude, 34, said: "I was an idiot. I behaved badly. I made mistakes. Who hasn't?
"It all came out and I took it on the chin. I also like to think that because of the scale on which I had to then admit to them, I learnt my lesson."


Love and War

Passion-filled letters from our boys at the front reveal what made Britain great
THEY say love conquers all-even the nightmare of war. Sweethearts Dora and Peter Medcalf are living proof. Torn apart by World War II, HE was with the RAF in Africa, SHE joined the Land Army at home.
Like thousands more in two world conflicts they kept love alive with years of letters, now gathered in the book Dispatches From The Heart. Author Max Arthur said: "Across time these still deeply move us. Their words should never be forgotten." For Dora and Peter those romantic notes led to a lifetime of passion and happiness. She was just 17 and he was 18 when they were separated and RAF radar wizard Peter went off to battle in North Africa.
Today, Remembrance Day, at home in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, 84-year-old Dora admits: "We didn't know if we'd meet again. I was always desperate for Peter's letters." And he didn't disappoint her. They arrived in their hundreds...
FROM PETER. July 25, 1941: My Own Darling, I was feeling fed up, then your card arrived...to sum up all our love for each other and our hopes for the future in those few brief words. We did have some fun, didn't we, darling?
Those evenings we 'stole' were the happiest of my life. The night before I left was most beautiful of all.
FROM PETER, January 1, 1942: I want you so much, my love, in every way. Every night in bed I try to imagine you with me-there isn't much room for the two of us, I must admit, but I think we could manage!
Let's get married soon after I get back, dearest. I want you so much and can't bear to wait for you longer than absolutely necessary.
I've had your photo in front of me as I've been writing this. It is so lovely, darling, but I'm afraid not much comfort in place of my beautiful Dora with the lovely long legs and slim body that was so alive!
I can still feel the smooth sheen of your skin as I think of those lovely evenings together.
Please let this war be over soon so I can come back to you, good night my darling.
FROM PETER, May 27, 1942: The war seems to drag on and on.But remember how we used to bite the opposite ends of a blade of grass until our lips met? It seems like yesterday.
FROM PETER, October 28, 1943: It occurred to me that for three years I've never kissed. Still, I don't think it's the sort of thing one forgets how to do. Anyhow, we'll have plenty of practice...
FROM DORA, June 12, 1944: I do wish you were able to tell me exactly where you are, dearest-it's so dreadful not knowing, when you mean so much to me.
I'm longing for your darling heart. Please always love me, won't you? God bless, my dear, xxx for you darling, all of them for you always
FROM DORA, November 12, 1944: I don't know what reason you have for keeping us all waiting so long for letters these days. I've had three letters in eight weeks. I don't think it's good enough, do you? I'm feeling distinctly peeved over it.
I love you so much and with so few letters arriving the only precious link we have wears thin.
FROM PETER November 19, 1944: I feel so utterly lousy and fed up with myself. I have been a swine letting you go so long without letters. I don't seem able to muster any ambition or interest in life or anything.
Darling. I do love you...and I'm sure I will never love anyone else.
FROM DORA, March 3, 1945: Thanks a lot for your letter, darling, I rushed home at midday today simply because I was longing to read it.
Boy, oh boy!! I'm just longing to see you, and that's not all I'm longing for, although just to sit and look at you will be heaven.
Lord, how I love you Pete, from head to toe I just tingle with it!
FROM DORA, March 6, 1945: I do miss you terribly all day, every day, but it's when I get into my 'virgin' bed that I long for you so much, just to feel your warmth and warmness around me (lovely, lovely thought).
I'm now going to creep into my lonely bed, horrid thought. Yours Dors xxx
Dispatches From The Heart is available at £ 9.99 from bookshops or the publishers on 01933 443862. Quote LB25 to get FREE postage and packing.
The Somme 1916: Capt Alfred Bland
MY only and eternal blessedness, I am never utterly miserable, not even when I yearn most for the touch of your lips and a sight of my boys.
Why? Because I am in France, where the war is, and I know I ought to be here.
(Alfred was killed on July 1, 1916, the first day of the Battle of the Somme.)
RAF 1944: Flying Officer Francis Blackman
MARY dear, you have meant so much to me and been so very charming during these last few months that it is hard to say 'Goodbye'. God bless you, darling, and thank you a million times. (Last letter before being killed in a raid on Leipzig.)
Egypt 1941: Lt John Stillwell
DARLING angel, we have been on the move and travelled quite a long way. I am now sitting in a very beautifully dug trench about three feet deep. The best birthday present I could ever receive from you arrived today and did it cheer me up! It was your photos and a letter. The photos are marvellous, you do look sweet and that dear little curl at the side, I cannot get over it.
Palestine 1918: Signaller Robert Block
MILLIE my cherub, bet you I'm home and ruffling your hair before you know it. I'll tell you honestly, you are the best, nicest, grandest, sweetest girl in the world.
No, I'm not a flatterer-I had to knock up against so many people before I found you-so MY judgement goes.
PoW 1943: Pte David Edward Parker
MY own darling wife and child, by the time you get this Mary will be turned three.
I did think that I would see her before she was three...please God, I will see her before she is four. I am just longing to see her every day. Give her my love and a big kiss from Daddy. Tell her I will be seeing her one sunny day.
Western Front 1917: Sgt-Major James Milne
MY own beloved wife, we are going over the top this forenoon and only God in Heaven knows who will come out of it alive. If I am called I go with your dear face the last vision on earth I shall see and your name upon my lips.
WE may move at any minute. When this reaches you, for me there will be no more war-only eternal peace and waiting for you. You must be brave, my darling, but God will look after you and we shall meet again.
(James survived the war and returned to Scotland)
RAF 1943: Flying Officer Jack Yeoman
STELLA darling, don't let our having loved one another interfere in any way with your own future. I only hope that you will find someone who will love and cherish you as I would have. For myself, I have done what I know at least to be right, just in joining the war of my own free will and giving up a chance of supreme happiness with you. What more can anyone ask?
Aisne 1918: 2nd Lt John Lindsay Rapoport
DARLING, I love and adore you from the bottom of my heart. You wait till I come home, you will get some kisses then. And I shall hold you tight-you know how.
DARLING, you mean so much to me. How lucky I am having you for my own darling wife-to-be.
(John was posted missing weeks later.)
RAF 1943: Flying Officer Francis Blackman
DARLING, there are oh so many times when one's only conscious thought is the longing to get this business done, just to get back to you...
YOU have meant so much to me during these last few months that it is hard to say 'Goodbye'. God bless you, darling, and thank you a million times.
(Last letter before being killed in a raid on Leipzig.)
PoW Far East 1945: Gunner Bob Grafton
My dear Dorothy, this is my first letter as a free man. This starts a new life for us. The next kiss will be the first since I kissed you goodbye on the station in August 1941, so watch out, darling! I dreamed of you many, many times but always had to return to the hell on earth. It won't be like that...
France 1918: Lt W O Wightman
MY darling girl, it is just four weeks since we were married and I feel sure that you, my own little girl, are writing to me, too.
At the moment all is quiet...except for the sound of guns in the distance. Things are so peaceful at the moment that war seems a long way away. How perfectly and joyously happy you made me during those days-just you, my sweetness.
MY darling... the nights here are weird. The sky is lit up by the flashes of our guns and now and again one hears an enemy shell whizz through the air with the comfortable feeling that it will fall far away, one hopes, out of everyone's way.
RAF 1945: Gerald Bunyan
MY beloved girl, tonight there will be no you to caress, no dear breasts uplifting to my kisses, no scent of your hair-in fact, nothing at all. Your heart will be with me but my sleep will be empty, so different from the glorious contentment of having you beside me all the time. Please, I want so badly to be your real husband again and not just a bloke away from home whose heart is breaking to be with you.
1939: Richard Coomber off to Ceylon
DARLING, I don't know what I shall do much longer. You know what I used to feel like when I woke up in the morning? Well, it's much worse, and bigger now! If only you were here, I am sure that you could do something to make me feel better...

