In the city's bright lights

It's a tradition shopaholics adore - late night Christmas shopping.
The chance for families and friends to wrap up in their trendiest winter warmers to pound the streets looking for the perfect gift for a loved one to place under the tree, for many people, marks the beginning of the festive season.
In Bath, that date starts with the turning on of the Christmas lights on November 24.
Alison Wells, policy and projects officer for Bath and North East Somerset Council, has the job of coordinating the event.
"The Mayor of Bath will be turning them on this year," says Alison. "We're waiting to hear back from the Theatre Royal to see if any panto stars will be there so there might be some famous faces."
The festivities kick off at 6pm and the lights are set to burst into colour on the streets of Bath at 6.30.
Last year, about 3,000 people went to see the lights switched on by the Bath Bullet, Jason Gardener.
This year, a stage outside the Pump Room, set up by Bath FM, will be the setting for the event.
A week later, the Christmas Market also kicks off.
The market opens on December 1, at 5pm and runs for 11 days.
Now in its fifth year, the market has expanded to include 13 more chalet stalls, making the total of destinations for gift treats more than 120.
A charity stall will also be set up at the market which changes hands everyday, offering the charities the chance to raise much needed funds for their causes.
On the first day, the Guide Dogs for the Blind has the stall and other charities taking part include the Bath institute for Rheumatic Diseases and the Chernobyl Children Lifeline.
The market is one of the city's main shopping attractions, drawing thousands of tourists to the city to share in the festive spirit.
"We've always been a favourite regional shopping destination," says Alison, "so we often get people travelling to us to do their Christmas shopping."


Grooming gear for the guys

Men as well as women take an interest in their appearance these days.
How you look has a great impact on how you feel, and, by extension, how confident you are and how you portray yourself.
In today's competitive world, this can go a long way for both men and women.
If you're a man who is new to beauty products, take a look at some of the products available from The Body Shop. The Hemp gift set, right, fro instance, is a great way to introduce men to taking care of their appearance.
The Hemp range is a perfect gift for the winter months with hand protector, body butter, foot protector and lip conditioner on offer to help rehydrate skin dried out by the harsh winter cold.
There are many other products available for the fashion-conscious man including a men's grooming set with a face scrub, face protector, deodorant, aftershave and shower gel.


Festive wines

Everyone looks forward to Christmas dinner, but a carefully selected wine can take the meal to a higher level. And, according to expert Matt Skinner, you don't have to be a professional taster to get the knowledge
Wine rocks," says Matt Skinner with a huge grin as he proceeds to cheerfully demolish the jargon, snobbery and confusion that makes it hard for most of us to distinguish our Chardonnay from our Chablis.
A bright and breezy Australian - one of Jamie Oliver's mates and the man in charge of wine for the famous Fifteen restaurant - this boy knows his grapes.
"I'm so passionate about wine and wine making that I'd love everyone to share my enthusiasm and knowledge," says the 30-year-old bubbling with enthusiasm and shaking his fashionably shaggy locks.
To that end he's distilled his knowledge into Thirsty Work, a down-to-earth guide which explains the nuts and bolts of wine making and easy ways to identify wine types.
"Just like people, there are hundreds of different varieties of grape, each one with its own personality. Some are delicate and pretty, others full-bodied and intense."
He's broken the whole process down and grouped the wines into three user-friendly categories.
As Matt explains: "I couldn't fathom how something so normal as drinking wine ended up being intellectualised to the point of mass confusion. Why should everyone be doomed to boring 'house wine' because they don't feel confident about anything else?
"Wine's for everybody and as long as you know enough to know what it is like, what else matters? Trust me, pay very little attention to the language of wine and most importantly never let it put you off."
Matt fell into the world of wine by accident. After landing a job in an off-licence straight out of school, he was initially baffled, but intrigued all the same.
"Ten years ago I couldn't tell a raisin from a prune," he says.
Undaunted, within three years Matt had won a national wine scholarship and was in charge of wines for prestigious restaurants in Australia.
"Frankly I've discovered that the best thing about wine is that it's so personal, there's no right or wrong. It's like art or music, it's all down to personal preference."
Traditional
Matt says: "Turkey, goose and chicken - the big three bird combo - scream out for something light and red. As a rule, stay clear of wines that are big on both fruit and oak, as these will just swamp the flavours of your food."
His suggestion for a Christmas lunch wine is: Allegrini Valpolicella 2003 £7.99
Vegetarian
Nut roast is a popular alternative to the traditional Christmas lunch. Matt suggests a fruity/juicy new world wine to accompany it:
Veramonte Primus (Carmenere/Cabernet Sauvignon/Merlot, 2002) from Chile, £9.49 at Sainsbury's.
He says: "Chilean wine-makers have mixed opinions about local red variety Carmenere (car-man-yeah), but nearly all agree that when it's really good, its awesome.
"Thankfully for us, this wine falls head first into the awesome camp. Lush, fruity, and loaded with aromas of dark currants, sweet-cherry, tobacco, and leather. If you're a fan of Merlot, and fancy trying a new but similar variety, this one is definitely worth a look."


Brightening up the outdoors

Many neighbours will strike up something of a battle when it comes to outdoor decorations.
The battle is won by the person with the most impressive display on the outside of their house on the big day.
And those who go that extra mile with their decorating may find themselves something of a local celebrity with people enjoying their festive display.
But it's not all a case of 'keeping up with the Jones's'. If you have young children, even the smallest of displays can get their imaginations running with the magic of Christmas.
Pictured left, is the Santa light from WH Smith for £19.99, and below left is the Snokflake curtain light which can be hung from a window, for £13.99.


Jane's gingerbread Christmas tree

When a domestic goddess such as Nigella Lawson claims that she can't survive her children's birthdays without her, you know Jane Asher must be good.
Now the actress turned cake-decorating guru is back with a new book devoted to her favourite art form.
Cakes for Fun is a collection of more than 40 fabulous ideas for turning celebration cakes into true party pieces - and whether your tastes are simple, sophisticated or saucy, Jane has the perfect cake for you.
"It's one of those hobbies I started as a child," she says.
Jane insists that the secret of her success is making the process "as easy as possible".
That means using ready-made cake mixes and icing, and letting your imagination run riot with sparkles, sprinkles and other decorative accessories, she says.
And once you've mastered the basics, Jane says it's just a short step to developing your own methods - and perhaps even baking a cake from scratch.
If you're bored with traditional fruitcake, why not jazz up the festive season with one of her alternative suggestions?
Ingredients:
2 quantities of gingerbread
2 quantities of royal icing, coating consistency
1 quantity royal icing, for piping
Green food colour
25g pot of 8mm silver balls or dragees
1 pot of Supercook chocolate beans
1 pot of white iridescent sparkles or Supercook lustre sparkles
1 cookie tree cutter set or card templates
Piping bag with adaptor and no 3 nozzle
Recipe:
Preheat oven to Gas Mark 6/200C/fan oven 180C. Grease two trays or line them with baking parchment.
Roll out the gingerbread on a surface lightly dusted with flour. Cut out two of each size star cutter as directed in the set, or cut round two of each size of the card templates. Place them on the lightly greased prepared trays and bake for about 12 minutes or until golden brown around the edges. Leave to cool. It will make about 20 cookies.
Colour the coating consistency royal icing, green, and then pour or brush it over the top and sides of the cookies. Allow to dry.
Assemble the tree by sticking each layer, using more royal icing, to the top of the previous one. Make sure that the points of the star shapes are placed alternately as shown in the picture, far left.
Pipe icing on to the corners of the cookies and let it drip over the edges. Stick the silver balls and chocolate beans on to the icing. Lastly, sprinkle all over with the white sparkles.
HOWEVER well you plan the run-up to Christmas, you may find you don't have time to indulge in a little creative cake decorating,
If that's the case, why not buy an extra special cake to make up for it?
Everyone deserves a little indulgence at Christmas and Nigella Lawson's Chocolate Fruit cake would be a treat the whole family could enjoy.
Nigella, who admits to being a big Jane Asher fan when it comes to celebration cakes, may well have taken some hints from the expert when she created this rich, extravagant chocolate cake.
It's available at Bloomsbury, and costs £28


Lighting up for their dad

A Whiteway family has dedicated its celebrated annual Christmas light display to the memory of their father, who died of cancer two months ago.
John Warman loved the festive season and spent six weeks every year putting the finishing touches to the Christmas display outside his home in Haycombe Drive.
But he sadly lost his battle with cancer in September, aged 69.
The proud father held on to see his son Christopher's 18th birthday and the birth of Christopher's daughter, Khady.
Now Christopher has taken on the job of overseeing the family's light display this year.
Ten of the couple's children - the Warmans have a total of 22 between them - and eight grandchildren got together to put the decorations up in Mr Warman's memory.
His widow Jenny, the mother of five of his children, said: "If it was just me I wouldn't have done it.
"John really enjoyed Christmas - it was the main event of the year.
"We never spent much on the children's birthdays, it all happened at Christmas.
"He would sometimes wake up at 2am and get the kids to open their presents."
The day the decorations went up the children were a bit gloomy, because their dad was not there doing it with them, but it was something they wanted to do, said Mrs Warman.
"They miss their dad," she said.
"Christopher rang me the other day to tell me he could see the lights from Windsor Bridge and was really excited he could see them from his balcony in Julian Road.
She added: "Last year John's energy levels were low and the boys helped out.
"Normally he would start on his birthday on November 5 and take six weeks to do it all.
"Before Christmas became so commercialised he would make shapes out of plywood and paint them. We had Power Rangers one year and a nativity scene another.
"Now my brother in America sends us a huge blow-up Santa each year."
Mr Warman was a prize- winning gardener who won a category in this year's Bath in Bloom competition shortly before his death.
His colourful front garden was named the best large garden visible from the pavement in the 2005 contest.
He had tended the garden for 22 years but recently handed over control to Christopher, who has followed in his father's footsteps and recently qualified as a professional gardener.

