FOR THE LOVE OF A PICKLED CUCUMBER

I'VE GOT QUEENS on my mind at the moment. Before you think I'm heading off into a pink polemic, I'm talking about the ones with crowns and countries of their own. Last week, I was broadcasting on the subject of coinage and I was given a Maria Theresa thaler. This is a beautiful silver coin which was common currency in the 18th century and from which we get the corrupted word 'dollar'. I've been carrying it in my pocket as a talisman and this has given me time to examine MT's portrait. She was not a looker and, indeed, from her profile one might suspect she was a girl who, at weekends, was given to a check shirt and a sensible shoe.
Clearly, being a monarch is not a beauty contest, which reminds me that today is the anniversary of Queen Victoria's death. To mark the occasion, you'll be pleased to know, I'm wearing black, I've covered up the piano legs and shoved my son up the chimney. Victoria was quite a girl, but not someone you'd want in the front row of a comedy show, partly because she wasn't a great one for a gag, and partly because her English was poor. Her mother was German and mildly overbearing.
When Victoria was young, Mama trained her to keep her chin up by sticking a sprig of holly under her collar, a technique that would make anyone lose their humour. VR was 18 when she came to the throne and you get some idea of her maternal relationship when you learn that her first royal act was to have her bed moved from her mother's room to the first one of her own.
What she did in her room is her own business but it certainly wasn't reading Dickens's Oliver Twist under the covers because she was advised it dealt with 'paupers, criminals and other unpleasant subjects'. She stayed away from most of her subjects and never did learn to speak English fluently.
She, Albert and the children all spoke German in the home. I like the idea of the family gathered round the fireplace reading improving works aloud in a Teutonic tone with a small piece of foliage shoved down their fronts. Nevertheless, VR has some pleasing aspects. She used cannabis to relieve her monthly indisposition and drank whisky mixed with claret, a concoction that might make anyone think the piano legs were looking a bit on the sexy side and needed covering up.
VICTORIA IS KNOWN FOR HAVING BEEN obsessed with her husband. Indeed, Benjamin Disraeli refused to see her on his death bed, in case she asked him to take a message to Albert. Her devotion, however, slightly paled this week in the face of a Croatian widow and her pickled cucumber. Vera Dudas, who is 73 and comes from Duga Resa, is a widow. She doesn't quite have the gilded buildings of Victoria to commemorate her deceased husband, Pavao, but she has something unique - a cucumber which she says was pickled by her mother-in-law when her late husband was born in 1930.
Vera believes that this 76-year-old vegetable is the world's oldest pickled cucumber and has submitted it for inclusion in the Guinness Book of Records. 'Unfortunately, the cucumber has survived longer than Pavao,' said Vera. 'I remember my entire married life when I look at that cucumber; it was with us everywhere we ever lived and through all our experiences - good and bad.' Naturally, she has insured the item and this may be the only time in my life that I would be keen to read a policy document.
WE DANES ARE PARTIAL TO A PICKLED cucumber, although I've never looked at one and thought about marriage. We tend to consume it with pork. This brings us to a dilemma that has at last been sorted out. What if you were eating your pork and pickle during a power cut? How would you find your food?
No problem. Scientists in Taiwan, and not a moment too soon, have created pigs that glow in the dark. 'There are partially fluorescent green pigs elsewhere,' (there are?) said Wu Shinn-Chih, the assistant professor of animal science at the National Taiwan University. 'But ours are the only ones in the world that are green from inside out. Even their hearts and internal organs are green.'
Apparently, they used jellyfish genes to help create the animals, who are going to help with stem-cell research. I like pigs. They are bright creatures. I often wonder whether the Old Testament instruction not to eat pork was less the word of God and more pigs trying to outsmart us.

'Wales was so boring, I had to chain myself up for fun'

Over the past few hundred years, public hangings have rather lost their appeal as public spectacles. All that, however, could be about to change. On January 30, a 25-year-old escapologist called Jonathan Goodwin will mount a gallows at a secret location somewhere in London. As television cameras roll, his arms will be strapped to his sides and a noose placed around his neck. This noose will then be attached to a counterweight. If Goodwin does not free himself within 30 seconds, he will be hoisted into the air and strangled by his own body-weight.
That, at any rate, is the plan. 'To a certain extent it is horribly dangerous,' says Goodwin. 'On the other hand, the reason I've agreed to do it is that I don't think there's that much danger of actually dying. But having said that, there's always an off-chance.'
Assuming all goes well, Goodwin intends to have another extremely near-death experience four days later. He will be vacuum-packed in a plastic bag, lowered into a coffin and then buried under six tons of concrete. 'Originally, I was hoping to be buried under 6ft of earth, as you would be in a real grave, but that really would have been impossible to get out of because of the weight of the soil. I'm hoping that the viscosity of the concrete should make it a bit easier. Although, to be perfectly honest, I'm not sure quite how quickly it will set.'
All this could easily be dismissed as so much puff and nonsense were it not for the fact that Goodwin is a remarkably accident-prone escapologist. Last autumn, he was taken to hospital with second-degree burns after a trick went wrong: he was attempting to escape from various restraints before an electric iron burned through a bed sheet that had been placed on his chest.
'Basically, I cocked it up. I had to go to Accident and Emergency, and when the doctor saw what had happened he assumed I was a sexual deviant and inspected my groin to see if I had any burns there as well.' And then there was the incident earlier last year when he fell off a 60ft zip-wire and broke his ankle in two places. 'Well, yes, I'm afraid I rather cocked that one up, too. Unfortunately, I miscalculated how quickly I was falling.'
If, as seems likely, there is something dark and deeply disturbed lurking in Goodwin's psyche, he's convinced that it's all Wales's fault. 'I grew up in this tiny little village in Pembrokeshire full of pensioners. I was so bored that I used to devise ever more bizarre ways of amusing myself - cliff-jumping, things like that.
'Then I began experimenting with locks and wrapping myself in chains. Fortunately, my father was helpful and he used to make sure the chains were on properly. When I became older, it struck me that this was something I could do for a living.'
Far from getting nervous before a stunt, Goodwin insists that he always looks forward to it - all the more so if it involves him being cooped up in total darkness unable to move. 'I know it might sound a bit odd, but frankly I find it hard to imagine anything more relaxing than being shut in a coffin.'
In preparation for being buried alive, Goodwin has been spending a lot of time lying on his kitchen floor encased in a bin-liner while his girlfriend attempts to suck the air out with a Hoover nozzle. 'I always try to plan my tricks as meticulously as possible. I go over the calculations again and again. But eventually there comes a time when you have to say, "Bollocks, let's just get on with it.'' '
Death Wish Week starts on January 30, E4


FSA to probe advice on with-profits Investors struggle to get the right advice on whether to stay in poor funds, warns watchdog

THE FINANCIAL Services Authority has raised concerns that most financial advisers are ill-equipped to advise clients on whether to bail out of with-profits funds or to stay put.
David Strachan, the FSA's head of insurance, said: "There is a concern that there aren't that many IFAs out there well-equipped to advise on whether policyholders should stay with or leave with-profits funds. We are also investigating whether people are not getting advice on this matter because advisers are worried they could be accused of churning [switching funds to earn commission].''
The FSA is now to launch an investigation to find out why consumers find it hard to get advice on what to do about their poorly performing funds. Strachan said he wanted to know what prevents customers from getting the information to allow them to make the decision.
The regulator admitted that the situation is complicated because some individuals in poorly performing funds might be better staying put as they have valuable guarantees attached to their policies.
Ned Cazalet, an insurance industry analyst, said: "You have IFAs who are embarrassed that plans they sold their clients five years ago have turned out to be a poor investment, but are reluctant to tell them how bad it has been.''
He added: "On top of that is the complexity of the products - the value of guarantees, the complex mathematics behind the way these schemes pay out and the effect of charges. But it is not tenable to have a pounds 385bn sector where people have no idea what they should be doing.''
The FSA investigation comes in the middle of the season of life office bonus declarations. In the past two weeks Norwich Union and Friends Provident have said they will maintain or increase bonuses for their policyholders.
But many life offices, including most of the providers running the pounds 85bn held in with-profits funds that are closed to new business, are expected to announce either minimal bonuses or none at all. The poor returns are likely to prompt policyholders to question whether they should cut and run, said analysts.
They added that the market is splitting into those life offices committed to with-profits and those that are not. Providers such as Norwich Union, Legal &amp; General, Prudential and Liverpool Victoria are committed to with-profits business, they said, but others such as NPI and Alba Life have funds that have little chance of generating decent returns in the years ahead.
The Association of IFAs said the regulator should not throw stones until it had the evidence. Chris Cummings, the association's director-general, said: "Let's look at what the results are before we jump to any conclusions. If individuals go to their IFAs and ask for advice on with-profits funds they will get it, and if the IFA believes that is not his normal area of expertise then he will usually refer the customer to someone in his firm who is an expert in that field.''
The with-profits industry has shrunk over the past few years following a sustained period of falling fund values and plummeting bonuses. In 2000, pounds 15bn was placed into with-profits funds, but last year this fell to just pounds 1.5bn.

