BLAIR IN SECRET PLOT TO DUPE U.N.;
WORLD EXCLUSIVE Devastating revelations in new book

A WHITE HOUSE leak revealing astonishing details of how Tony Blair and George Bush lied about the Iraq war is set to cause a worldwide political storm.
A new book exposes how the two men connived to dupe the United Nations and blows the lid off Mr Blair's claim that he was a restraining influence on Mr Bush.
He offered his total support for the war at a secret White House summit as Mr Bush displayed his contempt for the UN, made a series of wild threats against Saddam Hussein and showed a devastating ignorance about the catastrophic aftermath of the war.
Based on access to information at the highest level, the book by leading British human rights
Continued on Page 5
lawyer Philippe Sands QC, Professor of Law at London University, demonstrates how the two men decided to go to war regardless of whether they obtained UN backing.
The revelations make a nonsense of Mr Blair's claim that the final decision was not made until MPs voted in the Commons 24 hours before the war and could revive the risk of him being charged with war crimes or impeached by Parliament itself.
The book also makes serious allegations concerning the conduct of Foreign Secretary Jack Straw, Lord Chancellor Lord Falconer and Attorney General Lord Goldsmith over Goldsmith's legal advice on the war.
And it alleges the British Government boasted that disgraced newspaper tycoon Conrad Black was being used by Mr Bush's allies in America as a channel for pro-war propaganda in the UK via his Daily Telegraph newspaper.
The leaks are contained in a new version of Sands' book Lawless World, first published last year, when it emerged that Lord Goldsmith had told Mr Blair the war could be unlawful before a lastminute U-turn.
The new edition, to be published by Penguin on Thursday, is likely to cause a fierce new controversy on both sides of the Atlantic.
It follows recent charges against two British men under the Official Secrets Act after a transcript of another conversation between Mr Bush and Blair, in which the President raised the possibility of bombing the Al Jazeera Arab TV station, was leaked by a Whitehall official.
Both governments will be horrified that the stream of leaks revealing the grim truth about the war is turning into a flood. The most damaging new revelation concerns the meeting between Mr Blair and Mr Bush at the White House on January 31, 2003, during which Mr Blair urged the President to seek a second UN resolution giving specific backing for the war.
The Mail on Sunday has established that the meeting was attended only by Mr Blair, his Downing Street foreign policy adviser Sir David Manning, Mr Bush and the President's then national security adviser Condoleezza Rice, plus an official note-taker.
The top-secret record of the meeting was circulated to a tiny handful of senior figures in the two administrations.
Immediately afterwards, the two leaders gave a Press conference in which a nervous-looking Mr Blair claimed the meeting had been a success. Mr Bush gave qualified support for going down the UN route. But observers noted the awkward body language between the two men. Sands' book explains why.
Far from giving a genuine endorsement to Mr Blair's attempt to gain full UN approval, Mr Bush was only going through the motions. And Mr Blair not only knew it, but went along with it.
The description of the January 31 meeting echoes the recent memoirs of Britain's former ambassador to Washington, Sir Christopher Meyer.
Meyer, who was excluded from the private session between Blair and Bush, claimed the summit marked the culmination of the Prime Minister's failure to use his influence to hold back Mr Bush.
Equally significantly, Meyer was puzzled by Blair's behaviour when the two leaders emerged to join other aides. Meyer writes: 'We were all milling around in the State dining room as Bush and Blair put the final touches to what they were going to say to the media.
'Bush had a notepad on which he had written a form of words on the second resolution... He read it out. . . There was silence. I waited for Blair to say he needed something as supportive as possible. He said nothing. I waited for somebody on the No 10 team to say something. Nothing was said. I cursed myself afterwards for not piping up.
'At the Press conference, Bush gave only a perfunctory and lukewarm support for a second resolution. It was neither his nor Blair's finest performance.'
In view of Sands' disclosures, Blair had every reason to look awkward: he knew that despite his public talk of getting UN support, privately he had just committed himself to going to war no matter what the UN did.
When, in due course, the UN refused to back the war, Mr Blair seized on the fact that French President Jacques Chirac said he would not support any pro-war resolution, claiming that the French veto was so 'unreasonable' that a UN vote was pointless. In reality, Bush and Blair had decided to go to war before Chirac uttered a word.
The disclosures will be seized on by antiwar critics in Britain, including Leftwing MPs who say Mr Blair should be impeached for his handling of the war.
However, Ministers will argue that after three major British inquiries into the war, and with thousands of British troops due to be sent home from Iraq this year, it is time to move on.
A Downing Street spokeswoman said last night: 'These matters have been thoroughly investigated and we stand by our position.' 


University don is stabbed 40 times in Oxford murder riddle

UNIVERSITY don was strangled after being stabbed more than 40 times in a frenzied attack at her luxury flat, police revealed last night.
Dr Barbara Johnston is believed to have let her killer into her home in Oxford as there was no sign of any break-in or burglary.
The killer strangled her with her own jumper after stabbing her repeatedly with a single-blade weapon.
Police said the murderer would have been covered in blood after the attack and appealed for any witnesses to come forward.
The 55-year-old research fellow had returned to Britain from Auckland University in New Zealand last September.
On the Friends Reunited website she had described living in the South Pacific as 'relaxed, peaceful and safe'.
She was found dead in the early hours of Thursday. Police forced an entry to her first-floor mansion flat after her elderly parents became concerned when they could not contact her for several days.
Acting Detective Chief Superintendent Steve Tolmie, of Thames Valley Police, said: 'Dr Johnston was killed in a shocking attack in her own home and a full investigation is now under way to track down her killer.
'At this time her last contact was on Monday afternoon when she spoke on the telephone to a letting agent.
'Her parents raised the alarm on Wednesday when they became concerned for her welfare after not hearing from her.
'There is no sign of any break-in or burglary, so it's possible that Dr Johnston may have known her killer.
We are checking internet activity to see whether she could have met someone through that means.
'Dr Johnston was a very private person, and wasn't employed at the time of her death. She knew few people in this country and had no partner.
'She's going to be very missed, as she was a very loved daughter and sister.' He appealed for calm among the residents of Oxford, the backdrop for the Inspector Morse mysteries, and said anyone who saw anything suspicious should contact police immediately.
Yesterday a team of forensic experts were scouring the Georgianstyle flat and the surrounding area in an attempt to find the murder weapon.
Two officers, dressed in black forensic suits, blue hard hats and harnesses around their waists, were standing on scaffolding outside Dr Johnston's home and liaising with officers on the ground.
Neighbours spoke of their shock at the murder that took place on their doorstep and which has stunned the academic community of north Oxford.
Katie Jamison, 29, said: 'It's quite a horrifying thought that someone could still be out there. We don't know yet if it was someone she knew or not, but either way it's appalling.' Another resident, aged 85, said: 'It's really unbelievable that something like this has happened here, it's a really nice area and most people have quite a bit of money.' The academic who had a doctorate in philosophy and had worked in biomedical research for 25 years at Auckland University came back to visit Oxford regularly.
Her Friends Reunited entry read: 'Now living in Auckland, New Zealand, but still own a home in Oxford and return to the UK every 2-3 years or so.
'No kids never married. Can't afford to return to the UK while it's so expensive, to live the life in the South Pacific is relaxed, peaceful and safe, which must count for something these days.' The doctor, who specialised in child respiratory complaints, moved to Auckland in 1982 after graduating from Southampton and Oxford.
Yesterday her parents and brother were said to be too upset to talk about the tragedy, and were being looked after by police officers.
A post mortem showed Dr Johnston suffered multiple stab wounds and had been asphyxiated, but there was no evidence of any sex crime.


Markets frenzy over car that runs on sugar

SUGAR soared to a 25-year high on world commodity markets last week but the price jump had nothing to do with builders taking more lumps in their tea.
Experts blamed Brazilian motorists, who have been swapping petrol-driven cars for those powered by ethanol better known as grain alcohol and easily distilled from sugar cane.
The demand for ethanol as a cheap alternative to petrol has pushed Brazilian sugar cane farmers to sell more of their stock to make the intoxicating fuel.
This in turn has led to a shortage of cane to be used for simple sugar manufacturing.
Combined with growing demand from developing markets such as Russia, India and China, where increasing wealth has led to a growing taste for the sweet things in life, the Brazilian drive for ethanolpowered cars known as flex-fuel cars has helped drive the price of sugar to historic highs.
In New York, the main market for sugar, a pound soared to almost 19 cents last week, an astonishing 26 per cent jump on the price at the start of this year and more than double where it stood in January, 2005.
Sudakshina Unnikrishnan, commodities analyst at investment bank Barclays Capital, said: 'A lot of sugar cane in Brazil is going into ethanol production. Sales of flex-fuel cars there have gone through the roof.' Of the 1.7 million cars bought in Brazil last year, 54 per cent were flex-fuel models. Cane sugar is an easy source of the ethanol fuel and is right on the doorstep for happy Brazilian drivers.
The surging cost of sugar is closely linked to the rising price of oil, which jumped again last week. The price of a barrel of Brent crude closed on Friday at $65.20.
Analysts believe the use of sugar cane to produce ethanol as a fuel alternative will grow. But the price of sugar in Britain's supermarkets has not yet been affected. In fact, the Institute of Grocery Distributors said the average price of sugar on the shelf was slightly lower than a year ago because of competition between supermarkets.
The rising prices of sugar and oil are both features of a broader booming market for all commodities from fuel to food basics and industrial metals.
This was reflected two weeks ago when investment manager Hermes, operator of the massive BT pension scheme, said that it was allocating three per cent of its assets to the commodities market in the hope of riding the current commodity wave.
It is thought that other pension schemes keen to fill potential shortfalls in their funds will look at commodities as investments.

