Hamas warns of violence after talks: As Israelis and Palestinians meet in Annapolis, die-hard leaders threaten escalating resistance

HAMAS OFFICIALS have issued stark warnings that the Israeli-Palestinian peace conference in Annapolis this week is likely to result in more violence rather than settlement, including a threat from the group to escalate its own 'resistance' to Israeli occupation.
In a series of statements delivered from both Damascus and the Gaza Strip, which Hamas controls, the organisation piled more pressure on a meeting that most commentators have suggested has little chance of producing any concrete moves towards Palestinian statehood. 
In the Syrian capital Abu Marzouk said Hamas, which was not invited to Annapolis in Maryland, did not expect the talks to produce any benefits for the Palestinians. 'Resistance in all its forms will escalate in the West Bank and Gaza against the Zionist enemy,' he said in an interview on the Hamas website. 'This is because Annapolis will expose the arbitrariness of the settlement track and its destructive endeavours.'
In Gaza, a Hamas official condemned the decision by Arab powers to endorse this week's US-hosted conference, saying the talks would favour Israel's policies rather than Palestinian demands.
Arab League ministers agreed on Friday to attend the conference in the hope of promoting the creation of a Palestinian state and pushing for Israel to return the occupied Golan Heights to Syria as part of a regional peace process.
A Hamas official, Sami Abu Zuhri, called the announcement 'a great shock for Palestinians because it opened the door for direct normalisation with the occupation (Israel) amid (its) continued escalation and aggression'.
A third Hamas official - also in Gaza - warned that the group had mastered the technology to make the Qassam rockets it fires at Israel much deadlier by packing them with more explosives. It follows the warning by Israeli officials that Hamas might try to disrupt the conference with more intense rocket fire.
Marzouk's comments come as pre-conference talks in Jerusalem broke down days before Israeli and Palestinian leaders prepared to travel to the US. Negotiators from both sides failed to agree on a joint document to present to the conference.
The Israeli team for Annapolis will be led by Ehud Olmert, the Prime Minister, and the Palestinians by Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Palestinian Authority. Both men are weak domestically, which will make it harder for them to implement any agreement.
Abbas lost control of the Gaza Strip to Hamas, while Olmert is supported by a coalition government that is divided on the use of negotiations with the Palestinians. Analysts doubt whether either man has the political support to implement the changes required for peace.
However, political leaders were upbeat about the chances of success for the summit. Salam Fayad, the Palestinian Prime Minister, said his negotiators were going to the US to hasten the establishment of a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital.
Most commentators do not foresee meaningful results emerging from the meeting, however. They believe the most likely outcome will be a return to phase one of the road map promoted by President Bush in 2003. The first phase envisaged the Palestinians establishing state institutions and preventing terrorism while Israel was to freeze all settlement expansion and remove illegal outposts in the West Bank.
Yossi Alpher, an Israeli strategic analyst and former adviser to Ehud Barak, the Defence Minister, when he was Prime Minister, said he had no expectation of anything of importance happening in the US. 'There will be the ritual speeches and a celebration of the fact that they are both going back to phase one of the road map. Everything has been rigged to call it a success, but the problems start the day after the conference,' he said. 'Olmert cannot reopen the PLO office in Jerusalem or remove the illegal outposts. Mahmoud Abbas is incapable of expanding security beyond Ramallah and a small part of Nablus. He can't do anything with Gaza.'
Alpher predicted that the only possible surprise that could emerge was a resumption of peace talks between Israel and Syria. Barak is said to believe that Israel would profit more from peace with Syria than the Palestinians. He said: 'Negotiations with Syria are more worthwhile because the payoff is bigger, but that will depend on the Americans.'
Syria has said it will attend the conference if its claim for the return of the Golan Heights from Israel is on the agenda. Israel captured the heights in the 1967 Six-Day War, and Syria insists on their return before any peace deal.
'Syria will wait until it receives the conference agenda,' said Walid Moallem, the Syrian Foreign Minister. 'President Bashir al-Assad will then decide whether to attend or not, and at what level.'
Saudi Arabia's Foreign Minister, Saud al-Faisal, said he would attend, saying the gathering must make serious progress. 'The Arab peace follow-up group has decided to accept the invitation to attend Annapolis at a ministerial level to discuss the peace process,' al-Faisal said at the end of talks by Arab League foreign ministers in Cairo.


Anguish for mother of suicide girl as 'cyber-tormentor' escapes the law: As neighbours mourn, the family of a teenager who took her life after online hoax pledges a legal battle

POLICE RARELY need to patrol the small suburban town of Dardenne Prairie, Missouri. Its affluent residents are mainly law-abiding professionals whose children play safely behind the picket fences of smart houses in upmarket roads. 'Small and quaint' is how it describes itself.
But last night the St Charles County Sheriff's Department was on alert. Feelings are running high in this tight-knit community. And the focus was on one home in Waterford Crystal Drive and a planned candlelit vigil outside by parents and children with placards reading 'Justice for Megan'. 'It's all we can do,' says Tina Meier. 'It's for Megan.'
Megan Meier was Tina's daughter. She was vulnerable, a little overweight, suffered from depression and she was only 13. About a year ago she persuaded her parents to let her have an account on the social networking site MySpace. And on it she met Josh Evans, 16 and handsome, who told her she was 'beautiful'.
Six weeks later she was dead - found by her distraught parents hanging from a beam in her bedroom closet. After weeks of kind compliments, Josh had suddenly turned. He'd called her 'mean' and said he'd heard she was nasty to her friends.
Others then joined in the online onslaught, saying she was 'fat' and a 'whore'. For Megan, who, says her mother, had been regularly bullied and 'had been striving for years for a boy to like her,' the rejection was too much.
But Josh never existed. He was made up. And, in another cruel twist made public for the first time last week, he was apparently the creation of the mother of one of Megan's friends who lived four doors away in Waterford Crystal Drive.
What is more, despite both police and FBI investigations, Megan's embittered parents have been told that Lori Drew, 48, the woman they accuse of causing the death of their 'goofy, bouncy and beautiful daughter,' faces no charges. Cyberspace, it seems, has outpaced the law.
'We've been told there is no law to 'fit'. That is why this vigil is so important,' Tina, a real estate agent told The Observer . 'I cannot do anything to bring her back. But what I can do is press for change. And I get comfort from the fact that a tightening of the law will be Megan's legacy and protect other children from this ever happening again.'
The allegation, according to Tina and Megan's father Ron, and also contained in a report filed by the St Charles County Sheriff's Department, is that Drew perpertrated this heartless online hoax to win Megan's confidence and establish if she was badmouthing her own daughter, Sarah, now 15.
For a year the Meiers kept quiet on their attorney's advice. Last week they broke their silence for the first time. Prosecutors say the case is complicated, and there is no way of proving why this young girl took her life, though they may re-examine if there is new evidence.
But the allegation, and lack of action, has bewildered and enraged America. Virtual vigilantism has taken over. Irate bloggers have posted details of Drew and her husband Curt, 51, on the internet identifying their home and telephone number and details of their jobs, his as a manager in a local factory, hers as an ad saleswoman.
The couple, now bombarded with hate mail and reportedly receiving death threats, have remained silent on legal advice.
Now Dardenne Prairie is turning on them. They are shunned by neighbours. They have had a brick through their window and been subjected to a paintball attack and false 911 calls. Last week the town's board of aldermen unanimously passed a law making cyber-harassment a misdeamenour with a maximum penalty of 90 days in jail and/or a $500 fine.
'It's not much,' admitted Mayor Pam Fogarty, who hugged a tearful Tina Meier after the vote; her own daughter went to the same school as Megan and she was due to join the candlelit vigil. 'But it's a start. We intend to press for changes to the state and federal laws.'
Tina, now in the process of divorcing Ron, concedes Lori Drew may not have thought of the consequences of her actions. But, she says, Megan had had a 'typical teenager' on-off-on-again friendship with her own daughter, had regularly slept over at their house and accompanied them on family outings. Drew knew of Megan's emotional problems, for which she was receiving counselling and medication.
'She might as well have held a gun to her head. She thought it was funny, she thought it was a game. I just want them behind bars,' Tina said. 'She was an adult and she preyed on and stalked a child, posing as a 16-year-old boy. She messed with her. She screwed with her mind. She lifted her up and then crushed her right back down.'
'I hear she's receiving death threats and that she's been besieged in their home. But I don't feel one ounce sorry for her for the repercussions in any shape or form. I intend to fight to the bitter end to see her prosecuted.' 

Fleet Heroes:: Atkins 'We will carry on looking for ways to reduce our environmental impact'

WINNER: BUSINESS MILEAGE
It is an impressive victory in the fight for a greener planet. Engineering consultancy Atkins has cut annual mileage from 1 million to 760,000 miles - a reduction the same as the distance from the earth to the moon.
One of the main drivers of this success is the expertise of Andy Dean (pictured right), the Atkins programme director responsible for its 10-year contract with Network Rail - a contract that involves sending staff across the south west to check the network and examine structural problems. When Dean decided it was time to think sustainably about his company's own travel plans, he used a three-pronged strategy to cut carbon emissions.
Recruitment was streamlined to find people in areas where there were ongoing projects, reducing the number of hours engineers spent on the road. Atkins ensured engineers had a prop erly planned route for consecutive jobs, avoiding any wasted miles. The final measure was to encourage employees to work from home wherever possible.
'We really wanted to reduce our impact on the environment,' said Dean. 'We will carry on striving to do this and will be looking for new initiatives.' 
RUNNER-UP: JAMES MCNAUGHTON GROUP
One of the UK's leading paper and printer supply merchants has increased the fuel efficiency of its petrol cars by 20 per cent and of diesel cars by 31 per cent, and reduced business mileage by 107,000 miles despite an increase in fleet size.

