Blair aide: cash probe poisoning politics

ONE OF Tony Blair's most senior aides has attacked police investigation into cash for honours, saying that repeated delays in winding it up have poisoned British politics. In a remarkable admission from the heart of Number 10, the aide said the result was a 'blight' not just on Labour and the Prime Minister, but on the whole of democracy.
The aide is understood to be reflecting feelings in Downing Street that the length of the police investigation, which has been running for nearly a year, is frustrating and unnecessary. There has been growing tension between the government and the police inquiry team, led by Assistant Commissioner John Yates.
'At different times, they [the police] said it would end in different periods,' the aide told The Observer
'They said it was supposed to end in September. Then it was supposed to end in October. Then it was supposed to end in December, then January. So I don't attach much credence to whatever anyone says. But I hope it ends soon, because it is a blight on all politics, not just the Labour party. We expect it to end in the next couple of weeks. Whether it does is another matter.'
Asked whether Number 10 had been given specific reason to believe that the police would send the completed inquiry to the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) in the next two weeks the aide said: 'Yes'.
Blair yesterday admitted for the first time how bruising the affair was to government, acknowledging it was 'hard to stay calm' amid such a storm.
But in stark contrast to his senior aide's expression of alarm, Blair urged Labour activists to show patience and seemed keen to avoid further friction with the police.
Addressing his party's national policy forum in London, he said the prospect of a record fourth straight election victory would 'not be decided by current events, but it will be about whether we have the dynamism, the energy, the vision and above all clear, well thought out poli cies for the future of our country. . . It will be about changes that endure, not controversies that pass.'
While Blair's aides, and a number of senior cabinet ministers, were standing by the Prime Minister, some ministers were openly discussing options to speed him on his way. Options included asking the national executive committee, the party's ruling body, to set a timetable for his departure - making clear before May's local elections that he will be gone within weeks. Another pos sibility being discussed was to urge the Chancellor Gordon Brown to strike a new deal with Blair, involving a public announcement in April of a departure date.
Neither move would have the effect of forcing Blair from Downing Street. Both would signal to voters he was on his way.
The CPS could take months to decide on any possible legal action, but Blair was not expecting to be charged, because he has not interviewed under caution. MPs believe that the police, who have now sent nine files on the affair to the CPS, are working on four main case files - one on director of government relations Ruth Turner, two on chief fundraiser Lord Levy and one on the biotech donor Sir Christopher Evans, who was also arrested last year. They are understood to be studying laptops and BlackBerries belonging to figures including Turner.
Yesterday Blair insisted the scan dal would not affect the next election, telling his audience that while it was 'hard to stay calm', that should 'not change our course or our confidence'.
None the less, there appeared to be growing concern in government that his determination to stay until July risked major losses in May's elections and could leave the Chancellor, as his most likely successor, too little time to establish himself. 'At some point Gordon's got to say, "I have got to be in this job by June." He could say that publicly even - it would be better than conspiracy,' said one cabinet colleague who is close to Brown.
An immediate move by senior figures to force Blair out seemed unlikely, however. John Prescott, touted as a possible intermediary, effectively ruled that out by praising Blair's 'integrity' yesterday.
In a speech littered with references to Blair's forthcoming departure, he also warned Labour could lose the next election if candidates for the deputy leadership kept attacking government policies. When Blair went, it would be time to acknowledge mistakes but also to be constructive, he said.
'Any candidate has a critical role to play in ensuring the balance is right. Get it right and the government and party will benefit. Get it wrong and it could mean potential defeat at the polls.'
Some rebel MPs, however, clearly saw 26 March, the date pencilled in for reviving self-rule in Northern Ireland, as a possibly pivotal point, after which they wanted Blair to announce a departure date.
Jon Cruddas, one of the deputy leadership candidates, today calls for the party to move on from Blair. 'There is only a finite amount of time you can stay in this,' he told BBC1's The Politics Show in a pre-recorded interview. 'The page has turned, it's time to move on.'

World braced for huge surge in bird flu cases: 160,000 turkeys slaughtered on farm: Don't panic over food, plead experts: Concern at delay in informing Defra

THE NUMBER of cases of the deadly bird flu virus is increasing around the world as scientists struggle to combat the disease that is now threatening to jump species and infect humans. The news comes as Britain confirmed its first ever case of H5N1 in a farm in Suffolk. More than 160,000 birds will now be slaughtered as the country's farming industry goes on high alert for more outbreaks.
As the authorities responded to the outbreak in Suffolk, local residents questioned why it had taken some 48 hours after the first chicks died last Tuesday for the government's Department of Food and Rural Affairs, Defra, to be informed. But there was also wider concern. Japan and Nigeria have reported a series of cases of the lethal virus, and China, Egypt, Russia, South Korea and Vietnam have also revealed outbreaks in birds and in humans in the past two months. Indonesia began a mass bird cull in the capital city of Jakarta last Wednesday. At least 164 people are now known to have been killed by the disease across the globe.
The rapid spread of avian flu can be traced to the fact that the H5N1 virus is mutating as it spreads through birds and a variety of mammals including cats, tigers and pigs, said Robert Webster, a researcher at St Jude Children's Research Hospital, in Memphis, Tennessee.
Last night British health officials insisted the risk to the public was still negligible. It set in motion a series of emergency measures aimed at halting the spread of the disease among poultry in Britain. All the turkeys on the affected farm at Holton near Lowestoft, the largest poultry centre run by the breeder Bernard Matthews, are now being culled. Yesterday, piles of slaughtered birds were being scooped into open tractor trailers before being removed for incineration.
An exclusion zone of three-kilometres (nearly two miles) has been set up around the farm. All poultry in the area are to be kept indoors and tested for the H5N1 virus. A further 10km zone has been established in which all movements of poultry are banned, and last night another 2,090sq km restriction zone was created to isolate poultry from wild birds. Other measures will include a ban on bird shows, poultry markets and pigeon racing. This follows a decision by Defra to revoke the national general licence on bird gatherings.
Last night, the National Farmers' Union president, Peter Kendall, said his organisation had warned members to be vigilant. A spokesman for Matthews said his organisation could confirm there had been a case of H5N1 avian influenza at its Holton site. But he added: 'It is important to stress that there is no risk to consumers.'
Dr Andrew Landeg, the government's deputy chief veterinary officer, revealed he had called in ornithologists in a bid to understand how wild fowl - now thought to be the most likely source of the Suffolk outbreak - might have carried the virus into one of the 22 turkey breeding sheds at the farm. Officials also needed to know what other areas of the country might now be at risk of outbreaks.
Last night, it was revealed that Defra had identified several areas in Britain considered to be at particular risk of picking up H5N1 from infected wild fowl. The farm at Horton was one of them. 
Avian flu expert Dr Colin Butter of the Institute of Animal Health said it was now crucial that veterinary scientists discover whether the farm was the first place this strain of flu had emerged. It could be that the outbreak was an 'unhappy chance event', or it could indicate a significant level of the disease in wild birds indigenous to the UK, which in turn would make the virus harder to stamp out. Exclusion zones and culling would not be sufficient to contain the virus, Butter added.
However, Landeg yesterday ruled out the alternative - the introduction of vaccinations for poultry, a measure already introduced in Holland - as being ineffective.
As a result, farmers with free-range flocks may face serious threats to their livelihood. However, one organic poultry producer said moves to house birds permanently indoors would be counter-productive. 'My birds are resistant to the range of diseases that affect conventional flocks because their immune systems have been boosted through living outdoors. I accept that as a new strain of bird flu, special measures may be required in the short-term, but these should not be at the expense of the principles of good husbandry.'
However, Landeg yesterday insisted that the disease could be contained. 'There's a good hope, if this is not the first case, we will be able to contain this disease.'
It was revealed last night that five people in Indonesia have died from the virus since the beginning of the year while Japan yesterday confirmed its fourth outbreak of H5N1 bird flu this year and Thailand has reported three outbreaks during the past month.

News in brief

Clean energy is next to godliness, says warden
A medieval Suffolk church is to be powered by solar energy, after having panels inserted in the roof. Michael McEvoy, warden of the 13th century St Mary's Church in Lidgate, says they will provide an unobtrusive way of reducing the church's carbon footprint.
Sex pest stalks lone women 
Police are hunting a man who sexually assaulted three lone women. Officers are urging women to take care when walking alone and to stay in well-lit areas after a series of similar sexual assaults in south east London.
Ostrich's early Easter egg
An ostrich has laid her first eggs of the season six weeks early because of the warm weather. Keepers at Marwell Zoo, near Winchester are expecting her to lay a dozen more eggs in the coming weeks.
Tom's driving test is the pits
Teenage motorsport champion Tom Bradshaw has been brought to a halt after failing his driving test. Tom, 17, who won the 2006 North West Formula Ford C Class championship, said: 'I can be sat on the starting grid of a race and I am perfectly calm, but this was totally different.'
Light plane wreckage found
Aircraft wreckage, believed to be from a two-seater light aircraft missing off the coast of Blackpool, was found by an RNLI lifeboat last night. The two men believed to have flown the aircraft from Exeter have not yet been found, and it is still unclear whether they died in the crash.
The Lottery
The winning Lotto numbers are 13 17 39 46 47 49, bonus 48. Thunderball numbers are 1 2 3 9 11, Thunderball 12.

