Donations 'not lawful' admits besieged Brown

Labour suffered more damage from its association with secretive donor David Abrahams last night, with Prime Minister Gordon Brown admitting the party had, inadvertently, broken electoral law.
Mr Brown said pounds 650,000 of donations made by Mr Abrahams through four intermediaries - one of whom is a part-time builder who "hates politicians" - would be handed back.
And Mr Brown's deputy, Harriet Harman, said she would return pounds 5,000 given to her deputy leadership campaign this summer by one of Mr Abrahams' associates, Janet Kidd.
One of her rivals for that job, Hilary Benn, had already revealed he had insisted another proffered pounds 5,000 came direct from Mr Abrahams rather than Ms Kidd. 
There is pressure on Ms Harman to explain why her campaign team did not make the same demands as Mr Benn's, and the Conservatives are demanding to know whether other senior figures knew proxy donations were being made.
Giving money to political parties under someone else's name without declaring it is illegal, and the Crown Prosecution Service confirmed it had made "initial contact" with independent watchdog the Electoral Commission, which is carrying out its own inquiry into the affair.
Mr Brown told journalists at Downing Street, "What has happened, where political donations have not been lawfully declared, is completely unacceptable, cannot be justified in any way, and this behaviour should never happen again in future. 
"The money was not lawfully declared so it will be returned."
He said the practice appeared to have been going on "for some years", but he had only been told of it on Saturday and had no memory of ever meeting Mr Abrahams.
Mr Brown told reporters he hadappointed the retired judge Lord McCluskey and the former Bishop of Oxford, Lord Harries, to advise on changes that need to be made to Labour's handling of donations.
They will receive a report from Labour's former general secretary Lord Whitty, going into all aspects of the affair.
Questions remain over whether senior figures in the party knew whether Mr Abrahams was using proxy figures to donate large sums of money to Labour.
A well-known figure in the North-East of England, the property developer was deselected as a parliamentary candidate in 1991.
Mr Brown confirmed that his own leadership campaign turned down a cheque from Mrs Kidd, though he said that this was purely because it had been decided not to accept funding from any sources unknown to the team.
Labour's General Secretary Peter Watt resigned on Monday after it emerged that Mr Abrahams donated the money to the party over four years, under three associates' names
Ms Harman said she had accepted a cheque from Ms Kidd "in good faith", but was now returning the money.
The cheque for pounds 5,000 arrived on July 4, one week after Ms Harman won the contest to be Labour's deputy leader.
She said she understood Ms Kidd to be a "regular Labour donor", and added, "I first heard about this on Friday and my campaign has today arranged to return the donation to Janet Kidd."
Ms Harman insisted her campaign had not been offered a donation by Mr Abrahams, and she had "never" had any contact with him.
Speaking to the BBC, she added, "I know they spoke to her and said where to send the cheque and who to make it out to, but my campaign team understood her to be an existing donor to the Labour Party and indeed she was."
Ms Harman's campaign treasurer, Baroness Gale - a former General Secretary of Welsh Labour - said, "I had no reason to believe that it [the cheque] was from anyone else.
"I would have checked that she was a legitimate donor by the rules of the Electoral Commission. I reported it to them in the normal way."
Environment Secretary Hilary Benn revealed he turned down a similar offer of cash to his deputy leadership campaign after being told by Labour peer Baroness Jay of its true origin. He then accepted pounds 5,000 direct from Mr Abrahams.
The Conservatives said there were a series of questions for Ms Harman to answer, including whether Baroness Jay or anyone else warned her that Abrahams was making donations through third parties.
Mr Brown was repeatedly asked by journalists yesterday whether he had full confidence in Ms Harman. A Downing Street spokesman later acted to quash any potential "ambiguity" over Mr Brown's backing by stating that she had his "full support".
The affair comes as Mr Brown and his Cabinet are desperate to get back on the front foot after days of damaging headlines over missing child benefit data, criticism from former military chiefs and poor opinion polls.
Lib Dem MP for Brecon and Radnor, Roger Williams, said, "Questions urgently need to be asked about the circumstances of these donations, and whether there are any further skeletons in the closet. 
"In the wake of investigations into allegations of 'cash for honours' these revelations will deal another devastating blow to the public's perception of political parties.
"If trust is to be regained, donations must be completely transparent and subject to tough spending caps during and between elections."

Tourist's cigarette end started killer grass fire

A briton flicked a burning cigarette on to dry grass, starting a runaway fire that killed another tourist on South Africa's Table Mountain, a witness told a court yesterday.
Anthony Cooper, 37, from Gowerton, Swansea, is accused of starting the fire in January last year and killing British tourist Janet Chesworth, 65, who was hiking in the area.
Cooper has pleaded not guilty to two charges of culpable homicide. He has also pleaded not guilty to contravening the National Veld and Forest Fire Act.
Taxi driver Craig Ward told Cape Town Regional Court that he was parked near a cable car station at the foot of the mountain waiting for possible fares.
He noticed Cooper, a salesman who now lives in Brighton, walking down the mountain slope towards his own car.
"He threw his leftover cigarette on to the dry grass and within seconds a flame started due to the condition of the grass and strong winds," Mr Ward said.
Newly-retired Mrs Chesworth, from Sedgley, West Midlands, who was on holiday in the area, was killed by the smoke from the fire.
Mr Ward told the court how he had seen Cooper making a flicking motion with his wrist as he discarded his cigarette.
He added, "Between the flick of the hand and the fire there were 20 or maybe 30 seconds. I first saw smoke and almost instantly saw fire. There was a lot of old, dead grass around there."
When asked by the defence counsel why he hadn't thrown the tea he was drinking onto the spreading fire, Mr Ward added, "This wasn't like your normal barbecue fire. It started and then ran. It looked very unusual. It was almost as if there might have been fuel on the ground."
The fire had raged out of control very rapidly, he said.
"Even the people who worked there did not try to stop it. You were going to get hurt. It was impossible to stop it. You should have seen this fire take off. I tried phoning the fire brigade. There was no cell phone reception."
Mr Ward then drove to the lower cable car station on the iconic mountain.
"I told the police I saw the guy who started the fire," he said. "I gave them my name and number. It was chaos there. They were evacuating everybody and we were forced to leave."
He later described Cooper driving off in the aftermath of the fire. "I would say he was fleeing. He could have stopped. They caught him at the bottom, or so I was told. He pulled away like someone trying to get away. He could have stayed and tried to help."
However, defence counsel Reuben Liddell told the court the fire had started not from a discarded cigarette, but rather flared up after a piece of match shot off as Cooper lit his cigarette.
"He believes this could have started the fire," said Mr Liddell. "He continued to smoke. Then he saw that there was a fire. He tried to stamp it out. He screamed and yelled for help, but nobody came.
"He then called the emergency phone number. He identified himself as Cooper.
"'The grass on Table Mountain has caught alight,' Cooper said."
It was as a result of this phone call that the emergency services were called to the scene, he said.
Cooper has been living in Cape Town since his arrest 20 months ago.
The trial continues.

One in eight in Wales now working more than 48 hours a week

The number of staff in Wales working more than 48 hours a week is on the rise, according to new research from trade union body the TUC.
The increase in Wales is the highest in the UK, rising by 1.3% since last year to 12.2% of the workforce. This represents an increase of 17,000 to 143,000 workers
Across Wales, more than one in eight of the workforce now work more than 48 hours each week.
Under the European Union working time regulations workers are protected from working more than an average 48-hour week. But in the UK - unlike other EU countries - all workers can opt out of this protection.
London has the highest proportion of the workforce working long hours with 16.1% compared to 14.8% in the south east of England). Only the south west of England and the East Midlands buck the trend with a small fall in long hours workers.
While the law protects people against an average working week of more than 48 hours unless they opt out of working time rules, the Wales TUC says a lack of enforcement means that bad employers know that this is one employment right that they can breach with little or no risk of any consequences.
The union umbrella organisation says good employers have responded to concerns about the need for a greater work-life balance, but added that their figures show that a hard core of bad employers are taking no notice of either the law or calls from Government, progressive employers and unions.
Across the UK, the latest Labour Force Survey shows that 93,000 more people now work more than 48 hours a week, taking the total to almost three and a quarter million. This is a rise to 13% of the workforce - up from 12.8% last year).
Wales TUC head of campaigns and policy Derek Walker said, "These are very disturbing numbers. They suggest that the slow, but at least steady, decline in those working more than 48 hours a week has come to an end.
"Many employers recognise that overworked staff are unproductive by introducing more flexibility and better work-life balance, often under union pressure. But it now looks as if their efforts are being undone by those who don't care about long hours.
"No one should forget that 48 hours is six eight-hour days - more than enough for anyone every week.
"There is undoubted abuse of the law, but employers know they can get away with it because it is rarely enforced. Neither the Health and Safety Executive nor local authorities who share responsibility for enforcement have the resources to implement the law.
"And the Government knows that employers can abuse the opt-out as ministers consulted on ways to close loopholes in 2004, but have yet to bring forward any concrete proposals for change.
"The current discussions on how best to protect vulnerable workers and enforce existing rights must include working time rights and closing the loopholes that make a voluntary opt-out a joke."
The Wales TUC says these official figures underestimate long-hours working as the sample on which the survey is based is unlikely to include a proper share of migrant workers and excludes those who live at their place of work, such as some hotel and care staff who work long hours.

