One Voice On Transport

POWERFUL transport body is to be created as city leaders seek to make life easier for North-East motorists and commuters. 
The city region transport body will be set up next year with powers over buses and roads from Northumberland down to Durham.
The new authority brings together a collection of councils and transport groups based throughout Tyne and Wear who will work with others in the region. 
It has not been awarded any extra powers by central Government but is expected to have a strong lobbying voice on issues such as A1 dualling.
The planners behind the group, which will eventually become the region's most powerful transport authority, are eager to get started on groundbreaking travel schemes.
The interim transport board wants to look at starting a cross-ticketing project to make it possible to use just one pass for buses, trains and the Metro.
It will also look at ways of improving connections to London and across the Pennines to Manchester.
Councillors on the ambitious board will bring together agencies such as One NorthEast and business groups and will be led by North Tyneside's elected mayor John Harrison. He said: "It is similar to, say, the Passenger Transport Authority, but much more powerful.
"That obviously just covers passengers but we will have a real chance to improve motorways and rail links in the region.
"And it's not just a lobbying group, but a very real presence that will solve a lot of connectivity problems here.
"We will not just solve problems within the region but make it much easier to get from the North-East to London and the rest of the UK.
"This is a fantastic opportunity that businesses, local leaders and indeed The Journal have often called for and now we have the chance to improve our connections by road, rail, sea and air."
The initial steps have won praise from the North-East Chamber of Commerce.
Ross Smith, head of policy, said: "The suggestion is this will be something loosely modelled on the Transport for London organisation and that is a very positive step.
"If it brings together the different transport bodies and allows them to meet under the same roof and decide the region's priorities together, that will be a great move.
"They are planning to have Network Rail and the Highways Agency accountable to this body, and certainly in terms of the Highways Agency, that would be a very welcome move."
Minister for the North-East Nick Brown said the board had "the potential to make a step change in the development of transport policy in the region.
"But it is very important that as well taking a strategic view, the new body looks closely at the details as well."
Liz Smith, assistant regional director, CBI North-East, said: "It is vitally important that the fragmented governance of transport is streamlined to produce a more efficient transport network for both the movement of goods and people around the region. These proposals could bring about much needed coordination of transport policy across the City Region, and business will be keen to be involved in this."
Northumberland County Council have, however, sounded a note of caution.
Council leader Peter Hillman said: "The needs and challenges of our urban and rural communities are very different. 
"We'll continue to work with other authorities to explore ways that Northumberland and the wider region could benefit." 

Rapist Veteran Jailed

A DISTURBED Northumberland war veteran who claims he received no treatment for his mental condition from the Ministry of Defence was yesterday jailed indefinitely for raping and kidnapping a woman.
Newcastle Crown Court heard that Christopher Edwards, 52, served in the Royal Navy in both the Falklands conflict in 1982 and the Gulf War in 1991, and had suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder as well as being diagnosed as having an adjustment disorder.
Yesterday the Blyth man, described by Judge Michael Cartlidge at Newcastle Crown Court as "dangerous" and "obsessed" is beginning an indefinite prison sentence for public protection after admitting he carried out two separate attacks on the woman, who cannot be named for legal reasons.
He must now serve at least four years behind bars before he is even considered for release.
Julian Smith, prosecuting, told Judge Cartlidge that on November 30 last year, Edwards, of Beal Close, had been at an address in Blyth with the victim when he said: "You are not going home until we have had sex".
He later forced himself on her, before bizarrely offering her a cup of tea and allowing her to leave.
The court was told the second incident, on December 2 last year, occurred after the woman returned home to her flat in Newcastle from work to find Edwards sitting outside the property in his car. He pursued her inside where he put rope around her neck, pulling her backwards.
The court was told Edwards pulled the woman, who remembered coughing and feeling choked, up the stairs and dragged her into the bedroom where he pushed her on to the bed and tied her thumbs and wrists with plastic cable ties and gagged her with black tape. 
Mr Smith said that Edwards then told the victim he had a knife, before revealing it to her and bundling her, struggling, into the boot of his Vauxhall Zafira.
The court heard that the victim managed to loosen her gag and use her mobile phone to call a friend and dial 999 while still in the boot.
Once at his home, Mr Smith said the victim's ankles were also tied, before again, she was offered a cup of tea. 
Police arrived shortly afterwards and Edwards admitted kidnapping his victim, who suffered a red neck and bruises to her body.
The court was told the woman remains severely traumatised, suffering from paranoia, and is still scared every time she sees a Vauxhall Zafira car.
Geoff Knowles, for Edwards, said he was "a man on the edge" who had suffered from both physical and mental problems. 
He said: "This was bizarre behaviour against a background of once being diagnosed with an adjustment disorder and once having suffered post traumatic stress disorder. 
"Despite this he has not received treatment from Her Majesty's services, and the 25th anniversary of the Falkland's war brought it all back to him."
Last night, the Ministry of Defence refused to comment on the case, but Blyth Valley MP Ronnie Campbell said he was outraged a war veteran had used his experiences as a serviceman to try and excuse his criminal behaviour.
He said: "Does the fact he says he received no help give him the right to rape and kidnap a woman? I don't think so. I think it's disgusting he has tried to use his service history to benefit him in court."

More Metro Misery As Vandals Damage Track

MISERY struck Metro commuters again yesterday after vandals targeted the system.
The multi-million pound Sunderland line was suspended for more than three hours after a road sign was thrown on to a track and damaged a carriage.
The early-morning attack, at the Stadium of Light station, forced thousands of commuters travelling between South Hylton and East Boldon to find alternative methods of transport.
It comes just a day after a hole created by disused mine shafts appeared under tracks in North Tyneside.
No passengers were aboard the train at Sunderland yesterday, which was making its way to begin service at South Hylton just before 6am.
Slight damage was caused to the train, which had to be withdrawn from service, but the driver was uninjured.
Officers from the British Transport Police are now investigating the scene.
PC Dave Burns, from North-East Area Command, said: "These kind of incidents are extremely serious.
"The potential for what people see as a silly prank can turn into a tragedy.
"All lines of enquiry are being looked at and also any forensic evidence that comes to light."
A spokesman for Nexus, which operates the Tyne and Wear Metro, added: "What happened in Sunderland was a mindless piece of stupidity which caused a massive inconvenience for a lot of people.
"Replacement bus services were arranged and bus drivers accepted Metro ticket and passes from passengers."
Meanwhile a points failure at South Gosforth held up passengers for more than half an hour.
This added to chaos in North Tyneside after thousands of commuters were forced to find alterative routes when Northumberland Park was closed following a hole appearing close to the track.
Bosses at Nexus confirmed the station, used by about 10,000 passengers a day, will be out of service for several weeks.
The station opened just under two years ago to cater for the redevelopment of the area, including a new housing estate and Sainsbury's supermarket.
Passengers have been advised to allow extra time for their journeys, with a replacement bus service running between Four Lane Ends and Shiremoor stations, calling at all stations in between.
Extra trains will also operate between Shiremoor and St James via Wallsend to give passengers from Monkseaton and Whitley Bay an alternative route into Newcastle.
Sunday shoppers are reminded that the line running between Haymarket and Jesmond is also closed due to essential redevelopment work. The line is also closed after 7.45pm Monday to Thursday. A replacement bus service is available.
Anyone with information about yesterday's vandalism should contact the British Transport Police on (0191) 232- 1253.

Report Warns Of Cctv Failures

MORE than eight out of 10 CCTV cameras do not provide satisfactory images for the police, a Home Office report said today.
The new National CCTV Strategy exposed a series of failures in current use of video surveillance. The report written by the Home Office and the Association of Chief Police Officers revealed:
The majority of cameras are not positioned in places where they can combat terrorism or serious crime;
Some cameras originally installed to fight crime are now being used to monitor bus lanes;
Many cameras in public places such as shopping centres and transport hubs are designed to "monitor crowds, slips, trips and falls" rather than detect crime;
Some police forces have failed to keep pace with technological developments, leading to evidence being lost;
Some cameras were poorly maintained and "not fit for purpose".
The report said: "Anecdotal evidence suggests that over 80% of the CCTV footage supplied to the police is far from ideal, especially if it is being used for primary identification or identities are unknown and identification is being sought. In some cases the cameras' initial purpose has been changed or they are required to perform a number of additional and conflicting tasks."
Noting the crucial role played by CCTV in the investigation into the July 7 suicide bombings, the report went on: "The majority of cameras have not been placed in positions which may be required for the prevention and detection of serious and organised crime and counter-terrorism."
A Home Office spokesman said: "CCTV has proven its effectiveness time and again in tackling crime and disorder. It also plays a vital role in the fight against terrorism and helps communities feel safer.
Shadow home secretary David Davis said: "The countless victims of crime in this country will be stunned to hear that not only can they not get a police officer on the streets but also most of the CCTV footage that should help them get justice is less than useless."

£260m Bill In The Pipeline

THE new Tyne Tunnel will cost at least £260m a many times more expensive project than the £12.5m original.
The Tyne and Wear Passenger Transport Authority is confident the new tunnel will be open by 2011, with work set to begin early next year. 
Coun Tom Hanson, chair of the new Tyne crossing working group, said: "Today's anniversary is an important milestone in the history of the Tyne Tunnel. We are also looking forward to an exciting future, with the construction of the second vehicle tunnel. 
"This project is vital to the economic prospects of Tyne and Wear to stimulate investment and job creation."

