Pearson: All i

Adam Pearson held his tongue for as long as he could over the summer.
Continually frustrated in his quest to sign Phil Parkinson from Colchester, one man caused him more headaches than any other.
But long-serving chairman Peter Heard is a figure of principles and he was not about to let Parkinson go without a fight.
As a result, relations between the two chairmen became a little strained. Christmas cards are unlikely to be exchanged.
When the High Court injunctions were lodged and compensation figures rejected, Pearson finally lost his rag with Heard.
In a public explosion, he branded Heard "personally vindictive" and called his actions "ludicrous".
Tonight, Pearson will meet Heard for the first time since finally agreeing to a £400,000 settlement. Just don't expect any handshakes in the Layer Road boardroom.
"I don't think I'll probably even see him if I'm honest," said Pearson when asked if there will be a show of reconciliation.
"My view was - and still is - that the whole situation didn't need to get personal in the way it turned out to be.
"It was just a business transaction and I think they got a very good deal out of it.
"I would have been happy just to get the deal that they were offered but obviously everybody is different."
The first return of Parkinson will take centre stage at Layer Road but having been at one another's throats in June, a few cameras may be pointed towards the main stand.
It won't quite live up to the Roy Keane and Mick McCarthy bill of last Friday at Molinuex and Pearson for one, will not allow it.
He explained: "I have to say that shaking hands and relationships between two chairmen are completely irrelevant.
"What I think of one chairman and what he thinks of me is unimportant.
"The only thing that matters to me is that the team are able to put in a good performance for the fans that travel down there and make sure that we beat them.
"That will help bring them back into the battle that we're in and everything else is just hyperbole and nonsense."
Ironically, it was among Heard's final acts of his time as owner of the club. Within two months of the Parkinson saga, he sold his controlling stake in the club.
Heard remains as chairman, overseeing an impressive grounding in the Championship.
Speculation among fans suggested that Pearson was so unimpressed with his counterpart that he would sit among the away supporters rather than in the directors' box.
But that's not the case by all accounts.
"All I know is that I'll have my usual seat at Layer Road," confirmed Pearson.
"They're under new ownership now but that is all irrelevant to me, I'm only concerned about getting a win at a very difficult place.
"I don't think it's personal from anyone's point of view.
"I've no particular empathy or relationship with anyone on the Colchester board and certainly not the chairman. It will be a functional night out.
"Therefore it's a massive game from that point of view."
Having guided the U's to promotion last season, it is possible to forgive Heard for fighting tooth and nail to keep hold of Parkinson.
But the transition to new management has so far proved to be seamless at Layer Road.
Geraint Williams, former assistant of Parkinson, has steered Colchester to seven straight home wins but Pearson believes City will be well-equipped to end that run.
"The facilities are not good and they are not conducive to enjoying the football occasion," added the City chairman.
"But saying that, I'm sure our team are much better-equipped to go there than virtually any other in this league - simply because we are used to it.
"We've had a few seasons of going to grounds like Layer Road and I would be very disappointed in the players if they weren't mentally prepared for it.
"That is the key to getting a win and perhaps the reason why some of the bigger clubs have struggled."
What do you think?

My boy helped me beat habit

After more than 15 years as a smoker, Jonathan Harker decided to quit for his baby boy.
Mr Harker, 35, used to smoke 20 cigarettes a day after taking up the habit as a teenager.
But this year he made the decision to kick the habit after the birth of Oliver, now seven months.
He said: "I had wanted to quit for a long time and had tried unsuccessfully before.
"I knew the new laws surrounding smoking would be coming in soon, but I also wanted to stop because I have a baby son and didn't want to smoke around him."
Mr Harker's GP gave him a number for Hull and East Riding NHS Stop Smoking Support Service and he joined a weekly class in Hull city centre.
Now, having been smoke-free for more than a month, he has decided to go it alone.
But Mr Harker put his success down to the help of the stop smoking service and recommended it to others.
He said: "I found it much easier going to a class where there were people to help you.
"I put off stopping smoking repeatedly, but if you go to the sessions, you have someone checking on you and there is an incentive to continue.
"I would recommend it to others who want to give up."
Like many people Mr Harker, who lives in the city centre, started smoking as a teenager.
He said: "I remember starting smoking as if it was yesterday. I was in the cadets and when I was 13 all my friends were smoking.
"I tried a cigarette and it made me sick, but I was determined to carry on.
"I never really liked smoking. It smells and I didn't want to stand outside when the new laws came in."
A ban on smoking in public places is expected to come into effect in June.
The stop smoking service in East Yorkshire has a high success rate, with seven in 10 smokers who attend the classes kicking the habit.
The Mail is supporting the service with its Commit To Quit campaign.
Readers can pledge to give up smoking by filling in the form in the Mail. The forms will then be passed to the stop smoking service, which will contact readers with advice or information on classes.

£7.5m funding for local policing

Neighbourhood policing in the region is to be given a £7.5m boost over the next two years, the Government has revealed.
Home Office Minister Tony McNulty announced Humberside Police would receive £7.5m to increase the number of police community support officers (PCSOs) between 2006 and 2008.
In 2006-07, the force will receive £3.1m, which will rise to £4.4m in 2007-08.
The allocation is part of a funding package that will see cash for police and PCSOs increase by more than 40 per cent, Mr McNulty said.
The cash is being awarded to help achieve the Government's target of having 16,000 PCSOs in forces across England and Wales by the end of next April.
Mr McNulty said the Government now accepted a target of 24,000 PCSOs was excessive.
He said: "The Home Secretary and I accept the argument put forward by the police service that neighbourhood policing does not need 24,000 PCSOs.
"This settlement will help provide 16,000 PCSOs and we do not expect the number to increase beyond that."
The funding increase comes after a reassessment of the position for 2007-08 and a review of requirements as the roll-out of community policing continues.
Mr McNulty said he was confident the police service was making "excellent progress" towards reaching the target in April 2007.
Some 6,700 neighbourhoods have neighbourhood policing teams, which equates to 2,600 teams in total because some cover more than one area.
Mr McNulty said: "The next priority will be to complete the full roll-out of neighbourhood policing teams by March 2008 in a sustainable manner that takes account of local needs."
Some £315m in will be made available in 2007-08 to fund PCSOs and the policing roll-out, he said.
The Neighbourhood Policing fund will receive £235m, £45m will go towards the costs of PCSOs recruited in 2002-04 and £35m will help forces manage the wider costs of delivery.

Vision of the future
Right now it's just a muddy track - but in less than a year it'll be Hull's premier shopping street.
The St Stephen's development is rising from Ferensway, with its undulating glass roof and fast-rising hotel already becoming landmarks on the city's skyline.
The Mail got the first look inside the development last week and saw how the project was on track to open in September.
Where just a year ago there was nothing but wasteland, the covered shopping street at the heart of the £200m development is now clearly visible.
But it's not just shoppers who are waiting anxiously for the centre's doors to open.
Every year Hull loses millions of pounds as shoppers from the area choose to spend their money in Leeds, Meadowhall or York.
Everyone involved in the city's regeneration is crossing their fingers in the hope St Stephen's will bring back some of those shoppers into the city.
St Stephen's could soon be followed by Quay West, the planned extension to Princes Quay shopping centre that could bring more big names to Hull.
Project manager Richard Smedley, of Hessle, has lived in East Yorkshire for 15 years and said the St Stephen's development was good news for the area.
He said: "It should have a positive impact on Hull.
"If you look at what ING Real Estate's development director Stephen Berry is saying, it could retain up to £150m of retail spend in the city and that can only be good for the economy.
About 85 per cent of the structure has already been put up and the steel frame should be complete by February.
One of the street's most eye-catching features is the "Pod", the restaurant area to be suspended above shoppers.
It will be installed around Easter when most of the work on the surrounding buildings is complete.
Almost all trace of the site as it was has disappeared.
The former Northern Foods tower block, once such a familiar feature on Hull's skyline, stood where the corner of the Tesco store is now being erected.
St Stephen's Square itself, where contractors found graves and human remains dating back to the 1840s, sitsunderneath the supermarket floor.
The bodies were reinterred in Hedon Road before work moved on to remove all trace of the old square.
The Tesco store is a massive concrete platform sitting above a car park, though its roof is fast taking shape.
Mr Smedley said he has had a "mixed reception" from people when he tells them he's in charge of the St Stephen's project - but said people are generally optimistic about the future. "People are really pleased we are moving forward," he said.

Store helps pupils to bury time capsule

East Hull: A time capsule has been buried to mark the opening of Asda's Mount Pleasant store.
Store manager Tim Cullum buried the capsule at Hull's Museums Quarter with the help of pupils from Mersey Primary School in Derwent Street and Craven Primary School in New Bridge Road.
The pupils worked to create and find items that best captured Hull's history and the community.
Mr Cullum said: "This has provided us with a great opportunity to work in partnership with local schools and groups such as Hull Museums, which is what Asda is all about."
Sarah Howard, senior education officer for Hull Museums, said: "We are delighted to be a part of this exciting and stimulating project, particularly as it involves schools in our community that regularly visit our museums and a significant partner from the private sector.
"One day this capsule for children will provide historians or archaeologists with a wonderful snapshot of the life of children who went to schools in this community in 2006."

