TAMASIN'S LOVE FEAST TURNS SOUR

THEY had all the ingredients for a perfect relationship -- she was a successful TV chef and food writer while he ran two upmarket delicatessens.
So when the striking Tamasin Day-Lewis, daughter of the late Poet Laureate Cecil and sister of Hollywood actor Daniel, first met handsome New Yorker Rob Kaufelt at a food fair in Ireland, the attraction was instant.
Indeed, as the couple's relationship blossomed, Tamasin decided to devote her latest book -- the best- selling Where Shall We Go For Dinner? A Food Romance -- to their love affair.
That Tamasin was besotted with Kaufelt, there is no doubt.
Calling him 'irresistible', she writes: 'Crazy as it may seem, I remember thinking just one irrational thought: "My whole life has changed" as he fixed his megawatt stare full-beam on me.'
Alas, just weeks after the book was published last month, I can reveal there is a twist to the affair that leaves a bitter taste -- Somerset-based Tamasin and Kaufelt's love is no more.
Indeed, Kaufelt has returned to his native New York to run his cheese shops and is living with fellow American Nina Planck, who has recently given birth to his first child, a son called Julian.
'There was a great deal of love on both sides, but sometimes there are just other things which get in the way,' Kaufelt tells me.
'It is hard to have a sustained relationship between two people who come from two such different worlds and live so far away from each other -- she in Somerset and me in New York.'
All this is a far cry from how mother-of-three Tamasin, 54, who is separated from her husband, former Antiques Roadshow supremo John Shearer, describes her 'mutual passion' with Kaufelt, 60, as she charts their simmering romance following their first meeting five years ago.
Highlights of their travels included a trip to Italy -- where they celebrated Kaufelt's 59th birthday in Venice -- as well as gastronomic tours of Lyons and Gascony in France, not to mention holidays in Ireland and visits to Tamasin's Somerset home.
Adds a friend of Kaufelt's: 'He looks a good 20 years younger than he is and Nina is only in her 30s. He is charming and a lovely guy. It is no wonder Tamasin fell for him.' 
HASLAM CLOSES THE BOOK ON HIS TALES
FOR more than four decades he has been the favourite party guest of every hostess. So when man-about-town Nicky Haslam decided to write his memoirs, publishers were clamouring to secure his signature.
The manuscript was snapped up by Weidenfeld, where insiders tell me the book is a 'brilliant' account of London life written with 'great style'. And although it only goes up to the late Sixties, the publishers believed they had a potential bestseller on their hands.
Now, I hear, interior designer and decorator Haslam, 68, has had second thoughts and plans to buy out his contract. 'Nicky is prepared to repay his advance, which is in five figures, in order to get the manuscript back,' says a friend. 'Most of the people he's written about are dead so he's decided to bring it up to date by including the past 40 years or so.' Although wittily waspish in private, the Old Etonian style guru insists he is not a 'James Lees-Milne-style' diarist and that his book is an affectionate look at the personalities he has known.
A Weidenfeld figure tells me: 'Someone is going to pick up a very good book, but it isn't going to be us.'
HAS JAMES CRACKED IT?
OLYMPIC oarsman James Cracknell admits his 'Boys Own' adventures with fellow pretty boy Ben Fogle have been tough on their wives. But after reluctantly supporting their husbands' seafaring challenge to row the Atlantic, TV presenter Beverley Turner and Ben's party organiser wife Marina have at least been consulted about their planned epic trek to the South Pole next year. 'I didn't have the courage to tell my wife Ben and I were going to be crossing the Atlantic for 70 days so I just put the entry form on the kitchen table and waited for Beverley to find it,' Cracknell revealed. 'She wasn't very happy, not happy at all. So this time round I sat her down and asked her permission. It is difficult for our families when we're away, but we hopefully make up for it when we are at home.' Whether the wives offer them a warm welcome home remains to be seen.
BRIERS MAKES A SPLASH 
IT COULD have been a scene from The Good Life -- the TV comedy that made Richard Briers into a star -- when during a stay at a Norfolk hotel the 73-year-old actor got stuck in a roll-top iron bath. 'Richard was staying in the same hotel as me and he got wedged in this old-fashioned bath,' chortles actress Phyllida Law, mother of Oscarwinner-Emma Thompson. The pair were staying at Strattons Hotel in Swaffham while filming the new series of ITV1's Kingdom, in which Briers plays a randy OAP who falls for a much younger woman. Goodhumoured Briers took the incident in his stride. 'They got him out and he was telling everyone he wasn't embarrassed,' adds Phyllida.
AFTER landing the role of head girl in the St Trinian's remake while at RADA, starlet Gemma Arterton is graduating to another British institution -- James Bond. For I can reveal Gemma, 21, has been picked to star next to Daniel Craig in his second outing as 007.
Gemma (above) learned of her success only this week and has been sworn to secrecy until the cast is declared later this month. Says a source at Bondmakers Eon Productions: 'Gemma has the modern look and fits perfectly with the new vulnerable image of Bond.' The movie is described as a direct continuation of Craig's first Bond film, Casino Royale. Filming is due to start next month with shoots set up in Italy, Austria and Panama.
The role crowns a remarkable year for Gemma -- as well as St Trinian's, she has also starred in Love's Labour's Lost at The Globe.'It's the kind of thing you dream about when you are starting out,' she said at the time. 'I hope it proves I'm a versatile actress.'
FUTURE political historians will search in vain for the Formica-topped cafe table where John Major sought nourishment before and after his illicit liaisons with Edwina Currie.
Tevere, the former Tory PM's favourite greasy spoon in Great Peter Street, has closed after more than 70 years of serving politicians and civil servants as well as clergy from nearby Westminster Abbey.
A regular haunt of former Cabinet minister Jonathan Aitken, Conservative frontbencher Alan Duncan and Tory fundraiser Lord Ashcroft, it also played host to such diverse figures as Sinn Fein's Gerry Adams and politicianturned-TV personality Michael Portillo. Facing a four-fold increase in rent, Tevere served its last fry-up on Tuesday.
GENEROUS supporters of Elton John's Aids Foundation dug deep for his autumn hoopla, lavishly staged in Covent Garden last month. A final reckoning of the accounts now reveals the event, attended by Liz Hurley and a host of other celebrities, raised in excess of £350,000 for the charity, which does such brilliant work funding educational programmes and fighting discrimination against HIV sufferers.
PS
TODAY inquisitor John Humphrys, 64, made a rare public foray at the first night of Dealer's Choice in the West End.
His companion was not longtime love Valerie Sanderson, mother of his seven-year-old son, but attractive Guardian writer Catherine Bennett. Miss Bennett, 50, who is about to join the Observer, was once married to Lord Sackville, whose family home is a 365-room mansion in Kent. He left her after six years for one of the female employees of his publishing firm. Catherine, however, has been much admired by literary types ever since. She and Humphrys failed to go on to the aftershow party at the Empire Casino, where director Sam West, actor Roger Lloyd Pack and writer Anthony Holden played poker into the early hours.

CLOGTHORPE COUNCIL'S LITTLE CHRISTMAS BOX


CHEMISTS TO SELL THE PILLTO UNDER-16S

GIRLS under 16 could soon be able to get the contraceptive Pill from their chemist without a prescription.
Unveiling the controversial plan, Health Minister Lord Darzi said pharmacists would be given the green light to dispense the oral contraceptive after a simple interview.
The Pill is currently available only with a prescription, although most pharmacies are able to provide the 'morning-after-pill' without a doctor's authorisation.
Trials of the controversial new regime, putting the Pill on the same footing, will begin in the New Year. Lord Darzi said the Government would work with chemists to ensure 'robust standards' and appropriate training.
But the unexpected announcementtriggered protests from pro-life and family campaigners, with predictions that it could even lead to deaths. There were warnings that chemists cannot carry out the same health checks as doctors do before supplying the Pill, which can cause blood clotting and thrombosis.
Campaigners also fear that youngsters would be put at greater risk of sexually-transmitted infections. The Society for the Protection of Unborn Children said it would consider a legal challenge to the change.
But the Royal Society of Medicine welcomed the move, pointing to the 'catastrophic tidal wave of teenage and unwanted pregnancies'.
Health department officials said it was too early to say if there would be a lower age limit for the Pill. But they said it was likely pharmacists would have the same powers as GPs, who can give it to girls of any age if they think it appropriate.
That raises the prospect of 11 or 12-year-olds being given the Pill by a chemist without their parents knowing.
By law, doctors are supposed to encourage under-16s to tell their parents. But they can prescribe the Pill without parental knowledge or consent if a youngster does not wish to involve her family. Pharmacists are likely to be covered by the same rules.
Earlier this month, it was revealed that girls as young as 12 are being given the morningafter pill without their parents' knowledge at pharmacies authorised to do so in eight out of ten health authority areas.
The same system of local directives will now be applied to dispensing the contraceptive Pill.
Lord Darzi insisted last night that the Pill would not become widely available over the counter. He said trials would involve chemists in 'a full assessment process' before supplying it under arrangements ' equivalent to prescribing'.
But John Smeaton, national director of SPUC, said: 'This is all part and parcel of the Government's massive attack on human life.' There was clear evidence that making contraception more widely available did not reduce unwanted pregnancies.
Tory MP Nadine Dorries, a former nurse, said: 'The contraceptive Pill is known for causing blood clotting and thrombosis.
'Every GP assesses whether someone's going to be susceptible to that. A pharmacist will also not know the family history of breast cancer or the person's mental history.'
Michaela Ashton of the charity Life said: 'I am particularly concerned about the impact on young people. It will lead to many taking drugs inappropriate for their developing bodies, encourage girls to have underage sex and expose them to the risk of sexually-transmitted infections.'

X MARKS THE SPOT FOR HMV

HMV (up 13/4p to 1183/4p) has its fingers crossed the unprecedented crop of CDs pouring out of The X-Factor will help it survive Christmas.
Boss Simon Fox said HMV, which warned on profits last December, is getting a sales boost from previous winners Shane Ward and Leona Lewis' current hits.
This was Fox's only comment on festive trading at HMV's half year results to October, where underlying sales rose 5pc. Pre-tax losses were £31.4m against £36.5m last year.The dividend stays at 1.8p.

