Weak teachers to be 'struck off' in drive to improve children's lives

A "2020 Vision" aimed at making Britain the best place in the world in which to grow up was unveiled yesterday. Under the Government's Children's Plan - a £1bn strategy for education, welfare and play - bad teachers would be "struck off" the teaching register to make sure they never set foot in a classroom again.
At present, schools can face lengthy disciplinary hearings before they can get rid of poor teachers. Even those who are dismissed are not necessarily barred.
A Government education adviser, Sir Cyril Taylor, said last month that there were about 17,000 bad teachers in England who should be thrown out of schools. They were unable to control their classes and were damaging the education of about 400,000 children, he added. All new teachers will now be expected to gain masters-level qualifications.
Other measures outlined yesterday by Ed Balls, the Secretary of State for Children, Schools and Families Secretary, include changes to the primary curriculum and the possible end of the Sats assessment tests in England by 2009. Mr Balls said the aim was to "make our country the best place in the world for children to grow up in" and claimed it would "unlock the talents and promote the health and happiness of all children - not just some".
The Government will set aside £225m to build 3,500 play areas and 30 supervised adventure playgrounds so that children can take risks as they grow up. The blueprint calls for an end to the "no ball-games culture" in force on many green spaces and council estates. A further £160m would be spent refurbishing 500 youth centres and developing out-of-school activities.
The Children's Plan sets demanding new targets to be met. By 2020, 90 per cent of children should have made a start in reading, writing and maths when they start school at age five, 90 per cent should reach required standards in English and maths by the time they leave primary school at 11, and 90 per cent should attain five GCSEs at grades A* to C. Mr Balls also wants to double to 70 per cent the number of students passing the equivalent of two A-levels.
On behaviour, the document calls for disruptive children to be made to sign "acceptable behaviour contracts as a preventive measure to avoid them going off the rails and being given Asbos". A restorative justice scheme would see young offenders forced to meet victims and see how their behaviour affected others.
The Children's Minister, Beverley Hughes, said showing young people the consequences of their actions could reduce re-offending rates. "Many, many young people don't have a clue about the kind of impact their behaviour causes other people," she added. "It can be very, very salutary and very powerful in challenging behaviour."
The blueprint confirms plans to replace the end-of-year national curriculum tests for 11- and 14-year-olds with tests that can be taken when children are ready for them. This change could be introduced as early as 2009.
A review of the primary curriculum will also look at whether the starting date for formal schooling can be staggered so that parents of children born in summer can let them start later. Research shows that "August babies" perform worse in exams than older children in the same year group.
However, opposition MPs said the Government was failing to take decisive action to improve children's services. The shadow Children's Secretary, Michael Gove, said: "International audits of our schools have shown we are falling behind other countries in basic reading, maths and science. The Government has responded by trying to change the tests to cover up their failure and expand political interference without giving parents or teachers the crucial powers they need."
David Laws, for the Liberal Democrats, added: "Ed Balls's 10-year plan does not come anywhere near delivering on the scale of the challenge we face. This is a mouse of a plan for a mountain of a problem."
However, teaching unions were more optimistic. Steve Sinnott, the leader of the National Union of Teachers, said: "The Government deserves credit for being bold in many areas. At long last, it has recognised that not all children develop at the same rate."
Deborah Orr, page 29
Key points of the reforms
3,500 play areas to be built, along with 30 supervised adventure playgrounds so that children can "take risks". Speed limits of 20mph to be enforced around them to make them safer.
The start of schooling will be staggered so that parents whose children were born in the summer can opt for them to start later in the adademic year. Evidence suggests that pupils born in August fare less well in exams.
By 2020, ministers want 90 per cent of children to have made a start in maths and reading by the time they start formal schooling at age five. The current figure is 71 per cent.
League tables to show the percentage of gifted and talented children at every school who are above the average attainment level for their age.
The General Teaching Council will be given new powers to "strike off" teachers who are found to be incompetent.
More than 200,000 two-year-olds from disadvantaged families will receive free child care.
Trials of a restorative justice system in which young offenders are made to confront victims rather than face court action.
A root-and-branch review of the primary school curriculum. National tests for 11- and 14-year-olds to be replaced by exams that pupils can take when they are ready. The current testing system could be axed by 2009.
A review of sex education, which is delivered "atrociously" in some parts of the country, according to the Schools Minister, Jim Knight.
Social workers and police to be stationed in schools to deliver a range of children's services in one place.
Acceptable behaviour contracts to be drawn up for pupils to sign.
All new schools to be "carbon neutral" by 2016.
Wenger cagey as Lehmann returns to Arsenal line-up

Jens Lehmann, out of the Arsenal team for almost four months, will make his return between the posts in tonight's Champions League match against Steaua Bucharest. The 38-year-old German, whose last appearance on 19 August against Fulham was marked by a second high-profile error since the season began, was pre-selected for this match by Arsène Wenger, although the Arsenal manager was less than certain about the keeper's longer-term prospects at the Emirates.
"This was decided three weeks ago so it is independent of anything else," Wenger said on the eve of a match where victory will confirm his team at the top of Group H. "Jens' long-term future depends on, when you are 38, what you call a long-term future, we haven't spoken about that. At the moment I expect him to play well tomorrow."
When asked, however, if he expected the player whom he described as "super professional" to remain at Arsenal for the second half of the season, Wenger added: "I cannot guarantee [that], like for anybody else."
It appears more than likely that first-choice keeper Manuel Almunia will return for Sunday's match against Chelsea along with a number of other first choices who are likely to be rested tonight.
"We have lost a game and know we have not been good, so now of course we want to respond," Wenger said. "However, our quality is what we have done in the last six months, not in just one game. We know only our own performance is important and not what people say, even more so in the bigger games.
"My squad is very determined and very strong. If you had listened to what people said before the season, we would be 10th or 12th in the league and be out of everything. At the moment we are in everything. It is not a coincidence - it is down to the mental strength of my team."
Wenger indicated he will make some changes with Nicklas Bendtner set to lead the attack.
He said: "I will rest some players, but I will play a team who is part of my squad. However, there is no Carling Cup side any more. I had one before, but now I feel they are a bit older and all these players have moved upwards now to the first-team squad."
Robin van Persie and Abou Diaby are also set to return to the team.
Arsenal (probable, 4-4-2): Lehmann; Hoyte, Gallas, Senderos, Traore; Walcott, Gilberto, Denilson, Diaby; Eduardo, Bendtner.
Steaua Bucharest (probable): Zapata, Emeghara, Goian, Rada, Nesu, Neaga, Petre, Lovin, Crisocea, Dica, Badea.
Ferguson confident young charges can shine in Eternal City

Sir Alex Ferguson knows, from the defeat inflicted on a young Manchester United side which played Fenerbahce three years ago, that fielding an under-strength team after European qualification is assured can be risky. "We don't want to send teams out here to get humiliated or embarrassed, that's for sure," he said yesterday, recalling that occasion, when a Tuncay Sanli hat-trick did for United, 3-0.
But Ferguson knows that Wayne Rooney's contribution usually belies his 22 years, which is why, after much "pestering", he has been allowed to captain the side for a second time at the Stadio Olimpico tonight. Ferguson says this bunch of youngsters is his best in years and in Rooney he sees a leader in similar mould to Bryan Robson, Roy Keane and Steve Bruce - "one of those absolutely determined, never-give-in type [of] players." Praise indeed.
Ferguson, who left Cristiano Ronaldo, Carlos Tevez, Nemanja Vidic and Rio Ferdinand back in Manchester, believes Rooney could use another game after his recent month's absence and wants him to maintain his forebears' mix of energy and wisdom. "He doesn't want to lose that spark - [and] neither did Robson or Keane," Ferguson said. "They had it right to the end of their days. But they also brought qualities to the dressing room and to the field and Wayne will."
United's arrival in the Eternal City was considerably more low key than their departure from here eight months ago, after United fans were baton-charged and 18 injured during the quarter-final tie United lost 2-1. "We are concerned, you have to be," Ferguson said of 1,200 United fans' re-acquaintance with the stadium tonight.
The United manager did not much look like a man preoccupied, though. He revealed that the relapse in club captain Gary Neville's rehabilitation is not as serious as was thought and might be the result of scar tissue created by the injury changing his running style.
The only note of discord amid the harmony is between Ferguson's assistant Carlos Queiroz and Sporting Lisbon, who have told Queiroz he is "persona non grata" after he rejected their claims that he tried to poach their midfielder, Miguel Veloso. "We have never been interested in Veloso at any stage," Ferguson insisted. "We've not a bit of interest in the lad. He's not what we need. We've got six midfield players, why would we be interested?" Ferguson insisted the relationship between the clubs, which brought Nani and Ronaldo to Old Trafford, had always been transparent and demanded the allegation be retracted.
Manchester United (probable, 4-2-3-1): Kusczak; Simpson, Pique, Evans, O'Shea; Fletcher, Carrick; Eagles, Rooney, Nani; Saha.
Roma (probable, 4-2-3-1): Doni; Cicinho, Mexes, Ferrari, Antunes; De Rossi, Pizarro; Esposito, Giuly, Taddei; Totti.

Sea eagle makes surprise visit

A white-tailed sea eagle, extinct in England for nearly 100 years, has been spotted on the Hampshire-Wiltshire border near Andover. Ornithologists said the bird was on its first migration south after leaving a nest in Finland but gales had blown it off course.

