ID cards impinge on essential freedoms

Sir: With ID cards now being S linked to passports (Report, 13 d February) the Labour govern- o mentis keeping us prisoner on C this island. A free society should o be one where law-abiding citiizens are able to move around e freely, travel abroad and even o leave the country and society' of which they are members, if d they wish to do so. 
This is one very noticeable difference between democracies and totalitarian states. Being unable to c get the necessary documentation to leave the country, with- pounds out also submitting to having i an identity card, giving the Government access to more personal information, is fundamentally against this.
Tony Blair will downplay the level and type of information to s stored on these cards, but this t begs the question: if we have R passports, why do we need ID H cards? They must carry more information about us than a passport or there would be no R point to them. What kind of in j formation would the government like them to hold? Do they S intend to wear us down over a h period of time and hope that we K will give up on the debate about civil liberties in favour of more a fashionable issues which are less difficult for the government to respond to?
We should strongly resist a government that locks foreign h nationals and its own citizens in prisons without trial, that lies to its citizens about the reasons for h going to war and that tries to y regulate our lives seemingly without end.


Study of insects is vital for combating environmental threat

Sir: We wish to state our considerable disquiet at the planned reorganisation of the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC)-funded Centre for Ecology and Hydrology (CEH), a key organisation responsible for understanding environmental issues, including the ecology of insects (report, 10 February).
The number of CEH sites is to be reduced from nine to four, with closure of three major stations in Huntingdonshire, Dorset and Aberdeenshire, to "rationalise" the organisation. 
Reports indicate the savings will amount to only pounds 2m to pounds 3m a year, and restructuring will cost pounds 45m. This will result in the serious loss of scientific posts (about 200) and expertise in many disciplines, including insect science.
Insects are essential to humankind because of their role as pollinators, scavengers, or predators and parasites of other invertebrates. True, some insect species are pests, but most of the near-million recorded species are either beneficial or harmless. They are huge global players in our ecologies.
The recent disclosure about the fate of CEH is surprising because it appears to be at variance with the Government's concerns about, and commitment to, environmental issues. CEH has a worldwide reputation for excellence in the biological sciences, especially ecology, and has produced some of the most innovative and important work in insect ecology and other areas of biology over the past four decades.
We strongly urge the Government to reconsider the proposed restructuring so that CEH's unique expertise and facilities are not lost in an attempt to save a relatively small amount.


Reading between the lines of exams

Sir: Philip Hensher's contribution to the debate about reading in schools (Opinion, 1 February) is particularly important now because the goal-posts have moved dramatically.
There used to be a balance between wider reading and examination texts. 
Regrettably, English teachers have become crammers and students encounter far fewer books than they used to: half the number, one estimate shows. You can now study Emma for AS-level and again for A2. A professor from a London college told me last summer: "We stopped asking students what they had read five years ago because they hadn't read anything."
But the fault lies not in our students but with those in authority. Politicians, examination boards and teachers are colluding, by drafting and redrafting coursework, modular exams and retakes, all sorts of notes and the internet, to produce better results. In the words of a former headmaster who became disenchanted: "The Government still believes it can fatten the pig simply by weighing it constantly." This will be the real Blair legacy.

We can't go on living beyond our means

There was another huge trade deficit last year for UK plc. This was caused in part by the switch from being an oil exporter to oil importer for the first time since 1979 as North Sea output declined. Yet sterling remains strong and foreign companies want to buy British companies as diverse as the London Stock Exchange and BAA, which owns Heathrow airport.
So are we selling solid assets to finance our taste for luxury imports, the equivalent of selling the farm to cover the dissolute son's losses on the gambling tables of London? If we were, this would be a story that would end in tears, and the fact that the US seems to be following much the same path would be no consolation. Sooner or later there are no farms left to sell.
It is a huge question, but as with most huge questions there is no simple answer. There is clearly some problem with our trade deficit, and this will tend to get worse simply as a result of our increasing dependency on imported fuel. But we are equally not in the catastrophic situation of the 1970s, when trade deficits threatened the collapse of the whole economy.
Some numbers. We only have a first sight of the current account figures for last year, and when the statisticians crawl over the accounts they usually find out that things are not as bad as they first thought. Just this week they "discovered" that UK software investment was four times as big as they thought and our economy appreciably larger as a result.
Still, officially our trade deficit last year was pounds 47.6bn, the highest ever in absolute terms and equivalent to 4 per cent of GDP. Fortunately there is a surplus on trade in services and a strong flow of foreign investment income that together will cut the current account deficit to a little over 2 per cent of GDP. While 2 per cent may not sound much in itself, it adds up over the years. As recently as 1997, the current account was virtually in balance.
Instinctively - and to anyone who remembers the sterling crises of the 1970s or even the ejection of the pound from the ERM in 1992 - this is uneasy stuff. Covering the trade deficit with exports of services is fine, for Britain has done that for about two centuries. We ran a trade deficit throughout the 19th century when the UK was the workshop of the world. I suppose it is all right too to rely on foreign in-vestments, provided they are sound. It is a bit like people putting part of their pension in a flat in the south of Spain - you can always rent it out if you are short of cash.
But the fact remains that Britain's stock of overseas assets is already smaller than the stock of assets owned by foreigners here. As our current account deficits mount, you would expect the net surplus we earn on foreign assets to shrink. So what is acceptable now, even quite clever, earning so much on our foreign investments, is not sustainable forever. It only works now because we have evidently attractive assets to sell other countries.
That leads to another matter: why is the UK such an attractive place for foreigners to invest? Some of the flow is vanity investment: buying Chelsea. Some is mistaken investment: buying Rover. But most investment must be for solid reasons because large companies do not make international purchases out of a whim, and that must say something about the prospects for the UK. Maybe they know something we don't.
I suppose the factual point is that this has been for the past 13 or so years the fastest-growing large economy in Europe. Even this year, when growth does seem likely to slow, the UK will probably outpace the eurozone again. And, small thing, I just noticed yesterday some new figures showing that the German economy had zero growth in the last quarter.
The UK has also a climate in which foreign investment is wel-comed. Couple this with the growth and if you have international ambitions you have to look at the UK. Our structural changes have thrown up investment opportunities. If, for example, you want to buy a string of power stations, this is one of the few places in the world where you can do so. We have managed to create businesses that did not really exist as such. Take the stock exchange and the airports. Go back 20 years and the stock exchange was a cross between a gentleman's club and a workers' co-op, while the airports were a rather dowdy part of the public sector.
There are also some technical factors at work. UK pension funds are being in effect forced to reduce their shareholdings in companies because of new regulatory requirements, thus restraining the prices on the market. Meanwhile some foreign companies, for example in Spain, have in effect tax breaks that encourage them to buy foreign ones. It may even be that retaining sterling as an independent currency has helped, for it gives both dollar and euro-based investors a hedge against the violent swings that have taken place between those currencies. Useful to have some sterling assets in a global portfolio.
But I don't think any of this is the whole explanation. I think that fashion comes in here. Not London Fashion Week and all that, but rather the wider lure of the UK brand.
Britons are not really aware of that, or see it as the slightly absurd "cool Britannia" stuff the Government used to peddle. But if you sit outside the UK, the poli-cies and ideas developed over the past 20 years appear fashionable in a way that they did not at the time, for example, when sterling was heaved out of the ERM. I think there is no doubt that the Blair/Brown partnership has burnished this image. Things such as getting the Olympics to London became possible thanks to the aura of the British brand.
The obvious question is that given the fickle nature of investment fashion, how secure is this position? On the one hand there have been a number of reports suggesting that the UK is losing its competitiveness, thanks in part to higher taxation.
On the other hand, the foreign punters keep coming. This illustrates a truth in all investment: you don't have to be that wonderful' you just have to be more attractive than the alternative. Provided we watch carefully what happens to investment flows and react if there is any sign of our becoming less attractive, then all should be well for a while yet.
But ultimately no country can prudently live beyond its means. At the present level of the current account deficit we are probably just about OK. But it cannot safely be allowed to grow. It stands to reason that as we import more and more oil, so we will have to curb our appetite for other forms of imported goods. Not a hair shirt' just a bit of prudence, as our prime minister-in-waiting used to say.
Are we selling the farm to cover the dissolute son's losses on the gambling tables of London?


Briefly... - Sick profits

Sir: You report (14 February) that smoking costs the NHS al-most pounds 2bn a year, and that Britain has the highest tobacco taxes in the EU, with pounds 3.84 in every pounds 4.80 pack of cigarettes going to the Treasury. 
These duties total pounds 9.5bn annually. According to these calculations the Government is making pounds 7.5bn a year on smoking - a nice profit - so it's not in their interest to deter people.

