We must value troops

RETURNED yesterday from visiting frontline troops in Helmand and Kandahar.
Although the fight is tough, their morale is sky high.
I am proud of our soldiers and marines, and the members of the Royal Navy and RAF who support them. They know why they are in Afghanistan and why their mission is important -to provide security, to do reconstruction, provide education and healthcare and to create jobs. They continue to face the dangers with courage, fortitude, characteristic good humour and growing success.
The Sun has always been a great supporter of our troops and I would ask that you, the readers, continue with that support for all our troops. If you know a young soldier, why not drop him a line or shake him by the hand?
He doesn't expect thanks but I know he would appreciate it. It is important for my soldiers to feel supported and thanked for what they are doing.

Law and disorder

COMPARE and contrast.
In Suffolk, a church-going hospital volunteer innocently takes £ 10,000 out of her bank account. Five cops pounce and grill her for two hours.
In Lincolnshire, a neighbour makes repeated emergency calls as stone-throwing louts lay siege to a pensioner's home. No police turn up.
Such is Britain's policing lottery. It's pot luck if you ever see a copper.
Only one thing is certain. If you live on an estate ruled by yob gangs, you'll almost never see a patrol.
In that vacuum, anarchy erupts. Kids join armed gangs because it makes them feel tough and secure. Others foolishly arm themselves for the protection they think they cannot get from the police. Easy access to cheap booze throws fuel on the inferno.
In the middle stands the ordinary Joe, forced to take the law into his own hands to protect his family and property. Increasingly often, it's a fatal mistake.
Confused
This situation is out of control. Gangs rule our streets by fear. Knifepoint robberies have doubled in two years. Yet the Government fiddles as Rome burns.
Joke amnesties for knives. Toothless increases in penalties for carrying them.
Conflicting advice from a procession of confused ministers: "Tackle yobs yourself". "Don't get involved, call the police". "Jump up and down to distract them".
Only one thing will work: A huge influx of beat cops, freed from the paperwork which chains nine of out ten to their desk.
As Ray "Robocop" Mallon, the cop-turned-Mayor-of-Middlesbrough, says: "Police need to get out on the streets. I want the fear transferred from the citizen to the yob."
Not much is going right for the Tories, bar the blows they landed on tax last week. But David Cameron's mantra about our "broken society" is spot on.
Gordon Brown must prioritise this terrifying spiral of lawlessness. Or he might have more of an election fight than he thinks.


Hail, Sven

THE Sun may, in the past, have painted Sven Goran Eriksson in a less than flattering light.
Our use of the words "gormless", "idiot", "chancer" and "snake" could have been interpreted as criticism.
But with Man City beating United and topping the League, we must utter through gritted teeth this hitherto unimaginable phrase:
Well done, Sven. (Even if you did squander a golden generation of English footballing talent.) Note to readers: Normal service will be resumed as soon as possible.


The amazing Bodger Brown defies gravity

LET'S hope the warm buzz of approval for their tax shake-up will encourage the Tories to do a bit more like that -and soon.
Who could have imagined John Redwood basking in such acclaim from all but the BBC, the broadcasting wing of the Labour Party?
The applause certainly registered with Gordon Brown who will be wondering which of the Tory plans to pinch for his -sorry, Alistair Darling's -spring Budget.
The nation may be temporarily mesmerised by our new Prime Minister but he needs something big to maintain his gravity-defying ten-point poll lead.
Even Gordon must be wondering how long can a man who, as Chancellor, personally supervised every penny raised and spent by Labour for a decade, look like a new boy on the block?
Whatever the secret, it's been a great trick so far.
The PM won praise for cancelling his holiday in Weymouth after only four hours.
But for a workaholic, who'd only just landed the job he'd been striving for all his life, four hours is too long. All it took to drag him off the beach was a farms drama which could have been handled by the appropriate minister without turning it into a full-blown Cobra crisis. Did Gordon summon the Cobra team to act over the escalating flow of body bags from our over-stretched forces in Afghanistan?
No, he left that to Scottish Secretary Des Browne, who looks after the Armed Forces in his spare time.
Did he stage crisis talks on the drunken thugs rampaging through our streets and murdering brave have-a-go dads?
No. Police have quite enough powers to deal with this burgeoning new atrocity - though they're failing to use them, obviously.
Neglect
I'm baffled that Gordon is riding so high. Most of Labour's bodges -like the squandered NHS billions, penny-pinching on the Army and national security, bulging jails, the tax credit fiasco and rampant immigration -can be traced back to Gordon's Treasury doorstep over the past ten years.
Look at what has emerged in just the last week. An all-party Parliamentary committee has blown the lid off the unforgivable neglect of our elderly in state-run care homes.
Thousands who deserve dignity in old age are starved, ignored, battered or sexually abused in the twilight of their lives. Sick and old, like Edwin Coglan, 78, are having to sell their homes to fund residential health care they've already paid for in taxes -only to be evicted when their money runs out.
At the other end of the life cycle, young mum Catherine Brown had to give birth alone to her dead baby because no trained midwives were available.
At least she avoided MRSA, still rampant in our hospital wards despite empty promises to make staff wash their dirty hands. The latest news from government health inspectors is that cockroach-infested kitchens are making sick patients sicker, with almost half failing to meet basic hygiene standards.
It's not because we can't get staff. The Office for National Statistics found 10million British adults -most young and healthy -don't work and are living on benefit at everyone else's expense.
Yet the ONS also revealed 8,000 East Europeans arrive each day, ready to do jobs we pay our own citizens NOT to do. Out of 2.5million new jobs, 1.5million have gone to migrants.
Poor education is part of the problem, even though Labour promised to fix that.
Last week, tests showed barely half of primary school children can read a simple sentence at 11.
It's no better by the time they take Key Stage 3 literacy tests at 14 -after a school lifetime under Labour.
Even those who reach university are out-performed by foreign students in English spelling and grammar.
Yet on Friday we witnessed another record-breaking rash of A-grade A-levels.
That's just one fairly typical week under the Gordon Brown premiership.
Come to think of it, anyone who can get away with all that without protests on the streets deserves a ten-point lead.


Tory tax cuts

TORY tax cuts would cost a pittance compared with the eye-watering £ 170BILLION a year spent by unelected Government quangos. This pointless tier of bureaucracy provides jobs for the boys, with budgets five times as big as the Ministry of Defence. Labour has created 200 new agencies for everything from herbal medicine to school food and milk marketing. Getting rid of half would let us abolish income tax for everyone earning under £ 20,000 -and still leave plenty to spare.


Emily Miller

FAILED undercover Daily Mirror reporter Emily Miller is ruing the day she attempted to infiltrate David Cameron's election team. Her cover was blown after Tory party officials spotted gaps in her CV and linked her hotmail account to a Mirror computer. But before confronting her, they interviewed her twice without letting on they knew her real identity. They could barely keep straight faces when they asked her which newspapers she read. After praising various papers, including The Sun, she said of the Daily Mirror: "Well, I'm not a heavy Mirror reader. I find it really irritating."


Lady Clarissa Dickson Wright

OUTSPOKEN One Fat Lady Clarissa Dickson Wright's autobiography Spilling The Beans, published next month, tells of the time she was studying for the Bar at Gray's Inn with several members of the future Labour Cabinet, one of whom was Tony Blair, then nicknamed "Miranda" for his long hair and girlish looks. "He was regarded as a poor sad thing and considered something of a fantasist," Clarissa declares, going on to say Peter Hain, Work and Pensions Secretary, was "much disliked".


Ann Widdecombe

TORY MP Ann Widdecombe on the problems of mislaid spectacles and having a big chest: "You take them off and put them down (these are the specs) -and then you haven't a clue where they are. I now understand why the more severe teachers used to have these things dangling on the end of a chain. But I have such a large 'upper circumference' that I wouldn't dream of having my specs dangling about on a chain."

John Prescott

FORMER deputy PM John Prescott sailed up the Mersey on a tall ship yesterday a replica of the 19th century slave ship Amistad -and was anxious that there were photographers to capture the moment for posterity. Grumpy Prezza had his aides running around making phone calls to try to rustle up a snapper -only to be told they were all at Anfield for the big match between Liverpool and Chelsea. It's tough when your days on the big political stage are over.

Stephen Fry
WASN'T devoting two whole evenings on BBC4 at the weekend to celebrate the 50th birthday of comedian Stephen Fry overdoing it? Old pals from Cambridge Footlights gushed shamelessly about him, with Emma Thompson suggesting he should be head of the UN. "Quite frankly, he should be Prime Minister," said actress Imelda Staunton. Others, including Kenneth Branagh and Jonathan Ross, agreed that Fry was quite simply a genius and a wonderful wit to boot. Fry himself started crooning to cooking instructor Delia Smith: "Delia, Delia, please let me feel ya." Such a (t)wit.

Dear Sun

WILL people lighten up about the spoof ned-hunting video acted on and posted by former Glenalmond pupils on YouTube? It was clearly meant as a joke unlike some of the dreadful videos on that site.

Do Scots want to go it alone?

SCOTLAND's First Minister Alex Salmond has called for a "national conversation" about independence. Scottish Sun readers feel there are more important issues that he should be dealing with - and most are opposed to the idea of a referendum on the issue.
£ 50 letter. SURELY there are more important issues in Scotland at the moment for Alex Salmond to deal with rather than spending his time pursuing his dream of independence?
In case he has forgotten, the vast majority of Scots DIDN'T vote for the SNP at the election. There is clearly no mandate for independence.
ROSE RODGER
Paisley
ONE third of Scotland is living below the poverty line yet our First Minister Alex Salmond is spending thousands on independence.
Time to do your job Alex and forget pie in the sky ideas, forget your selfish ambitions and look after the ordinary folk of this country trying to put food in our bellies.
A MAGUIRE
Edinburgh
BY refusing SNP demands, the Unionist parties are leaving themselves open to the charge that they are running scared and also leaving Scots open to speculation on this issue - which is boring us to tears - over the next few years instead of ending it now.
Come on Jack, Annabel and Nicol, put your faith in the Scottish voters and end this debate - back a referendum.
WILLIAM BLAIR
Melrose, Roxburghshire
WE live in a democracy where the will of the electorate is paramount.
With regard to important decisions like independence for Scotland, European Union constitution and the retention of the House of Lords, the people should decide. If politicians are convinced of their opinions and arguments, they should not be afraid of an honest debate.
JIM HIGGINS
Glasgow

