Consultation is a waste of time

Sir, - The news item headlined: "We don't want hospital waste", April 4, asks the question: "Do you think residents were properly consulted about what could be dumped at the Walley's Quarry landfill site, at Cemetery Road, Newcastle?" My answer to that is an unequivocal "no". But Silverdale is just another part of my concern. Geographically, the site is classed as being in Silverdale, but we in Poolfields, especially in Orme Road and Keele Road, are only a few hundred metres away, but have been kept in the dark as much as the Silverdale residents. 
The occupants of the residential caravan park, living on the brink of the site, only know of any dangers from me, but this has only been from my contact with them on another issue first mooted in 2003. Staffordshire County Council suggested the possibility of a skip waste recycling plant at Marie's Way, off Cemetery Road, and that option has definitely not gone away, which is why I began a campaign to prevent it at the time. Not being aware of any changes with the Walley's Quarry landfill site, I have repeatedly said the proposed skip site location was totally unacceptable, and a marriage of convenience, because of its close proximity to the landfill site, which would lead to a further downgrading of the in-fill quality. Many residents in Silverdale, Poolfields and Thistleberry, will recall the demolition of Newcastle Foundry, at Cemetery Road, but not all may be aware of the industrial pollution caused by residues of foundry processing, which contaminated all of that land adjacent to the cemetery, or the pollution clean-up unsuccessfully carried out under the charge of the council. But there is nothing so certain, should the skip site proposal come to fruition in the future, the polluted waste land will transfer to the quarry/landfill site, adding to the possibilities of environmental disaster. Already with the downgrading of the Pollution Prevention Control (PPC) to a point where more than 510 animal, vegetable, chemical, industrial and human tissues, biodegradable, combustible and gas-producing carbon monoxide and dioxide, methane, sulphur dioxide and acids become a distinct possibility. It is beyond belief that a community liaison group of councillors, two of whom represent us here in Thistleberry, could allow a hard-fought settlement of PPC for the benefit of us here and in Silverdale in 1997, to become what it is now without a word to any residents or local businesses. I am now reliably informed that Lafarge Aggregates, the permit holders, want to continue to liaise for the future with the same group, as it has worked well, but for who? It is certainly not the thousands of residents here and in Silverdale, who will continue living in fear of the consequences.


Why pay for drug research?
Sir, - It is with great regret that I find out about yet another patient who has the chance of a life-saving drug, but has to fund it out of her own pocket.
People should be given every chance to live their lives for as long as possible, with their family and friends to support them. Why develop a drug, and then say it is too costly to use? What is the use of paying for research into new medicines? Why should I contribute to cancer charities, if someone on my own doorstep will not have the treatment they deserve?
Maybe two years doesn't seem a long time, but in those two years, research could develop a miracle cure.
I wish Angelena Buxton, pictured, every success with her fight to get Nexavar paid for by the PCT, and hope others will offer support.

Our lives will be shattered

Sir, - Re: your report headlined Flats plan on garage site, last month. Clews Construction plans to demolish the garage, build six apartments and underground parking. 
I am shocked that this scheme is being considered in a terraced street. Just imagine the noise, mess vehicles, etc, within a few yards of our property. Then if we survive this scheme, as elderly residents we will be overlooked by this building, and continual comings and goings of vehicles at all times - day and night for this underground parking. There is plenty of land elsewhere for Clews Construction to build its money-making racket. Just look at a similar scheme in Corporation Street, and the mess. If this scheme goes ahead, our quality of life will be gone, unable to open windows, and mess treading through the house. I wonder if Clews Construction would like this scheme in front of their property? But still, I suppose their idea would be the same as the present garage occupant, who remarked to me that: "He had done very well out of it," and it could not happen to him, as he lives in the country. This scheme should not even be considered in such close proximity to residents, and elderly people should not be subjected to this monstrous scheme. Take it somewhere else, preferably in front of your own properties. Stoke-on-Trent City Council should consider that present properties opposite will become unliveable, if this goes ahead.


Clamp down on selfish parkers

Sir, - In response to John Lowe's letter dated April 25, I was reading his comments, and to a point agree. Yes, the aisle the bleach is in is not a place for a two-year-old to be touching items. 
And yes, mum should take some responsibility. But why should she be left at home? Some mums have no other option than taking their children with them, and why not? Or do you like them out of sight and out of mind? Are you a parent? But the comment that made me write in was the last one, that the parent and toddler spaces are ridiculous, and should be got rid of! Where would you park then, John? These spaces are regularly abused, people with kids, kids that look like teenagers - do they really need their own spaces? They are meant for people with small children and babies. So, next time I cannot get in a car space because of all the thoughtless people like yourself, you will not mind if I struggle with a baby asleep in her car seat that I cannot remove, because there is not enough space to open my doors properly? I regularly see works vans, young couples, people with "posh" cars who park their cars in the bigger spaces, all parked illegally in these spaces. But they know they can do it, so it will continue, as the supermarkets do not bother to control who parks in them, even though they have car park staff.

Word from the web

Classmates from St John the Evangelist Catholic Primary School, in Kidsgrove, have been sending messages of support to leukaemia sufferer Callum McGough. (April 27)
Bless you, Callum, for being so brave at such a young age. Our prayers are with you that the donor will be found in UK or an international donor is found. May some person be that miracle you need. You are a miracle too. May you and your family stay strong at this time. My friend has just been through similar and found an international donor. Don't give up - hope one is out there. I have a nine year old son called Caelum who sends you, from the other side of the world, positive healing wishes and prayers of a miracle from us to you.
Averil Churton, New Zealand
Plans have been submitted to erect a phone mast in Chesterton. (May 1)
The story of the distribution of telephone masts is a long and sorry tale. It could only happen in Britain; every telephone company has its own set of masts and, of course, in vying for top slot in a lucrative market, the supplier that provides the greatest coverage is going to get a bigger market share, and so the population of our landscape with these totally obvious and intrusive masts turns into something approaching Macbeth's Dunsinane.
There is hardly any control over this plague of bristling metal and many an iconic view has been degraded in the name of commercial interest. A really sad sight is the church at Audley vying with the aerial array at the rear of the council offices, another would be the Mill Farm collection in Alsager. However, these are ones that are familiar to me and I am sure there must be other precious views that have been despoiled locally.


Cannabis fight is already lost

Sir, - Re: the story headlined Hunt for drug barons, Friday, April 27. When I saw The Sentinel news bills outside the newsagents on Friday, declaring: Drug barons target city, I expected to read about crack cocaine or heroin, but no, it's those pesky cannabis plants grabbing the headlines again. The report included the police admitting just what an easy target otherwise law-abiding cannabis growers are. "We would have just kicked in the door, taken the plants, made an arrest and we wouldn't have gone beyond that."
This is not to mention the devastating effect on the family, court appearances, a hefty sentence, and a conviction which can lead to losing jobs (in healthcare, teaching, etc) and possible evictions, as well as an average cost of £4,000 per tax payer - well done there! Now, it's becoming more difficult for them, because "surprise, surprise", criminal gangs are cashing in on the huge demand for cannabis in the UK, and setting up houses full of the stuff. Police suggest that if they keep fighting this battle "hopefully there will be fewer people buying it, and less money to be made here". The battle is lost, and I suggest that people don't want more money wasted busting cannabis growers, as an easy way of achieving conviction targets. If cannabis was legal, it would have no attraction to criminal gangs. Leave it to those who want to use it to make themselves feel a little better, and for heaven's sake chill out - it's just a plant.

We have power of technology

Sir, - It is not often I find myself agreeing with one of John Abberley's grumpy right-wing diatribes, but he makes a good point in his column headlined: It's no wonder people don't bother to vote, April 20, when he says "in council elections, we have no idea what the candidates are like, or whether they are even trustworthy". He might also have added that the elected candidate generally receives a minority of the votes cast, and is no way accountable to the people he or she represents. In fact, he is saying that our much-vaunted democracy is a sham. It is a system under which the people are given a token vote, only to be exercised at long intervals of time, when any real part in the decision-making is denied to them. But practically everyone now has a mobile phone; access to the internet, and those who don't have only to visit their local library. Communications technology is developing at an unprecedented pace. The technology exists; all that is needed is for a new system to be implemented, and then, for the first time in recorded history, the whole population will have the opportunity to record its opinion on major issues. The people will decide.

Regeneration comes at cost
Sir, - In response to Mrs C Chambers' letter, April 2007, I feel that I must endorse my sympathy and support for the unfortunate predicament she finds herself in, with view to the regeneration of her locality. The problem should not be one for the residents to resolve. My family now happens to be unfortunate enough to be on the receiving end of the council's goodwill propaganda. We are also left confused and bewildered. Broken promises seem to be the order of the day. The council is responsible for displacing families who have no option but to take out additional mortgages or to rent.
Their initial promise was "no-one would suffer". Why should residents be forced into this kind of unfair situation? People deserve to be compensated fairly for being dispossessed of their homes. The council intend to develop Beautiful Burslem, but who is bearing the burden? Who is paying the price?


