Quicker links is joined-up thinking

HOW often do we inadvertently eavesdrop mobile phone conversations on the train that start: "I'm running late ... pass on my apologies ... I'll be there as soon as I can"?
While rail services between our major cities have seen better frequency and reliability, further improvement is limited by infrastructure constraints.
Delays to our journeys are more than an annoying inconvenience. Slow public transport links between our major cities could be a significant barrier to real economic growth. And looking at experience from around Europe, improving high-speed links between cities could play a big part in lifting our competitiveness.
Could transport infrastructure really achieve the step-change in growth we would all like to see in Scotland?
In its simplest terms, cutting journey times will save money and increase productivity. If you were to take the recent Eddington Report and apply it (albeit crudely) to Scotland, just a 5 per cent time saving in all journey times could be worth GBP 250 million to the Scottish economy in extra output from workers spending less time on the road or rail and more time at their desk or worktop.
Less obvious, but potentially more important, are the knock-on benefits of improving the links between Scotland's city regions.
Improved connectivity is one of the main ways in which to build up "scale" by bringing businesses, suppliers and labour markets closer together.
For example joining up Glasgow and Edinburgh, and improving links to Dundee, could create a pool of more than 3.2 million people. This would place it within the top 12 European metropolitan regions by population size. Imagine the asset for Scotland if we could extend to Aberdeen and truly join up our hubs of wealth creation.
Higher speeds to shrink the distances between our major population centres should be seen as the next stage in the development of our rail network.
They could have a fundamental impact on the way our whole economy operates.
They could promote efficiency gains, by lowering the financial and time costs of business travel. For despite the growth of information technology, face-to-face contact remains an essential element of successful business transactions.
They could help drive innovation by making it easier for workers, businesses and education establishments to connect with each other.
And they could encourage growth in the numbers commuting between our major cities making it easier to match what employers are looking for with the skilled workers they need.
This will all ultimately contribute to the productivity gains we so badly need if we are to move up the wealth ladder internationally.
Having the ability to combine assets and collaborate across boundaries to improve the performance of our economy is a must. Faster links can help make this a reality.
The competitors we are looking to match internationally are already doing this - and we need to catch up.
In terms of size and scale, only Glasgow and Edinburgh are comparable to the English core cities. If we are to offer a market of a similar range and depth to Greater Manchester or Birmingham - never mind London - we need to work more closely together both as cities and as metro regions.
Cities throughout the world have already begun to collaborate to build capacity and increase their influence. Faster links are fundamental to this.
A growing number of European city regions are creating development strategies based on the competitive benefits that being closer to each other bring.
The Denmark to Sweden crossing across the Oresund bridge now takes ten minutes by car. Previously this took an hour by ferry. The result of this shortening of journey time is the creation of a single region spread across two countries. In 2004, for the first time, the region attracted more investment projects than any other city- region in Scandinavia and it has become a European hub for investment in IT, telecoms and electronics and life sciences. Both countries recognise that geographic boundaries and separate institutions should not be a barrier to economic growth, a lesson we could learn a lot from here.
Most tellingly of all, perhaps, is the service between Madrid and Andalucia, a journey that previously took six hours and now takes two hours 20 minutes. Since the journey time decreased the region has seen significant economic growth.
Any major infrastructure improvements need to stand up to a rigorous cost-benefit rationale.
Improving Scotland's productivity is a principal objective of Scottish Enterprise as Scotland's main economic development agency. We will only achieve success by working with others across the public and private sectors. I would argue the same holds true for those involved in delivering Scotland's transport infrastructure and services. True sustainable growth requires alignment with the economic growth agenda right across the public sector and many parts of the private sector too.
That is where some the competitors I have mentioned really have managed to get it right.
If our end-game is to close the gross value added gap with Europe's best performers, then high speed and high levels of connectivity between our major cities are essential.
Ultimately what I want to hear when eavesdropping on the train of the future is: "Can you bring forward that appointment? I can be there early."
Then I'll know we really are going places.
Jack Perry is chief executive of Scottish Enterprise


Business Gazetteer

POWER TRIP Chinese nuclear tourism set to grow arms and legs
TOURISTS in China have another potential point of interest to add to their sightseeing itineraries, now that the country's biggest nuclear power station has opened its doors to the public.
For a 30 yuan (GBP 2) admission fee, visitors to the Dayawan nuclear power plant located by the South China Sea in southern Guangdong province will be able to learn about its construction and safety measures through models, photographs and videos.
They will also have access to "Lovers' Island", a wharf and a lookout point offering a view of Dayawan and Lingao, another nuclear plant being built nearby, the official Xinhua news agency said. All proceeds will go to charity.
QUOTE OF THE DAY
"Of course everybody plans to clear the debt as soon as possible, - but millions of us just don't."
Sean Gardner, chief executive of MoneyExpert.com, claiming 4.2m UK credit card users are still paying for last Christmas
GOOD DAY JPMorgan Cazenove
THE firm has kept its No 1 slot in Britain's corporate broking rankings. Financial data firm Hemscott's corporate adviser rankings put JPMorgan Cazenove top of the corporate broking league, with 36 FTSE 100 clients. Swiss bank UBS is in second place.
BAD DAY Pfizer investors
ITS shares fell 12 per cent in New York after the world's biggest drugmaker surprised the market by abandoning the development of its leading experimental cholesterol treatment, torcetrapib. The drug, designed to lift levels of "good" HDL cholesterol, was scrapped after an independent safety monitoring board reported patient deaths and heart problems.


Leader: Put Trident issue to the voters

DOES Britain need a new generation of nuclear weapons in the post-Cold War world? Can we afford the eventual bill, which the Prime Minister puts at GBP 15-GBP 20 billion, but which - given the lamentable failure of the Ministry of Defence to control costs - is likely to be well above GBP 25 billion? How does introducing a new weapon of mass destruction square with the urgent diplomatic need to stem nuclear proliferation? And why is the government fixated on the question of replacing Trident when there are ordinary British squaddies pinned down in Helmland with limited ammunition and limited air support?
There are good answers to these questions, but just to pose them is also to raise the suspicion that Tony Blair is rushing to judgment on the question of what to do with Britain's ageing Trident deterrent as part of a desire to bolster the importance of his own political legacy.
However, this issue is too emotive and too bound up with Britain's post-Iraq defence posture to relegate to the dying days of the Blair premiership. Such a controversial decision deserves a broader and longer public debate. As any new nuclear weapons system will not be in place until around 2050, there is a sound case for putting the final decision regarding its acquisition to the voters at the next general election.
The arguments in favour of retaining a deterrent capability remain significant. The 21st century will be dominated by the threat of nuclear proliferation. If Iran succeeds in acquiring nuclear weapons, then we can expect Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Turkey to go the same way. In such an unstable world, retaining both a physical deterrent and a diplomatic bargaining chip in any disarmament negotiations seems only prudent. Call this the "insurance policy" argument.
Of course, there are qualifications to be made. Britain's conventional armed forces are over-stretched and inadequately equipped. A replacement programme for Trident that robbed Peter to pay Paul would be worse than useless. However, the weakness in our conventional force structure is not fundamentally one of limited finance - the MoD budget is already slated to rise over the next few years - but of flawed procurement practices and short-sighted political decision-making. Those problems need to be cured regardless of the decision on replacing Trident.
There is also a powerful moral argument against nuclear weapons which must be respected. Yet there are no conceivable circumstances in which Britain would use them first. They are there to make a potential enemy - even a rogue state such as North Korea - think twice. In a world where radioactive polonium is now used as a poison, we need every scrap of insurance we can get.
Walters case inquiry needed
IN 2003, Reece Walters, a criminologist at Stirling University, published a book which suggested that governments seek to control university research for their own ends. Little did he realise that he himself was about to become the centre of a major row with the Scottish Executive over allegations of academic censorship.
Mr Walters was a member of a research team at Stirling University commissioned by the Executive to evaluate a pilot project for special youth courts dealing with persistent offenders. He claims that his highly critical evaluation of the pilot was sanitised by civil servants in order to justify the Executive's flagship policy. He also claims that when he went public on his criticisms in an academic journal, the Executive accused him of breaching his research contract. As a result, he was the subject of a disciplinary investigation which subsequently cleared him.
These are grave allegations. Certainly, Mr Walters presents his findings in a robust manner that some might consider non-academic. For instance, he argues that the youth court "represents a punitive excursion that poses serious concerns for due process, human rights and net widening". Nevertheless, it would be better for all concerned if this matter was the subject of an open inquiry by the Scottish Parliament.
Misguided response to eagle idea
THE Scotsman, in association with the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, has submitted a petition to the Scottish Parliament recommending that the golden eagle be named Scotland's official national bird. The eagle was the first choice in a poll of Scotsman readers. Adopting a national bird, especially a rare species, is a costless way of reminding ourselves of the need to cherish the environment.
But Patricia Ferguson, the tourism minister, has poured cold water on the idea. She claims that making the eagle Scotland's national bird would mislead tourists into thinking Holyrood was guaranteeing visitors a sight of the rare species. Are we to assume that if Ms Ferguson travels to New York for some late Christmas shopping, she will complain to President Bush that she did not see a bald eagle? And does Ms Ferguson believe that the Welsh Assembly should replace the dragon as the symbol of Wales, lest visitors complain they haven't seen one flying over Cardiff?
Similarly, the Lord Lyon King of Arms, Scotland's heraldic authority, is worried that designating a national bird will only encourage demands for other national icons, such as a Scottish tree and flower. And the problem is ...?


