It's not the lies, but the reasons why

According to Ferenc Gyurcsany, Hungary's prime minister, the situation could not be more grave. "There is no plan B", he said yesterday after rioters took to the streets, stormed the state television station, ripped up the cobblestones and used the local constabulary as target practice. We haven't seen the Hungarians rioting with such vigour since the fall of communism. Their anger results from the revelation that Mr Gyurcsany admitted lying about the state of the Hungarian economy to get re-elected. As political porkies go this is a big one but everything is relative. Nevertheless, Mr Gyurcsany made comments, caught on tape, that it was only due to "divine providence, the abundance of cash in the world economy and hundreds of tricks'' that the economy had not collapsed.
As we reported yesterday, one of those tricks favoured by Hungarians is borrowing huge amounts of cash in Swiss francs. Such profligacy, especially when your local currency is under pressure, is a "train wreck waiting to happen'' as Prof Steve Hanke, a currency expert at John Hopkins University, explained in The Daily Telegraph. Our piece on the threat to the Hungarian economy could not have been more prescient. With loans available at 1.75pc in Swiss francs you'd be a fool not to take up such a great deal if living in the relatively high interest rate environment of Hungary - that is until the forint goes into free fall and your borrowing costs start to rise ominously. All this could be an isolated incident but the risk of the Hungarian economy turning into goulash and its problems spreading elsewhere is very real. The appetite for risk amongst investors is growing, according to the Chicago Board Options Exchange, as hedge funds and the like seek superior returns to those from equities. The shake-out in global markets in May has not deterred the brave or foolhardy. Eastern Europe is an exotic financial mixture and hot money is still looking for a home. Mr Gyurcsany may have won himself some perverse Browny points by coming clean about the real state of Hungary's problems. However, his candour may be too little, too late.


Watch out Waitrose, Tesco hasn't finished yet

A decade ago their lead was more than six percentage points. Put together, Asda and J Sainsbury had 32.6pc of the total grocery market, while Tesco on its own had 26.5pc. Two years ago, Tesco had narrowed the gap on its closest rivals' combined market share to 2.2 percentage points - 32.8pc for Asda and Sainsbury's versus 30.6pc for Tesco. Starting to get the picture? If not, then the news due out this morning from supermarket data provider TNS should leave people in no doubt. Having narrowed the gap to one percentage point in the summer, I expect today's numbers will show that the gap between Tesco and the other two is now less than that. At Tesco's current rate of growth it will reduce this gap to zero and will have overtaken Asda and Sainsbury's combined market share by February. Relentless focus and clever foresight of tastes and preferences have delivered Tesco pretty much total dominance in the UK. The next challenge is how to harness the consumer's increasing desire for a clear conscience when shopping. This has been the traditional territory of Waitrose, serving the ranks of the right-thinking middle classes. Watch out John Lewis - why should Waitrose be immune from the Tesco treatment?


It's time Russia behaved like an adult

IT has not been the best week for our two biggest oil and gas companies. While BP's Thunderhorse platform will stay silent off Mexico until 2008 - lopping 5pc off group net income, according to analysts - Shell has encountered its own local difficulty on the Sakhalin-2 off the east coast of Siberia.
If it was God's joke to put a good deal of the world's oil and gas in the world's most inhospitable and inaccessible places, then He must have been thinking of Sakhalin island, which is frozen for half of the year and sits on around 45 billion barrels of oil and gas - roughly the same as the entire North Sea Continental Shelf. Sakhalin-2 accounts for just 10pc of this.
When Shell first agreed to exploit the reserves in 1993, Russia was happy for Shell and two Japanese companies Mitsui and Mitsubishi to take full ownership of the project. Since then the oil price has more than trebled and Russia's homegrown companies like Gazprom have found a new confidence. Thirteen years later Shell is in a pickle. A deal to give Gazprom 25pc of Sakhalin-2 in return for some other assets has stalled because of construction cost over-runs on Sakhalin-2 which have doubled to $20bn. Meanwhile reports from Moscow suggest the Kremlin will not sign them off, until Shell agrees to a new production sharing agreement.
What we are seeing is Putin Power. Quoted UK companies that are involved in Russia are now facing an increasing risk of value destruction because of Kremlin politics.
But the Russians are not acting in their long term interests by causing diplomatic incidents by undermining commercial agreements. Russia needs trading partners as much as we need her natural resources.
Japan voiced its concerns yesterday over Sakhalin-2 but it is now time for the UK government to bring pressure on Russia to behave like a fully signed up member of the developed world, rather than export the bullying tactics of its domestic politics into the international financial arena.

Hurricane Gordon defies the experts

Anyone wanting to predict the course of the Blair/Brown saga should log on to America's National Hurricane Centre website (www.nhc.noaa.gov) for the latest news on Hurricane Gordon. After a modest start as a small tropical depression near the Leeward Islands, Gordon was predicted a short and inglorious life. He would, said the forecasters, spend his "lifetime over water'' and was "no threat to land''. Then Gordon came to a halt in mid-Atlantic, apparently uncertain as to which way to turn, and the weathermen said he risked being shortly absorbed by other systems.
But Gordon has defied such predictions, picking up speed and power again this week, and remaining at hurricane force. He may even cause storms over Britain this weekend at the start of the Labour Party conference. A fine image of Gordon swirling purposefully towards Britain can be found in glorious colour on the website (the rainbow infrared version is the most impressive). So the Chancellor should take heart. He may have been seen as a swirling mass of contradictions for the past few weeks, but with some luck and determination he could be blowing a gale through Westminster for some time yet.

You can't stamp out philately

It has been a bad week for the world's 30 million stamp collectors, as the Post Office unveiled a new stamp available for printing over the internet - in the form of a barcode. It is hard for even the most ardent philatelists to get excited by a series of black lines or by starting a virtual album.
So does this spell the end for stamp collections? Of course not. The Stanley Gibbons 100 Index, the experts' guide to the price of stamps, has risen by 50 per cent in the past six years. If no more are issued, those that are left will become more valuable. The real loser will be the Post Office, which won't have collectors rushing to pick up the latest first-day covers, and those of us who cling to the art of letter writing. Some communications - condolences and major thank-yous - still require formality, and modern technology, be it barcode or e-mail, seems inadequate.

Why are our elders so much better? Notebook

At the Tate on Monday to interview Sir Peter Blake, the godfather of British Pop art, it suddenly occurred to me how much cultural nourishment is coming from men in their sixties and seventies. The two best novels consumed over the summer were by Philip Roth, born in 1933, and John Updike (1932). I've been playing the new Bob Dylan album, one of his very best, with complete delight, for days; he is 1941 vintage.
Leonard Cohen, a 1934-er, is still turning out beautiful lyrics. Among the non-fiction book treats of the autumn are a philosophical book by Michael Frayn, born in 1933.
Classical music is studded with the continuing work of older artists, but the visual arts are a particularly obvious example of the theme. Sir Peter Blake, born in 1934, has a new show opening next year at Tate Liverpool. The best exhibitions of the autumn in London, meanwhile, showcase new work, and a portrait-retrospective by David Hockney (1937).
At the Tate we've just had a glorious Howard Hodgkin show (1932) and Gillian Ayres, class of 1930, has her new work coming on at the Alan Cristea gallery in Cork Street in the spring. This is just a quick thumbnail list of people whose work I'm running into at the moment, but we do seem to be in an elders-and-betters age.
It's partly that artists often keep working longer than the rest of us because there is no ragged gap between what they do and who they are.
Better general health must be some of the story, too. But I wonder how much of the explanation is that these are people who were given a far better education, whether in language, drawing, live performing or playing, than is widely available now.
They have a base of craft and skill that they can continue going back to and drawing on; which is why we keep going back to - and drawing on - them.
I completely lost my temper at Edinburgh airport this week, which was very wrong of me: the bag which had been OK-sized 12 hours earlier in London was deemed too big (by a couple of inches) to carry down again. Something about the triumphal smile on the face of the official who said I'd have to leave it, got my goat.
Although I thought I had understood the new rules, I had already had a deodorant stick and a tiny bottle of aftershave confiscated and was about to lose a few tubes of water-colour paint. Fair enough. They're doing their job, and all that.
We should blame the al-Qa'eda nutters, not them. But I still don't see how restricting even further the size of bags you can carry on board, after they have been screened, has any connection with security.
The truth is that flying has become one of the most miserable experiences in modern life. There are the fearful queues, which are now just as bad after you have been cajoled into booking yourself in online, as they ever were before; there's the officious bullying and sanctimonious Tannoyed nagging which starts when you stumble out of the taxi and continues throughout the flight; there's the dazing retail hell of almost every airport.
Although, like countless millions of others, I have to travel by air for my work, I now go to considerable lengths to avoid it for the rest of the time. A long drive, a long train journey, or even shrugging and picking up a book instead ... anything to keep out of a plane.
The Liberal Democrats are rightly worried about the growth in flight pollution but they should not worry too much; the infuriating air travel industry, plus the Islamist nutters trying to kill us, are likely to solve the problem well ahead of any politician.
I was up there working on a Panorama for Sunday about Gordon Brown. One thing I'm told is that he does very good impersonations, including a "Tony". Twenty quid to whoever persuades him to give us that one on air.

