The Army's deadliest enemy is at home On one flank are lawyers and politicians: on the other, the recruits who won't be disciplined. Max Hastings sees a bleak future for the Armed Forces

Last week's court-martial proceedings against a Royal Navy submarine captain accused of bullying his officers made bleak reading. I have no opinion about the merits of the case, and no sympathy with bullies. Like most people who care about the Armed Forces, however, I felt my heart sink at yet another public embarrassment. Their via dolorosa seems endless. There are high-profile prosecutions (many of which collapse) resulting from alleged misdeeds in Iraq; fears about the impending deployment in Afghanistan; regiments disbanded and recruitment ailing; controversy about the treatment of recruits. The Sunday Telegraph reported last week on despondency at Catterick's Infantry Training Centre, where instructors live in fear of accusations of abuse.
The other night, I met a friend who has a son in the US Army in Iraq. Like every American soldier there, he told me, he finds himself knee-deep in "comfort boxes'' and goodwill messages from unknown admirers at home. "Do British soldiers in Iraq get the same sort of stuff?'' he asked. Not nearly as much, I said. In this country, it's an unpopular war. It seems deplorable that our soldiers, doing a difficult and thankless job at risk of their lives, should be tarred with the same brush as Tony Blair, the man responsible for sending them to war.
Prosecutions brought against soldiers accused of misdeeds are utterly unrepresentative of the fine things being done daily by thousands of young men and women on the battlefield. President Bush's Iraq adventure is quite as controversial in the United States as it is in Britain. Yet Americans perceive the distinction between the war's demerits, and a duty of loyalty to those who fight under their country's flag.
Why do we hesitate to do likewise? Soldiers who mistreat prisoners or civilians must be punished. But it seems sorely mistaken to use these cases, or for that matter allegations of bullying in British barracks, to compromise the regard in which the Armed Forces have always been held by the British people.
We are getting ourselves into a shocking tangle about what we expect from warriors. Throughout history, it has been understood that wars make unique demands on those who fight them. These can be met only by creating a service ethos utterly different from civilian life, not least in its willingness for sacrifice. Today, politicians and lawyers have thrust upon the Armed Forces restrictions and legal burdens designed to drive them into line with modern civilian practice. This is madness. Those who administer the Infantry Training Centre at Catterick are scarcely allowed to impose discipline on new recruits, lest they quit or sue.
Many line battalions have to run their own training programmes for alleged trained soldiers from the ITC, to render them fit to serve. Faced with the most rudimentary discipline - punctuality, kit inspections, morning runs, obedience to orders - many young men literally pack up and go home.
The excesses of European Human Rights law are bad enough in civil life, but disastrous when imposed upon the Services. The current issue of British Army Review carries a letter from a veteran warrant officer, suggesting that young soldiers no longer find it acceptable to give "casual salutes'' to officers. The First Sea Lord, Sir Alan West, said this month that the Armed Forces face "legal encirclement'' from human rights. Every officer knows what he means. Circumstance and misguided policy unite against discipline, confidence and morale.
An unpopular war, unfavourable publicity and a sense among the young that the Services are uncool, have hit recruiting and made many parents reluctant to see their children serve. Shortage of bodies, together with the culture of litigation, make officers and NCOs - especially corporals at the sharp end - increasingly hesitant about the management of those in their charge. Civilian officials and lawyers intervene with increasing energy in the traditional process of military justice.
Training is suffering severely from budget cuts. Large-scale exercises are cancelled, equipment programmes delayed. Finally, draconian political restraints imposed by this Government make senior officers reluctant to open their mouths publicly.
Those at the bottom of the chain of command need a lead, to restore their confidence. Politically-imposed silence at the top can only be construed by those at the bottom as meaning: "You're on your own if it goes wrong, mate.''
The Armed Forces exist to do an extraordinarily tough job in harsh circumstances. Unless men can be conditioned for the tests every warrior faces on the battlefield, how can they meet these? Almost all military operations are carried out in heat, cold or wet, often in the dark watches of the night, by men who must risk their lives when tired and hungry, far from home. One of the oldest military maxims is "train hard, fight easy''. If Britain's Armed Forces are obliged to conform to the social and legal standards now prevailing in civil life, their future is bleak indeed, because these will render them unconvincing warriors.
A retired general tells me of conversations with several officers who have left the Services: "They say they find civilian life a breath of fresh air, because they no longer have to work with all the taboos and restrictions that are making uniformed life fantastically difficult. It's becoming easier to give an order in a civilian business than in a service unit.''
Most of us have always taken pride in the fact that Britain's Armed Forces may not be the biggest, but man for man are the best. This will no longer be true, unless we change course. It is vital to get politicians and lawyers off the soldiers' backs. Political correctness may be a cliché, but for the services it has become a curse.
Right now the Services are feeling unloved. We should try to change that. Anybody who wants to write or send a parcel to a serviceman in Iraq or Afghanistan can find addresses on the net through BFPO.org.uk. The Armed Forces are among Britain's finest institutions. It is shameful that they are taking so much of the pain for this Government's deceits and failures.


Wogan's World

Hardly a week goes by but another of our most fondly-held convictions is blown out of the water. Now "research shows'' that trees are doing more harm to the environment than all our underarm deodorants and vehicle emissions put together. So, those people in the Amazon basin who have been scything down trees in swathes the size of Belgium, have all this time been doing their bit for the planet. Whatever next? Windfarms are beautiful?
People are confused. Sunshine is bad for you... sorry, hang on, it's good. Vitamin C fights colds and flu, take plenty... no, just a moment, don't. Homeopathy works... oops. Red wine helps the heart, drink up... no, not that much.
With all this contradictory information, it's no wonder the confused flock to fundamentalist religion, which brooks no deviation from its rigid truth. And, to paraphrase Chesterton, when people lose faith, they'll believe anything.
THE NEWS of that creative couple of con artists in the States who, having purchased a severed thumb for the purpose, stuck it in a bowl of chilli and tried to soak the fast food joint where they were eating for millions, struck a responsive chord with a poet of my acquaintance:
One night in a restaurant in Crewe,
I found an old thumb in my stew.
Said the waiter: "Don't shout,
Or wave it about,
Or the rest will be wanting one, too.''
Unfortunately for the finger fradusters, the judge didn't see the funny side and gave them 12 years. This, following the recent execution of a blind cripple, makes one wonder if the American courts are reverting to the good old days of the Witches of Salem. It would certainly be a relief to Ronald McDonald and Col Sanders, who were being regularly clobbered by customers who, having spilled hot coffee on themselves or slipped on a chip, sued for millions and retired to the Bahamas.


This pensions bill could bankrupt Britain

Since Labour came to power in 1997, householders have paid ever-higher council tax bills. The average increase has been 7 per cent a year. Ministers insist that the rises have been "necessary'' to fund the improvements in the services that local councils provide. It is, however, very hard to find anyone who sincerely believes that there has been an improvement in any of the services council taxpayers receive for their money. Indeed, far from improving, the perception of most taxpayers is that councils provide less, not more, for the ever-greater sums they extort.
Now we know why. As Liam Halligan explains in the Sunday Telegraph's Business section today, the increases in council tax have gone not on improving council services, but on paying for public sector pensions. These pensions are financed directly by taxes - that is, by the Government taking other people's money. More than one quarter of your council tax does not go on providing services in your community, it is immediately eaten up funding inflation-proof pensions for public sector workers. No wonder there has been no improvement in services from our higher council taxes.
The public sector pension deficit is now more than pounds 700 billion. That works out at a staggering pounds 30,000 per household. In the past three years alone, the bill for public sector pensions has grown by 35 per cent. There are now more than six million people who work for the state - the figure has increased by over half a million since Gordon Brown took charge of the Treasury - and their median wage is now higher than that paid to workers in the private sector.
Unlike private sector workers, who cannot retire with a state pension before the age of 65, and most of whom will soon have to work until they are 70 before they can collect any kind of pension, the employees of the state can retire on inflation-proof pensions at the age of 60. The Government promised to end that totally unreasonable anomaly, which is unjustifiable either by justice or economics. But Labour reneged on its promise. Having insisted that the case for change was "irrefutable'', Alan Johnson, the pensions minister, then folded at the first sign of protest from public sector workers: they keep retirement at 60 and their inflation-proof pensions.
The consequences are potentially catastrophic. Standard &amp; Poor, the organisation whose judgment on the credit worthiness of countries determines how easy or difficult it is for them to borrow money, has said that Britain's colossal public sector pensions liability may soon lead to a downgrading of the country's credit rating to "sub-investment grade''. That would make investing in Britain the equivalent of investing in a junk bond. Much higher interest rates would inevitably follow - which would wreak havoc on the finances of anyone with a mortgage, and would almost certainly lead to a general economic slump in this country.
Labour is risking the country's finances, heaping costs on to the next generation of workers, and ensuring that the present generation of taxpayers have to pay ever-larger amounts - and for what benefit? Simply so that public sector workers can enjoy an immunity from the economic realities that the rest face.
Ultimately, those realities will have to be confronted. At the moment, all that the Government is doing is burying its head in the economic sands by pretending that they don't exist. More than anything else, it is proof that Gordon Brown's reputation for prudence is totally undeserved. He has allowed the public sector pensions bill to balloon in a way that now threatens to blow up the whole economy. The Chancellor can look forward to a large taxpayer funded pension when he retires. He may be able to escape the consequences of his profligacy. The rest of us will pay dearly for it.

