Messing with our homes may lose Gordon his

A man who made it his life's work to move into his dream house could swiftly find it repossessed: poor, poor, Gordon. And what will probably do for the man in Number 10 is housing. Brown says his passions are health and education, but what will poison voters against him are roofs - the ones no longer over the heads of the electorate.
It's hard to see a happy way out. In some areas house prices are 20 times average local incomes and ownership seems impossible; yet if prices tumble, as economists increasingly predict, it will be not only Northern Rock customers who are suddenly homeless, with repossessions already trebling in a year. A fall in prices will not even help those crowded out of the market, as many owners will hunker down and refuse to sell. A huge swath of voters will be left feeling decidedly sub-prime, and they will take that out on a sub-standard Prime Minister. You know, the one who as Chancellor vowed upon collecting the seals of office: 'I will not allow house prices to get out of control and put at risk the sustainability of the recovery.'
Still, this housing crisis is not only about the repo man creeping up on the supposedly comfortable; there are 1.6m families - one in 13 households - on the waiting list for social housing, the Lib Dem housing spokesman Paul Holmes has discovered. This is vast. Yvette Cooper has cobbled together a housing green paper, but privately Labour MPs are scornful. For all the political-media obsession about home ownership, it remains a fantasy for many. Shared-equity schemes, community land trusts and the like could help. But might the 21st century also be crying out for a very old-fashioned solution - the rebirth of the council house? Did you know only 4,000 are built a year - a tenth of what we managed under Margaret Thatcher, who against her friend Gordon suddenly looks like a friend of municipal housing. And for every one built, more are lost with council house sales. And proceeds go to Westminster, not councils, which are thus unable to build replacements. The result? 130,000 children living in squalor. Few want to see the return of vast estates, but small developments that can never be bought, interspersed with private housing? There is no alternative.
Labour MPs know that housing is what exercises their constituents. Holmes has held meetings with Cooper and claims the minister privately admits the reason Labour builds so few council houses is because it does not want to borrow and break Brown's golden rule. Everyone now professes to believe in localism, yet councils are not free to raise and spend the money to provide the housing local people want. Instead, Brown seeks to plaster the countryside in executive houses against the wishes of - and unaffordable to - those who grew up there. These McMansions will be snapped up by the jaded urban middle-class fleeing cities, further contributing to civic decline.
This isn't planning, it's centrally controlled chaos. And it is the mortar falling out of Brown's premiership. Some day, quite soon, a large number of us might have to downshift - and that includes Gordon.

Writers? Give me a handyman any time

The Costa Book Awards shortlists were announced last week; an all-female first novel list, some tantalising biographies and a quartet of great kids' books all contributing to a compelling collection of nominated titles. Though often maligned, I'm a fan of such awards where judges sort the literary chaff from the wheat for the rest of us. These days, with so much attention given to books, it's hard to imagine anyone choosing not to read them.
I live with just such a man. When we first got together he announced that he was giving up fiction because he didn't have time left for non-factual entertainment. He was 33. In the society we move in, non-readers such as my husband are suspect. Yet being brutally honest, the only thing reading literary fiction qualifies you for is dinner-party conversation. Despite this, children who read early are seen as mini-geniuses.
David Cameron would be proud of me. At six my precocious aptitude for words led to me being skipped forward two years but left me incapable of basic maths. The much-praised reading was a 'skill' that took nearly 20 years to pay off.
We're told that once we digest the classics we unlock the secrets of the universe, but there are days when I wish I'd learnt to fix a boiler or basic electrics. Literature may be revered in high places but most writers I've met are pretty useless at anything else. So we should be grateful there are intelligent children and adults out there for whom books don't appeal and whose skills lie elsewhere.
Celebrity is more popularly revered but I'm a sucker for a handyman or woman - anyone capable of applying practical thought and skill to making something work. Am I alone in believing technical colleges, to some melting pots for the dispossessed of society, were hallowed halls where the gifted congregated? If the government goes ahead with recent sensible proposals to break up our unwieldy and failing comprehensives, then couldn't some of the splinter schools specialise in more practical qualifications?
If I had a euro for every time I've heard people fantasise about finding a good plumber, electrician, phone engineer, tiler etc, I'd give up on books tomorrow for serial shopping. Literacy is fundamental, especially for reading instruction manuals, but other skills deserve our attention.
The super-cerebral types often have only one practical qualification, a driving licence, yet their popular profile suggests the Earth wouldn't turn without them. Imagine the horror of a society run by authors and intellectuals? We'd do better to start valuing the people who actually do make the world go round - or at least assist with the rotation of our own daily lives - otherwise why should our kids aspire to be them?

Retreat! This is a ridiculous attack: Clubs are trumps

Gordon Brown has let 'the armed forces down by not appointing a Secretary of State who is full-time', according to Admiral Lord Boyce, chief of the defence staff in 2003.
'When you have got people who have been killed and maimed in the service of their government, and you put at the head of the shop someone who is part-time, that sends a very bad message,' he told the BBC.
The military have even, in their barrack-room way, come up with a nickname for poor old Des Browne: 'Two Jobs'. You can tell that one came from the top brass; it lacks the wit of, say, 'Chalky' White or 'Smudger' Smith.
The two jobs are, of course, Minister for Defence and Scottish Secretary. There is already a strong sense emerging from last week's row - which saw five former heads of the armed forces attack the government for creating a 'desperate funding situation' - that the generals, so well trained in the art of war, have spotted a weak enemy and grabbed their moment to go over the top.
Putting aside the question of whether the military is so hard done by, the idea that Browne is shirking his duties is absurd and shows a fundamental misunderstanding of Britain's political terrain. For Scottish Secretary isn't a job any more. Didn't the brass hear of the wonderful scandal that wrapped itself round Helen Liddell when she was in the role? She was discovered to be so bored that she was taking French lessons in Dover House.
'It must take 5 to 10 per cent of Browne's time,' said James Mitchell, professor of politics at Strathclyde University, who has written a book on the role. 'It used to deal with all the subjects that are now devolved.'
A spokesman for Alex Salmond was equally dismissive. He wasn't really sure what the Scottish Office did these days, apart from sending the occasional cheque (with great formality). There are no regular meetings between the Scottish Office and the Scottish government.
Liddell was a hoot. The Daily Telegraph got hold of her ministerial diary. She travelled to London on Monday and came back on Thursday afternoon. She had a Burns dinner on Monday, a private dinner on Tuesday, a drinks reception on Wednesday and a concert in Edinburgh on Thursday. There seemed to be no official engagements. She was paid £ 118,000.
There are many, including Mitchell, who want to get rid of the role altogether. I disagree. It is good to have the Scottish Secretary in cabinet, and that certainly wouldn't happen if it was Browne's sole job. It has the advantage of meaning a Scot should always have an important ministry with which to share the role. The generals should get their tanks off Scotland's London lawn.

A protest too far

WITH GREAT tactical cunning, five former chiefs of the defence staff chose last week, when the government was weakened by scandal, to attack the Prime Minister over his commitment to the armed forces.
Even without the shrewd timing, the salvo would have grabbed attention. Neglecting the army in times of war seems especially reckless. But the senior officers had another, politically more partisan complaint - that the Defence Secretary is compromised because he doubles as Scotland Secretary.
It is a curious coupling, but there is no evidence that it is a strategic problem. Des Browne is not known to dodge defence briefings to attend Caledonian committees. The real issue is money.
Defence spending has risen. The questions are whether it has risen enough, and whether funds have been spent wisely.
Are navy destroyers, for example, useful in fighting the Taliban? No. Has cost-cutting led to neglect of injured personnel? Yes. Are the generals right to voice their concerns? That depends on how they do it.
Last week's onslaught would not have happened without encouragement from serving brass. Perhaps they only went public out of desperation. But perhaps they calculated that public furore works better than private persuasion. If so, they have over-played their hand.
The armed forces deserve respect and adequate resources. But in a democracy, it is generals who take orders from a civilian government, not the other way around.

Cosmetic surgery needs control

BEAUTY HAS always been in the eye of the beholder, but increasingly it has also come at the stroke of a scalpel. In 2005, the last year for which statistics are available, Britons had around 700,000 cosmetic treatments, over three times more than in 2001.
The increase is no surprise. Private clinics aggressively promote surgical procedures that are not without risk. A dossier of evidence collected by the consumer group Which?, and seen by The Observer , identifies 'hard-sell tactics' used by some of the biggest names in the industry. Meanwhile, an Observer investigation found that certain clinics in London do not, as a matter of course, ask clients vital questions about their motives for undergoing operations. 
Regulation of cosmetic surgery is a mess. Eight different bodies play some role overseeing the £ 360m-a-year industry, but poor practice can still flourish. There is no one body to which victims of malpractice can complain. There are no figures for the number of complaints, or for action taken in response.
But the Department of Health opposes more stringent rules on the grounds that cosmetic procedures are a matter of private choice. Indeed they are. But people cannot make wise choices if crucial information about risk is not discussed upfront.
Some popular procedures may be purely cosmetic, but they are still surgical interventions. If the Department of Health allows them to be conducted recklessly and without due regulation, it demeans the whole of British medicine.

