The grinding pressure of mortgage debts

Will "negative equity", that nasty phrase of the early 1990s, again stalk the land? And if it does, how well will borrowers and lenders cope?
When you get the Leader of the Opposition calling for mortgage lenders to be lenient on home-buyers who get into trouble, you know something is up. He cannot seriously believe he will have any influence on what the lenders will actually do. These are experienced financial institutions and while some of them may have got a bit carried away and lent on over-lax terms, they certainly do not want to repossess houses if they can possibly help it.
So why is he saying it? My guess would be that he reckons that a lot of borrowers will indeed be in trouble during the next two years and it costs him nothing to give the impression the Tories are on their side. The significant point is his keen political judgement: get on the right side of the trouble to come.
So how serious might this squeeze become? There are always two issues in a loan: price and availability. The price is determined by the cost of the raw material out of which the loan is fabricated: money. Availability is determined by numbers, scale and variety of lenders and the judgements they make about the terms on which they will lend.
The Bank of England controls, or at least heavily influences, the price of very short-term money, and we have just seen that come down a little. But it has less control over the price of money lent for three-months and upwards and virtually no influence on rates of five years and upwards. What has been happening in recent months has been a widening of the gap between the Bank's rate and the money market rates. Despite that small cut by the Bank, lenders still have to pay more for three-months' money than they did in the summer. So money is still expensive.
Meanwhile, availability has been cut. Part of that is because of Northern Rock. In the spring, it was doing nearly 20 per cent of new home loans, far too much actually, given its size and financial resources. Now it is doing hardly any new business. Officially, it is still open but if you look at the rates it is advertising for its loans, these are higher, in some instances much higher, than those of the other lenders. It is deliberately pricing itself out of the market. Add to this the fact that other lenders have tightened up on their terms, requiring a higher income or a larger deposit, and many people who would have got a mortgage six months ago now would not get one. The number of mortgages, at 83,000 in October, is down 16.5 per cent on a year ago. The result is that people taking out a first mortgage now are spending on average more than 20 per cent of their income on it, the highest proportion since 1992.
So how does the present situation compare with the early 1990s? In two ways it is better, and in one way it is worse.
It is better because we have control of our own interest rates and because unemployment is much lower. In the early 1990s, the UK was a member of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism and rates had to be held high enough to hold sterling within the narrow bands of the ERM. Since this period coincided with the post-unification German boom, rates suitable for Germany proved too high for the UK. Partly because of those high rates, the economy went into recession and unemployment soared. Many of the people who lost their homes did so because they had also lost their jobs. You can never say never, but a similar combination of double-digit interest rates and a long recession does seem most unlikely this cycle.
There is, however, one thing that is worse now than then. It is absolute level of mortgage debt. Houses are more expensive relative to income and mortgages are higher. So, though it costs less to service a mortgage than it did in the early 1990s, there is still the principal to be paid off. True, up to 1.5 million people will face higher mortgage costs next year when fixed-rate periods expire, though maybe not much higher if the Bank cuts rates as quickly as some commentators expect and the present crisis of confidence in the money markets eases. But for many people the real grinding problem will not be servicing the interest on mortgage debts. It will be paying them off.
This is the key point that politicians of all parties will be under pressure to tackle. Mortgage lenders can make life easier for people in difficulty by easing up on repayment schedules, as Mr Cameron urges. But they still have to get their money back in the end. This is not a one- or two-year problem. It will be a 20-year one.
It is possible that there will be sufficient general inflation over the next few years both to erode the real value of people's debts and to underpin the value of the housing stock. They would therefore be able to pay back in devalued money and eventually see the present level of prices exceeded. That is what has happened to the people who bought homes at the peak in the late 1980s. But inflation brings other problems, including higher interest rates, and it is hard to see any government deliberately trying to create it.
A more likely outcome will be a grind, as people have to restrict the amount they spend on other things and divert income to paying off debt. The pressure on governments then will be to hold down taxation, and certainly not increase it, so that people are cut enough slack to allow them to clear debt and still have some increase in their living standards. I don't think you can blame the present government for the debt binge that the country has gone on. You can blame it for wasting public money by increasing spending in an uncontrolled way. But any future government has to start from here, playing the hand of cards it has been dealt. One element in that hand will be the pile of debt, on mortgages and on consumer loans, that the electorate has accumulated over the past five or six years.
There is no way politicians can magic away that debt, any more than they can magic away the Government's own borrowing, once again running above budget forecasts. It is not good politicians saying: "Ah, you should not have borrowed so much," particularly in the light of their own performance. All they can do, all the next government can do, is to manage public finances in such a way as to give an over-borrowed nation the best shot at getting its debt burden back under control.
Setting its own house in order is the first stage of that process. The more people feel that government is trying to give better value for taxation, rather than mouth slogans about delivery, the more support there will be for its efforts to cut the fiscal deficit. There will have eventually to be cuts in overall taxation but these have to be directed towards helping people clear their own debts rather than recreating another binge. Not flashy, just thoughtful: is that too much to ask?

A sentimental journey ruined by boorish Brits

Shortly after 4.30 last Sunday morning, I roused my two sons, 12-year-old Joe and Jacob, aged nine, from deep slumber. They had both declared a keen interest in seeing live coverage of the much-hyped contest for the world welterweight boxing championship between Britain's Ricky Hatton and America's Floyd Mayweather.
This desire, I confess, did not burgeon without some fatherly encouragement. My own late father used to wake me up for the great fights of the early 1970s, such as the Thrilla in Manila between Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier, and I wanted my boys to have a similar experience, which they might remember with affection when they are the age I am now. You can't underestimate the excitement for a child of being woken up in the dead of night. In the heady cricketing summer of 2005, I took Joe to the last day of the third Ashes Test at Old Trafford, and knowing we were going to have to queue for ages to get into the ground, we set off for Manchester from our home in Herefordshire at 3.45am.
Back on the M6 fully 16 hours later, after a thrilling day's cricket, I asked Joe what had been his favourite bits of the day: was it the Australian captain Ricky Ponting scoring 156, perhaps, or the England wicketkeeper, Geraint Jones, catching Shane Warne? He thought deeply. No, he finally concluded, it was getting up at half-past three in the morning, and the Mexican Wave.
In a way it doesn't matter what fixes these things in the memory. I have similarly affectionate recollections of being woken up by my dad in July 1969 to watch Neil Armstrong become the first man to walk on the moon, even though the footage was so grainy that it might, frankly, have been the Mr Armstrong who ran the corner shop, in his back garden.
I have always ridiculed the fatuous conspiracy theory that the Apollo 11 moon landing was faked by the CIA on the basis that if it really had unfolded in a Burbank television studio it would have been much more watchable. Still, I was sitting there in the middle of the night, in my wincyette pyjamas, with my dad. I wouldn't have missed that for the world. Or the moon.
Anyway, on Sunday morning my boys and I stumbled downstairs and settled together on the living-room sofa, bleary-eyed, under Jacob's duvet. We watched the two boxers enter the arena at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas, with all the accompanying razzmatazz, and listened to Tom Jones singing "God Save The Queen". Then an American singer began to belt out "The Star-Spangled Banner", against a cacophony of jeers.
"Who is doing all that booing, daddy?" Jacob asked. I explained, with a heavy heart, that it was Ricky Hatton's fans, booing the American national anthem. "But we're his fans and we're not booing," Jacob said. "That," I said, "is because we do not have pea-sized brains." It was, and remains, a wholly inadequate explanation. "And the Americans didn't boo our national anthem," he added. The unfairness of it troubled him through the fight.
It troubles me still. I have met Hatton several times, and I admire him enormously. Before the anthems, I wanted him to win more than I have ever wanted a boxer to win a fight, but after them a part of me hoped that those fans would leave the arena disappointed. It has since been claimed, in defence of Hatton's huge, enthusiastic support, that it was a small, drunken minority who showed such disrespect. But what we heard was the booing of thousands, not dozens.
It has also been said that the Mancunian support comprises mainly football rather than boxing fans, and in particular fans of his beloved Manchester City. This is indubitably the case, and partly explains the problem. Booing the opposition's national anthem has become de rigueur at football internationals in this country, and was last heard before the final Euro 2008 qualifier, against Croatia at Wembley, that our boys so pitifully lost.
It was later said that the Croatians played well that night because they relaxed on hearing the English opera singer Tony Henry get the words of their anthem slightly wrong, one mistaken consonant changing the meaning of a line from "You know, my dear, how we love your mountains" to "My dear, my penis is a mountain". But it could equally be that they were fired up after all that raucous booing.
Either way, it was the values of the Beautiful Game that were on display in the MGM Grand, not the values of the Noble Art. But really, what difference does that make? They were Brits, boozed-up and boorish, and they shamed us all. Worse, from where I was sitting, under my son's duvet, they sullied a sentimental journey both into the past, and into the future.

