Letter: You Say - ECHO Letters

JAMES Woods (ECHO Letters, Dec 3) is wrong in his assumption that taxis present a costly method of transport. For many city-dwellers, it's far cheaper to pay for taxi journeys on a daily basis than purchase, run, insure and tax a private motor vehicle. Jimmy Brewster, address supplied

Stop wasting time

FOR a while now we've been pestered, in the media to reduce our carbon footprints. My family and I are only too willing to comply and regularly sort all our small contributions into the bins provided. This has not however improved the appearance of the street as most bins around here are kept in the front of the houses and are usually overflowing. My next point is, I feel that certain other things must be done before I will believe that global warming is being taken seriously by the authorities.
1. The lights on the top of high rise buildings should be turned off. On BBC TV London's high buildings and bridges were shown lit up just like Blackpool.
2. Day and night cricket matches should be scheduled as day only.
3. Envelopes with plastic film address windows should be banned, as we cannot recycle them.
I am sure that other people can make contributions to this small list, and then maybe I will feel that more than just lip service is being paid to a very serious threat to us all. W Bullock, Liverpool

Fast-track losers

ON Sunday evening I responded to an email from Ryanair for their latest sale for one penny each way flights. I booked three flights to Palma in February for a three-day break cost pounds 20 per person including tax. The sale was due to end at midnight on Sunday.
On Monday one of our family booked another four seats, again pounds 20 return. The sale has now been extended to Thursday.
The following day I entered 25 persons (as high as you are able to on the drop down window). No problem senor! 25 persons return inc tax to Palma Feb 23, that will be pounds 500 por favor.
It was the same with Alicante Feb 25, lp each way plus tax, 25 seats.
My theory is that the fast-track at JLA is a loser. If people in numbers will not buy a flight at lp each way, then they certainly will not pay pounds 2 to jump the artificially created queue.
Perhaps next summer, when people have had enough queuing and migrate to Manchester Airport, Peel Holdings may realise they have made a grave error of judgement, but perhaps Ryanair and easy Jet will have voiced their opinion by then.

In-house worries

AS a councillor for Norris Green ward which includes the Boot Estate, while I am pleased for the first 90 Boot residents lucky enough to be moving into Phase 1 of the new Ellergreen Estate, my main concern is for the 300 plus families that remain.
For 10 years they have lived in probably the worst housing conditions in Liverpool. Many are elderly and will struggle once again to pay the high heating costs this winter as the city council has rejected all proposals to compensate them.
Instead the Lib-Dems are seen celebrating that another 350 dwellings are to be built in Ellergreen Phase 2 but fail to mention that less than 50 of these will be for rent. The council needs to be doing more to speed up re-housing by giving the green light for more of the cash from the sale of Boot Estate land to be recycled for more new housing for rent and to repair council owned long-term vacant dwellings in nearby popular neighbourhoods.

Chess: A taxing matter

REGARDING Tim Akers's complaint about tax payers' money being spent on chess tournaments, I can assure him that any of this spent on British Championships will be well worth it, especially considering the number of ways in which tax payers' money can be wasted (ECHO Letters, Dec 4). 
The tournament will be a great success and one hopes local chess enthusiasts will support it more than they have supported local chess tournaments in Huyton and Skelmersdale.
The EU Championship is another matter.
If similar events hosted by Liverpool in recent months are anything to go by it will be little more than a benefit for a few chess celebrities and an irrelevance to those with no attachment to the EU. These events have not attracted all that many spectators; having no commentary room or bookstall for example they have not even been all that spectator orientated.
If it is the case that a large proportion of the pounds 160,000 is to be spent on the EU tournament then that is scandalous. It is difficult to believe that our representatives can have been so crass as to allow this. If our local politicians had any part in it I can only assume they have been so manipulated that they fully deserve their epithet, 'glove puppets'.

Awesome Babel has extra special talent; 
Strength, pace and close control among his assets

HOW ABOUT Ryan Babel last night? His dribbling, his strength and his pace are the three things that stand out.
He has a ferocious shot on him, but even though his decision making is still a little bit suspect, when he gets comfortable with the team and the way we play, we will truly see him explode into life.
Rafa can shape him into any sort of player he wants. He is versatile, and there are awesome aspects in his game.
In all honesty, he has the potential to have an impact on this league comparable to that of Ronaldo. It will take at least a season and a half to find his feet and get in touch with the team.
I've also been impressed with his goal instincts and his ability to get into scoring positions.
If he contributes 10-15 goals this season, it will be a huge confidence booster for him.
Andy Morrison, Liverpool
FERNANDO TORRES was terrific against Marseille and his goal was out of this world, but Ryan Babel was truly something else.
His pace was frightening for the French defenders and even when he was second favourite to reach the ball he made them sweat.
The goal, though, deserves special mention.
The strength and speed to hold off Rodriguez (when other players may have collapsed to the floor and claimed a red card) was awesome for a young man.
It was only bettered by the finish. The deft touch around the keeper was planned and executed perfectly. From there the outcome was inevitable.
This kid is special. It is early days, of course, but the goals he has scored already signal what he is capable of.
Jon Widdersley, Hoylake
FERNANDO TORRES' goal last night was sheer brilliance.
He is what we have been lacking at Anfield for years - a front line player who can take the ball and beat defenders. It will be interesting stuff on Sunday.
I hope Rio Ferdinand was watching him last night. The lad is pure dynamite.
Had Rooney scored that goal the Press would have been raving about him for the rest of the season. Come on Nando, show them on Sunday who the new king of the Premier League is!
David Carraway, Toxteth
RAFA BENITEZ is the best manager in the world.
We need to stop all these ridiculous stories about him getting the sack.
After the Reading match all the comments were so unfair, and you only have to look at last night's match for proof.
Three of the four goals scored last night were by players who have been signed by Rafa - Torres, Kuyt and Babel - while it was the magnificent work done by Rafa in helping the Reds lift the European Cup that stopped Gerrard leaving.
Get behind the greatest boss on the planet.
Phil Brownlow, Fazakerley

Hotshot Yak will become a legend

EVERY Everton fan knows that Yakubu had a shaky start after his megabucks move, but I had faith that he would do what he's always done - score goals. 
Regardless of his awesome hat-trick against Fulham, he has been getting better with each game and could be a true Blue hero.
Moyes deserves enormous credit, not only for sticking with the Yak while a lot of Blues were slating him, but creating a situation where we might not even miss him when we lose him, Yobo and Pienaar for the African Nations Cup.
I am glad to have AJ, Vaughan, Vic and McFadden at the ready.
Jack White, Maghull
WE all had something to say about the way Yakubu played in his first few games.
The truth is that Yak has probably never played for a club with such a high work ethic before but that, combined with the team spirit, is rubbing off on him. From his post match interview on Saturday, he seems to be liking it.
A few more games like that and he'll be a legend.
Geoff Martin, Ormskirk
YAKUBU has answered the critics in the best possible way - by slamming in the goals.
His record this season now is fantastic. Why players aren't given a bit longer to settle when they move to a new club is a mystery to me.
Let's hope that AJ and Vaughan will be fit enough to step into the fray when the Yak goes off to the African Cup.
Steve King, Liverpool
RE David Moyes being hauled before the FA beak for his comments after the derby. He has every right to an opinion and if the FA aren't big enough to stand up to under-performing refs then that's their problem.
Even die-hard Liverpool fans would say that Clattenburg had a terrible game.
In all honesty, Neville and Hi-bbert both had to see red, but Kuyt and Carragher should have, too.
The referees in the Premier League are now professional and therefore should be held accountable for their actions. Good luck, Moyes.
If they fine you for it, I'm sure there will be plenty of people willing to pay. 
Bill Cartwright, Everton

Credit due for stunning show

WHEN it's needed most Liverpool have that incredible knack of producing the performance they require.
Make no mistake about it, the mauling of Marseille ranks as the best of the season.
The players deserve all the plaudits for their tremendous show and Rafa Benitez, who I have had a go at in the piece below, must be congratulated for the way his team went about their mission.
But I admit to being totally confused.
How can we play that badly on Saturday and then turn it on last night? How can we pick up one point from the first three Champions League games, look dead and buried (almost), and then win our next three and score 16 goals into the bargain?
One minute you are watching the Reds, as at Reading, thinking what the hell is going on. The next, you see a European tie in which they were majestic.
Benitez put pressure on himself with Saturday's result, but it all evaporated in the two-goal salvo early on and character of a brilliant team effort.
Perhaps the manager must take into account that players are more durable than he thinks. They can play three games in a week.
When he picks his best team we can beat anyone. On this show it doesn't matter being first or second in the group.
That 4-0 romp sent a message to all the other sides - and who will want to face them on that form?
The difference in the last two games has been unbelievable. We had consistency before Reading, let's now have it from here on, with our best team.
I was thrilled to bits. They meant business from the start, effectively killing off the French side with the Gerrard rebound and a stunning goal from Fernando Torres - what a player.
We were solid at the back, and were always going forward. Kuyt'sgoal settled it and Babel's was the icing on the cake.
Perhaps Rafa should tell his players they're playing Real Madrid on Sunday, followed by Barcelona in the Carling Cup next week! Two more cup finals and, with the pressure on, the Reds usually turn it on.
Well done, lads. Well done, Rafa. I'll happily buy him a drink next time I see him if he likes.

