Hark! High street retailers whinge

Ah well, it looks like roast chestnuts and coins-in-the-Christmas-pudding have bitten the dust. A survey reveals that nobody can quite be fagged with old festive rituals anymore, preferring the new "custom" of getting tanked up on champagne on Christmas morning.
Still, let's be comforted that some traditions persist. Because -hark! -is that a familiar yuletide chorus we hear? Yea, 'tis the sound of retailers once again worrying that Christmas will be a "trading disaster", just like last year and the year before that.
I'm becoming quite fond of this now. As a festive fixture it's nearly as predictable as the EastEnders punch up that occurs 40 seconds after Barbara Windsor has said: "I just know this is gonna be the best faaaamily Christmas ever." Unlike Bab's Christmas dinner though, the retail figures somehow seem to turn out OK.
This year some analysts have given warning that increased living costs have cowed consumers and that high streets "face their worst December for 25 years". Mmm. I'm looking at a cutting here from December 9, 2006 that says almost exactly the same, predicting "the worst festive season for retailers for more than 20 years" as retailers "slash prices to lure customers". But two weeks later -behold! - "Last-minute £ 6bn shopping spree averts disaster on high street". Total sales rose 4.4 per cent and in Christmas week consumers spent a record £ 2.8 billion in supermarkets.
Is it just me or do traders not seem to have had a truly catastrophic Christmas for years? So why, then, do they perpetually seem to be blowing out their cheeks like a London cabbie moaning: "There ain't no money in this game no more?"
Perhaps it's all part of a new Christmas parlour game, like journalists play when they carp that this will be "the worst Christmas telly EVER" and it turns out to be roughly the same as any other with identikit repeats and obligatory rerun of The Two Ronnies. Or the national handwringing that this will be the worst binge-drinking new year EVER but things are much as they ever were.
And if it is so gloomy on the high street how come there are such wearying queues to pay, to park, to try things on? This, for me, is one of life's enduring mysteries.
And why these retail predictions are made so early in December when most people haven't bought a single gift yet? The "last-minute surge" isn't last minute. It's normal human behaviour. But the risk that traders run in constantly rushing to discount -some retail analysts call it "planned panic" -is that the customers get wise and leave their shopping ever later. I know many people who routinely wait until Christmas Eve now, confident that the shops will have blinked first.
If some traders aren't careful they'll find they have set yet another new "tradition" -the pre-Christmas sale. And this might be harder to kill off than any coin in a Christmas pud.

I really don't care if you don't vote

People who abstain are being utterly rational
O, the clarifying power of a genuinely stupid idea. A fatuous proposal can be a flaming torch in a dark cave, it really can. So thank you, Councillor's Commission. Truly you have led me from the path of wrongdoing.
You see for the past decade I have been there, brow furrowed, at countless meetings where the debate has turned to that political hardy perennial -"what shall we do about declining voter turnout"? And I have nodded away, or nodded off, as the speaker droned on about measures that sounded good, but everyone in the room secretly knew would make no impact at all. Sometimes the droning speaker was me.
And in all that time, I never once did what I should have done. I never once stood up, upsetting the desk as I rose, and shouted: "Stop! Enough of this nonsense! Who cares if people don't vote?" Well, it's time. And it's the Councillor's Commission that has woken me from my slumber.
On Monday, this Government- sponsored body issued a report on participation in local democracy. A central proposal was that councils be allowed to offer an incentive to vote. Each ballot paper, for instance, could double as a lottery ticket. So it won't just be a measly seat on the borough council that is at stake when you go to vote -there would be the chance to be a lotto millionaire.
Lotteries are just the start of it. Anything goes. Well, almost anything. The commission drew the line at offering doughnuts, as some districts in the United States do, because they were worried about obesity. The chairman said she was a doctor and thought dougnuts would be "a step too far". I am not making this last bit up.
Now the thing about offering lottery tickets is that it might work. More people might come and vote. But this is not because a lottery is a brainwave, a brilliant solution that has until now eluded even the greatest political scientist. It is because you are paying people to vote. The expected fee is the size of the prize money divided by the turnout. And if you pay people to do something more of them will do it. (Although, by the by, you have to keep paying them once you start.
Various academic social experiments suggest that if you start paying and then withdraw payment, you will make the situation worse than it was when you started.) The reason that this money-for-votes idea helps to clarify things is that the moment you think about it, it leads on to this question -why? Why on earth would you pay someone to vote? Which in turn leads to this -why should I care if you decide not to vote?
People who abstain in elections are making a rational decision. They are calculating that the benefit the result will bring them, multiplied by the probability that their vote will change the result, is smaller than the cost involved in making the effort to go to the polling station.
This is a personal, perfectly reasonable, calculation. Why would I want to influence it? Speaking as an individual, there is no reason at all. Actually, I'd rather they didn't vote. The more other people vote, the smaller the probability that my own ballot paper will change the result. But what about as a community? Isn't in the interests of us all that more people vote?
I have been pondering this a great deal and I can't for the life of me think why it would be. As long as everyone has the right to vote, and freedom under the rule of law, it doesn't matter if they choose to exercise the right. Low voter turnout may be the sign of a healthy society in which people live peaceful lives without worrying overmuch about government.
But what if low turnout is a sign of angry disillusion with the political choices on offer? Well, I certainly wouldn't want to disguise the signal with a whole load of synthetic schemes to reduce the cost of voting (with e-democracy and so forth) or increase its benefits (with lotteries and doughnuts). As it is, it doesn't seem as though most of those who abstain in elections have given up on democracy and the law, they are just not that impressed at what they are being offered. Which is their business and that of the party leaderships. Not mine.
All this stuff about turnout would hardly be worth going on about if it was just a matter of preventing some councillors luring people to the polling station with the offer of a free tombola. Unfortunately the drive to increase turnout has a serious consequence. It leads politicians (particularly, at the moment, Labour ones, who fear it is their voters staying at home) to feel that it is more important to make voting easier than it is to ensure that the voting system is secure.
You may be aware of the controversy over postal voting, with worrying amounts of fraud resulting from attempts to make it easier to send your ballot in ahead of time. You may be suspicious of new-fangled voting by computer and so forth. What is less well known is how insecure our basic paper vote on the day in a polling station system is.
You turn up, perhaps having left your polling card at home and without any other form of identification, and are handed a ballot paper, provided that the person whose name you gave hasn't already voted. And how do we know that person exists? At the moment we have household registration, which doesn't even require the signature of individual voters.
The Electoral Commission, the body policing the system, has been working hard to ensure voting and politics has integrity. And it has repeatedly argued that we need individual-signed voter registration. Tomorrow it will press its case again.
But it is being resisted by MPs. Why? Because it is feared that such registration will reduce turnout.
This obsession with turnout isn't simply pointless. It's dangerous.

Two years old is far too late to start education

Ed Balls, our Children's Secretary, yesterday announced that two-year-olds will start in state-funded education. Two-year-olds at school! Doesn't Mr Balls know that they're far too old for that?
It took a whistle-stop tour of three local nurseries for me to realise that the efforts in the Government's new Children's Plan to close the gap between rich and poor toddler attainment are doomed to fail. As we dashed from one to the other, looking frantically for a place for our two-year-old, I couldn't help but dwell on Mr Balls's approach. He is not, as all the detractors say, starting too early, but too late.
Nursery A was a private Montessori nursery. As I thought "Montessori" was a codeword for "nice teachers in transparent skirts, like the young Lady Diana", I was in for a shock. The Montessori method began to help the scores of poor street kids in Rome. It is hard work.
Montessori children operate like industrious Santa's elves, tiny factory staff calmly moving through their tasks. I watched a knee-height girl fastidiously unpack a stone-polishing kit, polish the stones, repack them, and begin again. It was eerie. They all brushed their teeth after lunch.
Next stop was community-run Nursery B, which we found empty. Everyone was in the garden, because, here, every day was like Glastonbury. Festooned trees, teepees and babies rolling in what looked like a paddling pool full of sick, but on closer sight was a mix of yoghurt and muesli.
And finally, came state-run Nursery C, whose head began her complaints about funding and staff turnover as we were buzzed in. Starved of adult attention, crawlers clustered around my ankles. When it was time to go, I looked back at so many tiny expectant faces, and felt like when I had to leave the dog pound. Could I sneak a few home in my bag? "I can't rescue you all," I muttered guiltily, and left.
Surely such three entirely different approaches were bound to have a profound effect on our daughter? That is, after all, the message of Mr Balls, that nurseries can rescue a child. Well, no, not at all.
The 40-year-old Head Start programme in America educates nearly one million of the poorest toddlers in nurseries in an attempt to close their achievement gap.
Trouble is, most of their improvement fades after a few years at primary school.
This is because study after study has shown that the most crucial time for a child is in its first year. And, earlier, in the womb. Or, in fact, earlier, at the moment of conception, or, most importantly, before. It barely matters what a nursery does compared with what a parent is. By two, it's too late.
If Mr Balls really wants to help poor children, he needs to be both scientific and bold about it. He must help their parents, just as or before they become parents.
Best of all (if this is not getting too circular) when they are still children themselves.

