Wake-up call for the cocaine generation

Poor maths performance holds us back; 
LETTERS

WITH the announcement of the performance of Irelands 15-year-olds in the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), Im concerned about Irish second-level pupils performance in mathematics, based on the last round of PISA results (2004).
Only 11 per cent of Irish students achieved Level 5 and 6 (the highest levels), compared with an OECD average of 15 per cent.
This below average performance by Ireland is quite likely to impact negatively on the needs of our knowledge society.
Notably, there is no evidence that this has been addressed in education curricula since.
These results show Irish schools are not producing excellence in mathematics.
The comparatively low level of high-achievers in maths raises concerns about whether current post-primary maths education is preparing a sufficient number of students to meet the needs of the future knowledge society.
Irelands scores in maths resulted in a ranking of 17th out of 29 OECD countries. To compete effectively as a nation with other OECD countries we need a broad pool of researchers and other professionals in a range of fields, and often these will be underpinned by mathematics and high-achieving mathematicians.
It is time that Education Minister Mary Hanafin and the Department of Education and Science implemented a targeted programme of investment in maths education at primary and post-primary levels to enable us to reach our potential among the developed nations of the world.
Senator Dr FIDELMA HEALY EAMES, Fine Gael (Galway West), Oranmore, Co. Galway.
AteddyJesus?
ENGLISH school teacher Gillian Gibbons was jailed in Sudan for calling the class teddy bear mascot Mohammed.
What if a Muslim school teacher working in one of our 3,100 Roman Catholic schools, which are funded by taxpayers of all denominations, were to call the class teddy bear mascot Jesus?
Would she be sacked from her job, and would she lose her appeal to the unfair dismissal tribunal on the grounds that she undermined the Catholic ethos of the school?
JACK CANTILLON, Limerick.
Why the delay?
IN HIS desperate attempts to defend Bertie Ahern, Eoghan Harris berates the Mahon Tribunal for taking so long and costing so much (Mail). Fair point, senator, but why has it lasted ten years and cost E300million?
Much of the blame must lie with those politicians and their business friends who have failed to give full information, put forward incredible explanations and took legal proceedings to delay and obstruct the tribunal.
It reminds me of those supporters of the paratroopers who constantly complain about the duration and cost of the Bloody Sunday Tribunal, when it was the British army and government who were responsible for the Widgery Whitewash and the subsequent delays and obstructions of the truth.
RAY CORCORAN, Ballymun, Dublin 11.
Nativity ban shame
SHAME on the creche crowd who chose to ban the nativity play on the basis that it would offended non-Christians.
Shame on all those other institutions, too, that have dumped the crib, lest it offends some. What we are talking about here is the only bit of Christmas left that directly acknowledges the birth of God-made-man.
Note how non-offensive the rest of the Christmas activities are simply because no one associates them with God. If we as one of the first Christian nations turn our backs on openly celebrating the one true God we have believed in for 2,000 years, then this shows we are no longer Christian.
Where are the pleas of the three Cardinals and our Bishops?
Could it be that their plea to welcome immigrants has resulted in their being silent lest they, too, offend other religions?
Many thanks for airing the views of Mary Ellen Synon, Jacinta OBrien and others still not afraid or ashamed to stand up and be counted as Christians.
REDMOND OHANLON, Churchtown, Dublin 14.
Existence an accident?
EVERY manner of crank, fool, cheat, barbarian and egotist has claimed to know the mind of God.
This neither denies nor affirms his existence, but shows human folly and the failure of religions.
But there is egotism and arrogance in the claims of the atheist, because the truth is unknowable, beyond understanding and is the most profound question the universe possesses.
Its possible we are a soon-to-be-extinguished accident at the fag-end of a 14 billion-year trip. Maybe life is meaningless. But it is also possible that life and intelligence were programmed into the universe from its beginning. Chance demands incalculable odds.
From the fundamental particles released by the Big Bang, through time, space, sums, planets and microbial life, we end up with the 100 billion cells of the human mind, whose mechanics evade us.
The atheist claims to understand that all this is random chance.
Now the universe, through us, can look back at itself, and begin to understand itself. There is a beautiful symmetry in its complexity. All a freak? I know where my money lies.
TONY JACKSON, Morecambe, Lancs.
ITS BEEN a stressful week for Finance Minister Brian Cowan, culminating with his presentation of the 2008 Budget on Wednesday. And with all the speculation about his political future on top of that, its enough to give anyone a headache. Well never know what was actually going through the Tánaistes mind at the moment this photograph was taken, but that shouldnt stop us having a guess.
Write a witty caption in the speech bubble above and send it with your name and address by email to captions@dailymail. ie or attach it to a postcard and send it to: Caption Contest, Irish Daily Mail, Embassy House, Herbert Park Lane, Ballsbridge, Dublin 4, to arrive by Thursday, December 13. The writer of the caption adjudged the best will win a 30 book token.
Last weeks photograph showed An Taoiseach having a private word with Cardinal Sean Brady. Many of you took a confessional view of things, but our winner found a different possibility in Berties smile. A book token is on its way to Valerie Stritch of Rathfarnham in Dublin with our compliments.
STRAIGHT TO THE POINT
¦ HAVING read in its entirety the actual verbal exchange which took place in the Dáil over Bertie Aherns next appearance before the Mahon Tribunal, Eamon Gilmores only possible answer to the Taoiseachs question, Are you deaf as well as stupid? must be an unqualified Yes! JD GERAHTY, Dublin
¦ THE future of the British monarchy rests solely on the influence of a blonde party-girl called Bubble. How reassuring!SHANE BARRON, Carlow.

The Bachelor boys; 
READERS LETTERS

QUESTION
Whatever happened to The Bachelors and are they still performing?
THE Bachelors were the original Irish boyband, long before Boy-zone and Westlife... and they are still belting out the standards 50 years after they first burst onto the scene.
Their remarkable story began when brothers Con and Dec Cluskey joined up with fellow Dub John Stokes to form a band called The Harmonichords aka The Harmony Chords in 1957.
They made an immediate impact on the Dublin scene and Radio Éireann were quick to jump on the bandwagon.
The Harmonichords had bigger ambitions though and took their act on to Hughie Greens Opportunity Knocks, in the talent shows original format on Radio Luxembourg.
Their big break, though, came when they sang Danny Boy on The Ed Sullivan Show, broadcast for St Patricks Day from Dublin in 1959.
Decca Records talent scout Dick Howe snapped them up and immediately went to work on honing their image.
Howe changed their name to The Bachelors because thats the kind of boy a girl likes and the girls lapped them up .
The Irish trios biggest hit came in 1964 with Diana which made it to number one in Britain and number 10 in the U.S. charts. Other chart-toppers included Charmaine and Whispering in 1963 and I Believe in 1964.
As times, musical styles and fashions changed, The Bachelors became more of a cabaret act, but their fan base remained loyal throughout the 70s and 80s.
The Bachelors, in their original format, reached the end of the road in 1984 when the Cluskeys asked Stokes to quit.
The split was acrimonious and, with both parties claiming the rights to the band, it ended up in the High Court.
It was ruled that Stokes could not form a band with the word Bachelor in the title, while Con and Dec could use the word but not by itself and not with the word original in front of it.
Con and Dec called themselves The New Bachelors and performed until 1993 when John Stokes turned up with his own band also called... The New Bachelors.
It looked like going to court again but an uneasy truce was called. Now Stokes, at 67 years young, fronts a band called The Bachelors, while Con, 66, and Dec, 64, have recently released an album: Irish Songs The Way We Sing Them, as Con &amp; Dec The Bachelors.
Daniel ODriscoll, Limerick.
QUESTION
Has Santa Claus any special connection to Ireland?
WHILE Father Christmas has been travelling across continents in many guises since the third century, giving gifts to the poor, cheering up children and even dropping gold down chimneys, it wasnt until the Vikings arrived here in their long boats in 795 that he started bringing good cheer to Irish homes.
But despite no one having seen him, except maybe for a trail of stardust in his wake, or the sound of a jingle bell in the distance many claim to know who he is.
The first theories surrounded the Viking god Odin, who was believed to have ridden through the world on his eight-legged horse called Sleipnir, to keep peoples spirits up in the bleak midwinter.
He was thought, even then, to be a plump, elderly man with a long white beard but his cloak was blue, rather than red.
The more popular and enduring inspiration for Santa Claus, though, is St Nicholas, the Bishop of Myra in Turkey in the third century AD.
At Christmas time, he travelled around in his red bishops robes and gave gifts to the poor with children especially rewarded.
He was said to be a shy and secretive man and, on one occasion, when he wanted to give money to a poor family without them knowing where it came from, the kindly bishop dropped some gold coins down the chimney.
What poor old St Nicholas did to offend Oliver Cromwell isnt clear but the puritan tried to ban him and Christmas in 1644 after he had invaded Ireland.
Santa Claus and Christmas developed over the centuries, with the 19th century seeing the introduction of Christmas trees to Britain and Ireland.
His dress sense also changed and the Victorian Santa was said to wear a cloak of green to match the holly.
The Santa with the red cloak we know today first appeared in a Coca-Cola ad in 1931.
As for the original St Nicholas, he has a church dedicated to him in Dublin, the Church of St Nicholas of Myra in Francis Street in the Liberties, which was started in 1829 and completed in 1854.
Stephen McDonagh, Dublin.
QUESTION
My cars emissions are 190g/ km CO2.
If I walked the same distance, how much CO2 would I produce?
FURTHER to the earlier answer, one should not equate the CO2 produced by breathing to the CO2 emitted by fossil fuel-burning vehicles.
The CO2 our bodies produce is part of the natural carbon cycle whereby plants absorb carbon-dioxide from the atmosphere. We eat the plants and release the CO2 in our breath, which the plants absorb again. The same carbon atoms go round in this cycle.
Fossil fuel-burning vehicles are taking millions of tonnes of crude oil which has been sequestered away over millennia and releasing it all over a few hundred years until it runs out sometime in the future.
Breathing is very nearly carbon neutral.
Simon Mason, West Yorkshire.

