Control fish stocks before it's too late

The verdict of the European Court of Auditors was blistering. National governments were making a complete pig's ear of policing their own fishermen. The result, auditors believe, is an industry out of control, rampaging through the seas, breaking EU fisheries rules left, right and centre while, in the process, endangering both fish stocks and its own livelihood in a spectacular piece of suicidal short-termism.
For the purpose of their report, the auditors had carried out spot checks on six countries with big fleets - the UK, Spain, France, Denmark, Italy and the Netherlands.
Together, these nations account for 70 per cent of the EU's £4.4 billion annual catch, yet the authorities' control over the fleets is, the auditors claim, inadequate - to put it mildly.
During its spot checks, the watchdog unearthed a host of unreliable catch data. Under-reporting by up to a third was, in the auditors' view, commonplace. None of the six countries could produce complete data, nor did the national authorities seem capable of spotting inconsistencies.
In at least two countries, the catch figures reported back to the European Commission were masterpieces of fantasy. Spain did not bother counting anything caught in boats under 10 metres, which make up a large part of its fleet. As a result, in 2005 it caught 169,000 more tonnes of fish than it told the European Commission.
France blithely ignores anything its fleet catches in the Mediterranean or off its overseas territories in the Carribean while its fishermen seem to treat fines as simply an irritating business cost.
The auditors argue that the six countries' inspections of their fleets are slipshod and ineffective. All too often, infringements are neither prevented nor detected and when they are, few are effectively punished.
The UK fishermen frequently complain about the heavy-handed approach of our authorities to their own breaches.
The auditors would like them to define "heavy-handed".
In 2005, the UK prosecuted in only one in ten cases of illegal fishing, a proportion the watchdog clearly does not find satisfactory.
The author of the auditors' report, Kikis Kazamias, said: "If something is not done, the situation will become disastrous. The inspection and sanctions systems are not working properly."
To which one is attempted to say: Welcome to the show.
Everybody but everybody knows that the EU's fisheries policy is a complete and utter mess. It is supposed to ensure the sustainable fishing of a flourishing marine stock.
Instead, it has presided over the decimation of the fishing industry and the virtual destruction of fish stocks. Four-fifths are overfished. Too many are on the verge of collapse.
In a terse warning to the nation states, the auditors conclude: "If the political authorities want the CFP [Common Fisheries Policy] to achieve its objective of sustainable exploitation of fisheries resource, the present control, inspection and sanction systems must be strengthened considerably."
This was music to the ears of the European Fisheries Commissioner, Joe Borg, who promptly embraced the report and announced that the auditors were so, so right and totally in tune with his own analysis. To that end, he said, he was already working on a major reform of the EU's fisheries control policy.
A new regulation would be tabled in the second half of next year.
But the bit that Commissioner Borg really liked about the report was its comments about the negligible powers that he himself had when it came to enforcing the CFP.
He instantly argued that only if the Commission had half-decent powers of enforcement would many of the weaknesses the auditors identified be tackled.
Which of course translates as taking the power of enforcement away from the nation states and giving it to Mr Borg.
That is politically impossible.
Moreover, both the auditors and Mr Borg are making two hugely erroneous assumptions.
The first is that it is actually possible to enforce the CFP properly.
This is cloud cuckoo land. The reality, as we all know, is that national authorities won't pull up their socks. They have had years to do so and have repeatedly failed. There is no reason to assume the leopards will ever change their spots.
Nor is the EU capable of forcing the nation states to raise their game.
Only one member state, France, has been dragged before the European Court of Justice for its CFP failings. It was fined g20 million for landing under-age fish and g58 million for failing to comply with the rules, which might seem impressive were it not for the fact that the case was concluded 21 years after the first infringement was recorded.
The European Commission's ambition to therefore take over at least part of the role of national enforcement itself commands a certain logic but will be rejected by the national governments.
And anyway, this approach labours under the second naïve assumption that as long as the CFP is properly enforced, it can - in its current state - ensure the sustainable management of our seas.
The whole problem is that it cannot.
Advances in technology aside, the principal reason why we are in this mess is that the CFP is structurally incapable of presiding over the sustainable management of our seas.
The present system, despite the reforms of 2002, simply cannot deliver.
As a result, you have fishermen struggling to make ends meet fishing fewer and fewer stocks in an ever-declining circle.
There needs to be a root-and- branch reform of the way the CFP works that is every bit as radical as - and preferably more so than - the big shake-up of the Common Agricultural Policy.
What the auditors' report exposes (for the umpteenth time) is the structural failure of the CFP.
Now the EU has stopped bickering over its institutions, it really does need to focus on how to stop the environnmental catastrophe unfolding off our shores.
Commissioner Borg's pledge to "reflect generally" on the future of the CFP simply isn't good enough.


Small change over pensions

What can you buy for 52 pence? A Mars bar, or a packet of crisps, with a bit of loose change left over! Yet a penny-a-week rise is all the over-80s can expect in their extra annual allowance.
As of April, it will rise from 25p to 26p.
Before anyone chokes on their cornflakes on reading this - a small portion if you are over 80 - it should be pointed out that even ministers find this penny increase bizarre and an affront to the nation's octogenarians.
So much so that the pensions reform minister, Mike O'Brien, has attacked the supplement as an insult.
Labour MPs are livid, with one among their number, Brian Jenkins, describing the extra allowance as "neither use nor ornament".
He is not exaggerating.
The question this begs is: why on earth did anyone suppose that an extra penny a week was reasonable? And who, pray tell, was it that arrived at this calculation?
What is notable about this statistic is how it illustrates a wider attitude on the part of those who hold the nation's purse-strings towards pensions and financial provisions for the elderly. Year after year, pensioners have protested that they are treated almost like an invisible section of the population. They have demonstrated against council tax rises, the soaring levels of utility bills, and the fact that the state pension fails to keep pace with these increases.
They have pointed out in the starkest terms the consequences of this loss of income. In many instances, it means people doing without food or heating, or suffering such anxiety and worry that they are being driven into an early grave.
Why is it then that ministers consistently fail to grasp the nettle even as the evidence of this impoverishment is laid out in front them?
How can it be that they do not respond appropriately - with a generous increase in pensions and allowances - even when their own backbenchers are berating them?
This state of affairs is now so dire that, in relative terms, pensioners are worse off than they were in 1950. The basic state pension is just 15.9 per cent of the average wage, compared to 18.4 per cent 57 years ago.
The most immediate way of addressing this is restore the index link abolished under Margaret Thatcher's Conservatives. The Labour Government has pledged to do this - but not before 2012 - so that pensions will once again be matched to average earnings.
We repeat what has been said by many people from many quarters - that 2012 is too late.
For all the competing demands on the Treasury, it is surely only right that the rate of pensions should be prioritised.
If the money is there - and we believe it is - it should be spent equitably. If it is not, it can be found, not least by shaving budgets elsewhere, reducing waste, or mothballing other unnecessary financial commitments.
Or do we simply conclude that the limit of the Government's concern can be counted not in pounds, but pennies?
Not before time
IT'S been a long time coming - more than 60 years, in fact. But the Government's recognition of the immense contribution to the war effort of the Land Girls is hugely welcome.
We could easily question the motives behind this award of a special commemorative badge. Many people too might wonder why this is happening now.
But let us not be churlish. For the surviving women whose contribution has never before been officially honoured, this award will mean a great deal. It is a reminder of how invaluable were the toil and labour of this army of women in the fields and on the farms of Britain.
It may also help to inform younger generations, for whom the Second World War is fading ever more into the distance, of how the people of this nation rallied in common purpose to help defeat the evils of Nazism.
That could not have been possible without the resolve, selfless spirit and the good humour of the women at home, even as their menfolk - fathers, brothers, husbands and boyfriends - were fighting abroad.
We applaud the Government for this belated award.
We salute those Land Girls - now veterans - who will receive it.

Uncomfy, cramped seats

Hugh Jones commented that First Great Western, in providing what are renovated coaches, now offers uncomfortable, compacted vehicles. In fact the redecoration, carpeting and so forth are very smart. However, the seating leaves much to be desired.
Did I read that the new seats were designed by Porsche? No doubt a superb company when fitting out two-seater sports cars, but seating for a long rail journey? No.
The extremely high backed seats were said to be in response to a perceived public need for " personal space". My experience is that it results in claustrophobic isolation.
The Paddington to Penzance route offers one of the most scenic rail trips in Britain. The Kennet valley, the Wiltshire Downs, rolling hills in Somerset, the Exe estuary and the red shoreside cliffs, the South Devon banks, Brunel's bridge and beautiful Cornwall. Does the passenger see much of it? Not really. The high-backed seating reduces the opportunity. The removal of some of the tables where a family of four could sit together is another disadvantage, taking away as it does some luggage space. Bums on seats is all very well for shareholders, but the experience of the passenger deserves much more consideration.

