Hillary is in a panic - as well she might be

Do you recall much about your time in kindergarten? I must confess that I don't. I remember a very mild slap on the cheek from a deranged old Viennese maid, Miss Hartleben, on the first morning, for failing to raise a hand before asking to be excused (ah, the good old days of British education before the PC Brigade ruined it). After that, save for the horror of tapioca pudding, it's all a bit of blur.
I pose the question not because I'm any more interested in your infantile recollections than you are in mine. I ask it because the issue of pre-school academic memories, or the lack of them, has unexpectedly enlivened the race for the White House.
Feeling under severe pressure for the first time on her previously untroubled march towards Pennsylvania Avenue, Hillary Clinton this week launched a startling attack on her main rival for the nomination. The Democrats' very own Miss Hartleben slapped Barack Obama for dishonestly claiming he developed presidential ambitions not long ago, citing as proof of his innate deceitfulness an essay the four-year-old Barack wrote entitled "Why I want to be President."
Myself, I suspect Hillary chose the wrong line of attack here. Far more effective to lacerate Obama for being too clever by half. To be writing an essay at all at an age when most kids are struggling with colouring-in (something Gerald Ford mastered only in the Oval Office) would petrify an electorate that twice plumped for George Bush. You wouldn't have thought that Hillary, reputedly even more fearsomely bright than her husband, was in a strong position to play the dumbo candidate herself until this moronic intervention. So what on earth possessed her to do it?
What possessed her, it seems, was panic. With the first Democratic primary to be held in Iowa in less than a month (on 3 January), chinksin her tungsten-plated armour have finally been appearing. Although she remains an almost prohibitive odds-on favourite, what was for so long a colossal lead in national opinion polls is starting to narrow.
Meanwhile, Obama has edged ahead of both her and John Edwards in the desperately tight three-way fight for Iowa. If Obama does win there, it could propel him to victory or a very close second place five days later in New Hampshire. In either case, he would then be a very live threat indeed to Hillary's own ambition, however late in life she developed it.
That Hillary would respond to the nascent threat by jettisoning her previous high-mindedness and turning negative on Obama will surprise no one who read Primary Colours or saw the movie. These Clintons - and why resist the temptation to see her candidacy as a joint effort, albeit one Bill might deny inhaling? - are ill advised to impugn the honesty of others.
Only last week, Bill caused the missus further strife by falsely claiming he opposed the Iraq war from the start - a position held, of all the candidates, by Obama alone. As for Iran, she was gung-ho for bombing while Obama preached diplomacy. Now that the US intelligence report has blown apart Mr Bush's plans for that, she can hardly carry on accusing Obama of naivete about Tehran's nuclear intentions.
Instead she went for that kindergarten essay, a line her spokesman subsequently insisted was merely a joke. Now I don't know about you, but when I look at Hillary Clinton the word that seldom flashes to mind is jester. Formidable though in many ways she is, zany queen of comedy she is not. I've seen the work of Lucille Ball, I've enjoyed the work of Lucille Ball, I have laughed raucously at the work of Lucille Ball, to paraphrase dear old Lloyd Bentsen. And you, Senator Clinton ...
However minor and short lived the self-inflicted damage proves to be, it does at least hint that she senses a turning tide, and fears that Obama, the candidate for change in a nation gagging for change, could yet develop the momentum to sweep her away.
I should add a warning here. All this may be nothing more than your columnist finding what he seeks. Ever since coming across Obama in the middle of a September night three years ago, when he gave his electrifying address to the Democratic convention, I've had what's known in (Angela) Brazilian as a "pash" on him.
He is the first Anglo-American politician of my lifetime who seems to me entirely sincere and right-thinking on all the major issues (his record on climate change, as well as Iraq, is immaculate), as well as personally decent and, at his best, hugely charismatic.
In an America of increasingly alarming Christian fundamentalism, the very thing that may yet damage him most with the general electorate - his Muslim antecedents back in Kenya - gives him a heaven-sent potential advantage so far as rebuilding America's dysfunctional relationship with the Islamic world. He feels like the right person with the right voice and the right perspective at exactly the right time. Deep in my bones I am convinced he will be the next President of the United States.
Then again, my bones were equally insistent that Spurs would finish above Arsenal in the Premiership this season (by all means check the league table). The hard fact is that Obama remains a distant second to Hillary in a richly Byzantine nomination process, riven by imponderables and beset by dramatic ebbing and flowing of personal popularity, that tends to be horrendously difficult to call at such an early stage.
Even if he does come from behind to beat Hillary, winning the general election will be anything but easy, and not only because of his colour. This is a country in which one Republican hopeful, Mitt Romney, feels compelled to make a Jack Kennedy-style speech about his Mormon faith not interfering with his political judgment. Another, thisweek's rising star Mike Huckabee, is an erstwhile televangelist.
In a land of such weird and aggressive religiosity, is it conceivable that a man with the middle name of Hussein - a man recently smeared by a Hillary volunteer, let alone the Fox News-watching far-right wing loons, as an Islamist sleeper - could be elected President? Any Republican opponent would try to Swift Boat him to perdition over his brief attendance at an Indonesian "madrasa" when he was six.
Still, he certainly has the political experience to cope, because by that age he'd already spent two years working on his bid for the White House. Whether he will make it this time is a long shot according to slightly more reliable indicators than a feeling in my bones. But what a glorious irony if it turns out that Hillary, by adducing that kindergarten essay as evidence that Obama cannot be trusted with the Presidency, edged that ancient ambition a little closer to fulfilment.

Living by fame, dying by fame: two modern tragedies

How much fame is enough? That searchlight glare of publicity - holding people in its stark white light - reveals things about you that you didn't suspect: cellulite, stinginess and such.
But there's a current obsession with the search for fame that is decimating the lives of otherwise bright and intelligent people. Take 19-year-old Robert Hawkins, who took a gun to the shoppers in Omaha, Nebraska, killing eight of them and then himself. The sad coda to this appalling tragedy was to be found in his suicide note, in which he apparently declared that he wanted to "go out in style". The first time I recall such a route to fame was when the assassin of John Lennon told everyone that he'd now achieved fame, his name would always be remembered. And I can't for the life of me bring it to mind! Others have followed this path into the history books, to give meaning to their lives.
There's an alarming parallel to modern life: it elevates fame and celebrity, even notoriety into major lifetime objectives for people who want to stand out in the crowd. Yet it also provides living environments that are ugly, vast, and soulless, where people get the sense that they count for nothing and are simply a speck in the vast concourse of the passing parade. The Westroads Mall where the hapless Robert killed so many, houses more than 135 stores and restaurants and attracts more that 14 million visitors a year. Without being disrespectful to the dead, it's enough to make anyone suicidal.
Then there's the fascinatingly macabre case of Isabella Blow, whose death the coroner recorded yesterday was suicide by drinking half a pint of weedkiller. I never knew this tragic woman, but she was clearly profoundly troubled: she had tried suicide several times before, suffered from serious depression and had been in the care of a psychiatric hospital. According to her psychiatrist, "she felt she was not coping with changes in her life ... her waning celebrity status, uncertainties about the future". That brutal limelight was threatening to turn its glare away from her and leave her shivering in the shadows.
That she regarded this as a crisis rather than a relief shows just how the empty values of celebrity had infiltrated and distorted the spirit of a feisty and assertive woman. I am not of the fashion world, but even I can see she clearly had a talent for stylish dressing, crazy hats and spotting up-and-coming talent.
How was it Robert and Isabella came by such a distorted world picture of what their lives might be about? Isabella would surely have grown into a grande dame of the fashion world, whose striking looks would have rendered her one of the ageing eccentrics of her day: think Edith Sitwell, with her ring-laden fingers and silk turbans. She never had beauty but she had the intelligence to create a persona without it. Sadly that persona took over her emotional life and convinced her that she must keep up the performance or cease to exist. But it didn't have to be like that.
At the same time there are other individuals dodging in and out of the limelight like slap-stick comedians ... now you see them, now you don't. For someone who was seeking anonymity David Abrahams has certainly got his come-uppance. Profiles and reports in the papers, photographs of his weasely features popping up behind Labour party worthies at fund-raising events. Was this exactly what he was conspiring to avoid. And just how terrible is it for him to be now taking centre stage. Playing with anonymity can prove as risky as playing with fame. You do both at your peril.
People ask too much of life: career and motherhood; town life and rural idyll; top job and peace of mind; lavish wealth and green credentials. Sometimes it's possible to pull off both. But one combination you can't have is fame and privacy.They are now mutually contradictory, and given the extra push of publicists and proliferating media there's little chance for someone like Isabella to creep away for some quiet contemplation and not feel she was missing out on the great glittering world that fed her self-worth.
Some people pull it off: jazz singer George Melly was not one to shun the limelight: indeed he shone in it with exultant panache. His garish suits, his thick voice all shouted, "Look at me". But what he gave us was his joyful life force in full flow. He went on performing when he was seriously ill, defying the gods to strike him down. He had what others seem to lack: a clear sense of his own life and his resolute purpose within it.
When he knew he was dying, he took to his bed, called his friends round one by one for fond reminiscences and goodbyes. They often say a so-called good death is the measure of the life. And George's send-off with a jazz band leading the hearse was a life-affirming experience for those of us left behind. As a humanist, he may not have believed in life after death, but he certainly believed in the life here and now ... until the very end.

