Also Opening This Week

THE GRUDGE ....
(15) Sarah Michelle Gellar, Jason Behr, KaDee Strickland. Dir: Takashi Shimizu. US, 92min Hollywood remake of Japanese horror Ju-on, but with same director. Gellar is a nurse whose patients suffer terrible hoodoo. Sam Raimi coproduced, and the film's making waves in the US.


NOBODY KNOWS .... 
(12A) Yuya Yagira, Ayu Kitaura, Hiei Kimura. Dir: Hirokazu Koreeda. Japan, 141min Based on a true story about young children who were found looking after themselves without parents in Tokyo, the film won Yagira a Best Actor gong at Cannes as head of the household when mother leaves. It is very long but explores the minds of the kids with affecting simplicity.
LOOK AT ME (COMME UNE IMAGE) ....
(12A) Marilou Berry, Jean-Pierre Bacri, Agnes Jaoui. Dir: Agnes Jaoui. Fr, 111min Lonely girl (Berry) with foul-tempered egomaniacal writer father (Bacri) learns to live as something other than a misfit. This excellently written comedy was the toast of the discerning at Cannes and vies for the title of European film of the year. A little theatrical, it remains both thoughtful and wise as well as funny. And really well-played, too.
FAKERS ....
(15) Matthew Rhys, Kate Ashfield, Art Malik.
Dir: Richard Janes. UK, 84min Artist forges famous painting so his roguish friend (Rhys) can sell it to placate pursuing gangster. The swindle leads to trouble. Fair to moderate caper from first-time director.
I AM DAVID ....
(PG) Ben Tibber, Jim Caviezel, Joan Plowright.
Dir: Paul Feig. US, 92min A young boy (Tibber) escapes from a Bulgarian labour camp and finally reaches freedom in Denmark. Based on Anne Holm's best-selling North To Freedom. Strange that everyone speaks English to him in Italy, Switzerland, etc. A bit Disneyish.
....
HOME AT THE END OF THE WORLD UNDER BLACKPOOL LIGHTS THE WHITE STRIPES (12A) Jack White, Meg White. Dir: Dick Carruthers. UK, 77min The filmmaking is practically non-existent in this concert movie, but the Stripes are great.
Everything seen through a glass darkly.
....
(15) Colin Farrell, Robin Wright-Penn, Dallas Roberts. Dir: Michael Mayer.
US, 97min Farrell got into trouble showing his vitals which are now cut out of this intimate drama about straights and gays trying to come to terms with themselves and each other during the Eighties when it wasn't that easy. Not bad.
THE WOMEN ....
(U) Norma Shearer, Joan Crawford, Rosalind Russell. Dir: George Cukor. US, 133min Memorably well-written and acted, this 1939 treasure from Cukor is a bitchy take on romantic love that outdoes anything Hollywood produces now.
Shearer is the society lady whose husband is snared by Crawford's golddigger shopgirl. Acidic and subversive.
WOULD I LIE TO YOU? ....
(15) Richard Anconina, Jose Garcia, Bruno Solo.
Dir: Thomas Gilou. Fr, 101min Unemployed goy boy goes to work for Sephardic clothier in Paris and falls for his daughter.
When the clothier finds out his origins, there's all hell within the community. Lively Jewish comedy with tough moments.



TOP 5 DVDs/Videos Released This Week

1. Elf (EV, PG) .... 
As soon as you see a nun in a wimple you know Elf is going to be an ultratraditional Christmas movie.
Luckily it's also ultra-funny and delivers a finale of the grown-men-cry variety. 
Perfectly written, cast and performed, with Will Ferrell just right as the embarrassingly overeager elf/man.
2. Uzak (Artificial Eye, 15) ....
The title is Turkish for 'distant' and that's just what the brilliant Nuri Bilge Ceylan's film is all about, as a successful photographer and his poor country cousin negotiate a joyless world where people are divorced from all the narratives that give life meaning social, personal, religious, artistic,
intellectual. Visually as bleak as its message but with a dramatic undertow that makes it utterly engrossing.
3. My Dad's The Prime Minister (Maximum, PG) ....
Ian Hislop takes a rest from Private Eye but not from satire in this children's TV series co-written with Nick Newman. Robert Bathurst plays the Blair-alike PM, a cringeinducingly matey modern dad with two children who are just trying to live down the indignity of it all. Works nicely as both a children's drama and as a subversive political commentary.
4. Live Aid (Warner Vision, E) ....
Nineteen years since Midge Ure
5. Frank Capra Box Set (UCA, U) and Bob Geldof's fundraiser for Ethiopia introduced the all-purpose 'Aid' suffix into the language. We all remember Queen, Quo and Clapton. But what about Joan Baez, The Pretenders and Run DMC?
All here.
....
Look up It Happened One Night, It's A Wonderful Life, Mr Smith Goes To Washington and You Can't Take It With You in any film reference book and you'll find five stars beside all of them. As crowd-pleasing Capra himself said, 'I'd be the first to admit I'm a damn good director'.

Opening This Week

ELEGIES: A SONG CYCLE 
William Finn, the Tony award-winning composer probably best known for his falsetto musicals, has put together 20 songs dedicated to family members and friends who have died. The aim is for there to be no after-death sentimentality or false hagiography just honest warts-and-all portraits of the people he has loved. Running for two nights only, the production stars John Barrowman, Susannah Fellows, Deven May and Lauren Ward. Sun 7 &amp; Sun 14 Nov, Arts Theatre, Great Newport Street, WC2 (020-7836 3334).


FRESH KILLS 
HAMLET HOW TO LIVE The latest in the exciting if varied young playwrights' season is by Elyzabeth Gregory Wilder. Directed by Wilson Milam, it tells the story of Eddie's modern dilemma, where he has more fun on the internet than in real life, creating tensions at home. Or maybe it's home that's driving him to seek adventure on the web his wife is haranguing him to make kitchen cabinets. Online Eddie develops a friendship with teenager Arnold that has unanticipated results.
Previewing from Fri 5 Nov, first night Mon 8 Nov, Jerwood Theatre, Royal Court, Sloane Square, SW1 (020-7565 5000).
HAMLET
Yukio Ninagawa continues to be a director whose name sets the pulse racing, and now, thanks to producer Thelma Holt, British audiences can experience his mesmeric, visually ravishing style again. He has already brought a Japanese version of Hamlet to Britain, but this time he has decided to present the Prince of Denmark in English for this short run. Michael Maloney, perhaps most famous for his appearance in Truly Madly Deeply, appears here as the indecisive prince, accompanied by Peter Egan as Claudius, Frances Tomelty as Gertrude and Robert Demeger as Polonius. First night Wed 10 Nov, Barbican, Silk Street, EC2 (0845 120 7518).
HOW TO LIVE
How would you react to a frozen pea diagnosed with a personality disorder?
Perhaps the only way to find out is to go and see Bobby Baker's show, which tries to answer the impossible question of how we should all run our lives.
Frozen vegetables and humans both come under the spotlight, as she leads the audience into a Therapy Empire which promises to sort out all manner of human dilemmas. Fri 5 &amp; Sat 6 Nov, Barbican, as before.

Top 5 Restaurants For Early Evening Steals

SAVOY GRILL The Strand, WC2 (020-7592 1600) Mon-Sat £100 .... 
Bargains are relative. The early evening supper menu, served from 5.45pm-6.45pm, is £30 for three courses which compares quite favourably to dinner menus at £50 and £60, even though with drinks, service and the rest it will almost certainly cost a ton for two. However, this sum includes the grandeur of the Savoy Hotel and the input of executive chef Marcus Wareing.
The three-course supper menu features dishes such as the Savoy Grill's famous and rich omelette Arnold Bennett, braised shin of beef with baby onions and girolles a la creme and sable Breton with vanilla cream, fromage blanc and strawberry sorbet. A selection of desserts from the trolley or a choice of English and French cheeses are alternatives in the last course, so you are not being short-changed. The new mood of the dining room has led to a ban on 'jeans, trainers, T-shirts or any form of sportswear'.


CIRCUS 
1 Upper James Street, W1 (020-7534 4000). Mon-Sat (closed for lunch Sat) £55 ....
The evening set-price deal here is offered both early (5.45pm-7.15pm) and late (10.30pm-11.45pm) at a price of £14.50/Pounds 16.50 for two/three courses. Circus was the second restaurant opened by Christopher Bodker after he left his job in the City to start up his first, Avenue in St James's. Both places are hymns of praise to minimalist architecture, the gods in question being Rick Mather at Avenue and David Chipperfield at this light and lofty West Soho site. The cooking of Richard Lee, who has been a loyal, longstanding head chef, could be pigeonholed as modern European but his dishes on the set menu have a welcome, homely air, eg deep-fried coley with chips and tartare sauce and Circus shepherd's pie. Drinks can often unravel a good deal so it is worth noting that bottles of red and white start at £16.50. And then leap up energetically.
L'ESTAMINET 14 Garrick Street, WC2 (020-7379 1432). Mon-Sat (closed for lunch Sat) £50 ....
Handy for the Royal Opera House and Covent Garden's theatres, this often overlooked French bourgeois restaurant and wine bar the name means tavern serves a menu between 5.45pm-7.15pm for £14.99. Compared to an opera ticket, a mere bagatelle. The main menu of dishes such as warm Lyonnais sausage on potato salad, une douzaine d'escargots, omelette au choix, marmite de la mer (fish stew) and poulet Basquaise restore faith, should it have lapsed, in tradition and continuity in cooking. There is a section of Les Grillades for when steak and chips is the order of the day. Two trolleys, or chariots as they call them, display an unusually fine selection of French cheeses and an array of traditional desserts such as creme brulee and tarte aux pommes. The surroundings suit the food red brick walls hung with pictures interspersed by shiny copper pans.
LOLA'S
The Mall, 359 Upper Street, N1 (020-7359 1932). Mon-Sun £55 ....
A high turnover of highprofile chefs left Brian Sparks beavering away as sous-chef until recently, rightfully, he claimed his place at the head of the brigade. His shrewd, inventive dishes carry on what has become Lola's style.
Spiced parsnip soup with spiced biscuit and rabbit lasagne with carrot consomme are two current first courses. Troncon of halibut with violet potatoes, baby fennel and Pernod beurre blanc and roast saddle of lamb with garlic confit, artichoke puree and salsify cannelloni carry on the creativity into the main course. The set-price early evening menu is served between 6pm and 7.15pm at the price of £15.75/Pounds 18.75 for two/three courses.
From Mon-Wed the menu is offered all evening. A recent revamp has softened the interior of the room, which occupies the first floor of what was originally a tram shed. Go on voyages of discovery with the wine flights.
L'ESCARGOT GROUND FLOOR
48 Greek Street, W1 (020-7439 7474). Mon-Sat (closed for lunch Sat) £55 ....
The 'Bienvenu', once attached to the original L'Escargot name in its days as an Alsace brasserie, might be warmer at 6pm, when the early evening menu comes into play, than after 7pm, when that service stops and a large chunk of the Soho media industry surges into the loud, colourful space. The menu at £15/Pounds 18 for two/three courses is a good deal relative to the a la carte prices and executive chef Jeff Galvin, who has a Michelin star for his cooking in the Picasso Room upstairs, makes sure that standards are high on every floor. First courses at this time of year might include a rustic soup or country terrine. When game becomes more of a glut, there will be pheasant with perhaps some wild mushrooms. Prune and Armagnac parfait has made an appearance among the desserts and there is usually something chocolatey.
LOLA'S The Mall, 359 Upper Street, N1 (020-7359 1932). Mon-Sun £55 ....
A high turnover of highprofile chefs left Brian Sparks beavering away as sous-chef until recently, rightfully, he claimed his place at the head of the brigade. His shrewd, inventive dishes carry on what has become Lola's style.
Spiced parsnip soup with spiced biscuit and rabbit lasagne with carrot consomme are two current first courses. Troncon of halibut with violet potatoes, baby fennel and Pernod beurre blanc and roast saddle of lamb with garlic confit, artichoke puree and salsify cannelloni carry on the creativity into the main course. The set-price early evening menu is served between 6pm and 7.15pm at the price of £15.75/Pounds 18.75 for two/three courses.
From Mon-Wed the menu is offered all evening. A recent revamp has softened the interior of the room, which occupies the first floor of what was originally a tram shed. Go on voyages of discovery with the wine flights.
L'ESCARGOT GROUND FLOOR 48 Greek Street, W1 (020-7439 7474). Mon-Sat (closed for lunch Sat) £55 ....
The 'Bienvenu', once attached to the original L'Escargot name in its days as an Alsace brasserie, might be warmer at 6pm, when the early evening menu comes into play, than after 7pm, when that service stops and a large chunk of the Soho media industry surges into the loud, colourful space. The menu at £15/Pounds 18 for two/three courses is a good deal relative to the a la carte prices and executive chef Jeff Galvin, who has a Michelin star for his cooking in the Picasso Room upstairs, makes sure that standards are high on every floor. First courses at this time of year might include a rustic soup or country terrine. When game becomes more of a glut, there will be pheasant with perhaps some wild mushrooms. Prune and Armagnac parfait has made an appearance among the desserts and there is usually something chocolatey.

