Ex-Lightning Seed makes heavy weather

For a man who spent a vast chunk of the 1990s resident in the charts, Ian Broudie looks surprisingly nervous. Bedraggled, old enough to be his backing band's father and small enough to be dwarfed by his acoustic guitar, he faces a venue so tiny that, were it a living room, an estate agent would describe it as "bijou". 
From the crowd, a Brummie accent bellows: "give us a birra Three Lions, Ian!" Broudie blinks. "I'm glad you said that," he says heavily, and starts to play the title track from his solo album Tales Told. It could sound no less like the Lightning Seeds' rabble-rousing football anthem if it featured a guest rap by Chingy. The mood is defiantly glum, the lush pop that was their trademark stripped away to a skeletal take on the sound of his recent production charges the Coral.


Broudie has recently declared himself unsatisfied by the Lightning Seeds' output, which made him the new lads' unofficial court musician, provider of Goal-of-the-Month soundtracks and optimistic, non-slushy love songs that men who cared more about football than music could play at their weddings. Tonight he plays Pure, perhaps the most optimistic and non-slushy love song in their oeuvre, as a mournful ballad. He sings the chorus in the past tense: "I loved you." It sounds heartbreaking. 
Broudi can borrow the Coral's trebly guitars and ska-cum-skiffle-skank, he can replace the sunny outlook with something introverted and bleak and he can play so quietly that a mobile phone is audible even when his band are in full flight. But his re-invention can only ever be partial: the one thing Broudie cannot change is his ability to write enrapturing melodies. The crowd respond more to Got No Plans and Lipstick than they do to tonight's only other Lightning Seeds hit, a cover of the Turtles' You Showed Me. "I don't really know what to say," says Broudie, as they cheer, and he doesn't: instead, he scuttles off stage, oddly nervous to the last.
At the Enterprise, London NW3, on Thursday. Box office: 020-7485 2659.


Evan Parker swings free

Freely improvised jazz music is supposed to be a practice that only settles into a pulse for long enough to realise it ought to be heading somewhere else. So you might not expect to find audiences nodding their heads in time to it. But the evolution of a radically distinctive European jazz not based on tunes or swing has resulted in eloquent new forms of . . . tunes and swing. Evan Parker, the British jazz revolutionary who started rewriting the sax-vocabulary book nearly 40 years ago, has played a crucial role in this evolution. 

Parker packed the Progress Bar on Thursday, performing with the dramatically resourceful double-bassist John Edwards and drummer Tony Marsh - a man who powers the swoops, crash-stops and zig-zags of free rhythm with an idiosyncratically rocking, trancelike groove. The group played a series of shorter improvisations in the first half, and a sustained 45-minute odyssey in the second that brought listeners to their feet. 
Sometimes the music twanged, snapped and sighed with free-improv's characteristic alternations of spikiness and tranquillity - Edwards dragging his bass-strings way off the fingerboard to bend notes, rubbing them with his knuckles to release a soft purr, or bowing the edges of the soundbox to make a fraught, scampering sound. Marsh maintained his own more brittle version of the late Elvin Jones's mysterious mix of a pulsing heartbeat and scattered, sometimes contradictory patterns.
Concentrating on tenor sax in a trio, Parker often sounds closer to his earliest John Coltrane roots, his gruff, split-note figures and explosive chords having more forward motion than the static, abstract-ambient feel of his unaccompanied work. His long, rising runs coloured by constant tone-changes, snorting exclamatory sounds, full-on double-time playing (like bebop, but with raw sound instead of scales) and unexpectedly tender long notes were like free-jazz equivalents of Sonny Rollins soliloquies. Parker's choices have led him to fill rooms rather than concert halls, but he is a saxophone colossus just the same.


Chile's 'disappeared' speak out

As you enter the Gate auditorium, you are handed a torch. In a darkened forest, you stand enthralled for 75 minutes listening to the seven female monologues that make up Fermin Cabal's play evoking the horrors of Chile during the Pinochet years. 

Cabal's title - meaning Green Gables - refers to a notorious Chilean detention centre, and his play offers multiple perspectives on the story of one woman, Colorina, who comes to symbolise the 3,000 "disappeared". We hear Colorina's own graphic account of her torture. But Cabal also introduces us to a fellow prisoner, a doctor, a gravedigger and a Spanish lawyer and Pinochet apologist. Finally, we hear again from the dead Colorina who sees a time when tyrants will "weep tears of blood". 
Visting Santiago last year, I was acutely aware of Chile's memory of its past. The achievement of Cabal's play, eloquently translated by Robert Shaw, is that it reminds us of the complicity of western democracies with the military regime and the systematic brutality it perpetrated. Cabal does this through language that combines insistent poetic motifs with prosaic detail: it is impossible to forget the story of the black leather coat that Colorina gives to a feverish prisoner, who then is mistaken for her and dragged off by the guards.
Thea Sharrock's promenade production intelligently reinforces our sense of emotional involvement. Shereen Martineau's Colorina recounts her experiences with a moving belief in divine justice, and Gemma Jones's tweed-coated gravedigger fixes us with a gaze as compelling as that of the ancient mariner. Both play and production offer a remarkable act of collective memory.
Until February 5. Box office: 020-7229 0706. A version of this review appeared in later editions of yesterday's paper.

Last night's TV: The way we were

First you notice the hats. Flat caps, bowlers, boaters. How handy hats were for making your feelings felt. The ebullience of small boys leaps out at you across 100 years in The Lost World of Mitchell and Kenyon (BBC2). At the sight of the camera, all the lads whirl their caps around their heads in a gesture entirely lost to us. The nebs of their caps are broken from snatching them off to whack each other. You could show respect: the young Bernard Shaw wore his top hat back to front because the brim was broken at the front from being raised repeatedly. Or not. My great-grandfather's funeral procession was remarkable for several carriages full of loudly weeping whores. As my grandmother used to say, with some satisfaction: "And no man raised his hat as they passed." 

For the better part of the last century, three big bins of silent film lay forgotten in the bowels of a Blackburn shop. Utterly lost, like the Edwardian world they recorded. I lived in Blackburn and worked on the local paper, but I had never heard of Kenyon and Mitchell. Showmen in every sense, they filmed the workaday northern world around them and they had a cast of thousands. Fishwives, foundrymen, dockers, weavers clattering out of the mill in clogs and shawls. "The sound of all these clogs on the cobbles," said Dan Cruikshank, "would have been deafening." More like a troop of horses, really. Clogs were hooflike and, like hooves, were periodically reshod. When a tram ran over my mother's foot, she suffered nothing worse than a bruise because she was wearing clogs. 
Ever enterprising, Mitchell and Kenyon often filmed the unselfconscious life of the street from the top of a tram. This is Lowry come to life. As Cruikshank said: "People lived in the street because their houses were so cramped. They possessed the pavement and the road much more. Without cars dominating the street, they simply strolled around." With no altruistic or artistic intention, Mitchell and Kenyon saved a vanishing world, assuming - correctly - that people would pay to see themselves.
There is no nonsense about acting natural. These people are natural. A boy stands stock still, astonished, like a stone in a torrent of people. They wave to us and smile at us and throw their hats in the air. They do not speak. They are all ghosts.

Art for the net generation

There has never been a more contagious carrier of sick jokes than the internet. Barely days, possibly even hours, after the September 11 attacks in 2001, the first interactive gaming sites sprang up with names such as Osama Whack and Bend Over Bin Laden. 
The Israeli artist Eddo Stern has put together a gruesome compilation of these crudely animated horrors and set them to an inappropriately grandiose orchestral soundtrack. What is striking is how idiotically harmless most of these retributive scenarios seem to be. There is plenty of unmentionable cartoon violence, but it mostly evokes those dumb arcade games where you biff a mole on the head with a plastic hammer.


Stern comments further on American foreign policy by presenting a scale model of an aircraft carrier crewed with little animated medieval crusaders. He also makes spooky films from video-game footage, which isn't a particularly original idea, but generated a certain frisson given the emergence of reports that Falluja has been reduced to a smouldering ghost town. 
New Yorker Marina Zurkow began her career as a set designer on B-movie horror classics such as Robot Holocaust and Breeders. She has also written a web-based animated series chronicling the adventures of a little girl who wears her brain on the outside.
Zurkow's first UK gallery show may be impenetrable to anyone who keeps their brain in the usual location, but it has something to do with states of selfhood, derived from the Tibetan Wheel of Experience. Even if the allegory passes you by, it's a strangely beguiling rabbit-warren of cute cartoon imagery, part-way between Alice in Wonderland and Pokemon.
Zurkow also introduces an animated character known as Pussy Weevil, a cheeky green goblin who pulls faces at you then runs away. The fact that it shares the vacant facial expression and speaks the same gibberish as the president of the United States is surely coincidental.


St Petersburg Philharmonic GATESHEAD

Can they keep this up? To get the St Petersburg Philharmonic to play three exclusive UK performances is the sort of coup that even the Edinburgh Festival finds hard to pull off. Yet programmers at the Sage seem confident that this won't be the last time that the ultra-modern new concert hall pulls off this sort of spectacular. The repertoire is, admittedly, fairly conventional: the achingly beautiful Second Symphony by Rachmaninov and the same composer's even more lovely Second Piano Concerto, set against a trio of Stravinsky's brilliant ballet scores. But any sense of the ordinary will soon be forgotten, partly because the conductor Yuri Temirkanov could never be routine even if he tried, but also because we don't yet know what a huge orchestra, let alone a Russian one, will sound like in the new space.

Prince Of Persia

Princess Of Persia: Sands Of Time was unusual in many ways. Its levels looked like pages from an Arabian Nights story, it had an emphasis on subtle puzzle solving rather than simply killing things, and moving the Prince around was fun all by itself. While its sequel retains the Prince's fluid movement, the rest appears to have been made-over by a focus group of American teenagers: from the hero's factory-fitted "attitude" to the brooding, blood-splattered scenery, Prince Of Persia is now all steel bikinis and fighting. The difficulty level has also been ratcheted up, and while it's not as harrowing as Ninja Gaiden, Warrior Within is far from the peaceful splendour of its predecessor. 
Ubisoft, £30-£40

