Christine Borland: Reconnecting anatomy to a sense of humanity

CHRISTINE BORLAND, FRUITMARKET, EDINBURGH ***** A GREAT deal of contemporary art will not last. A nightmare for conservators, much will simply fall apart, or perhaps, if electronics are used, it will become obsolete: the technology forgotten, the work will cease to exist. But, fundamentally, it is because so much art now has only the transient significance granted by media visibility. It is part of our celebrity culture, but that will fade and, like flotsam left by the tide, the art will be just formless detritus, shorn of context and bereft of meaning. There are also artists whose work will endure, however, artists who engage with contemporary reality and add something to the sum of our understanding. 
Christine Borland is pre-eminent among them. Some of her work will no doubt give nightmares to future generations of conservators. In her show at the Fruitmarket, for instance, one of the works on display consists of some 15 pounds of apple jelly. The apples were from Sir Isaac Newton's apple tree, the one said to have given him the idea of gravity. It still bears very large apples, the artist says - the demonstration of gravity was clearly emphatic. How can such a work endure? What is the shelf-life of apple jelly? Would the work be the same should the jelly be made by someone else from the apple crop of some future year? The jelly may go mouldy, but the questions it raises will not, and her work constantly asks questions, about our status as individuals, about anonymity and identity, individual consciousness and the anonymous materials from which we are made, the traces we leave and how quickly they lose all identity. One work here, Supported, is a poetic image of that very process. A human skull and vertebrae are laid on a glass shelf and sprinkled with dust. Removed, they leave a negative image. Light shines through the glass and the dust image of the bones becomes a shadow on the wall. This is a memento mori, dust and shadows, but there is a whole life implicit here with all its joys and sorrows, just as in TS Eliot's beautiful lines from Little Gidding: "Ash on an old man's sleeve/Is all the ash the burnt roses leave/Dust in the air suspended/Marks the place where a story ended." This is a work from the 1990s. The lower floor of Borland's show is retrospective, and such reflections about these human remains, and their medical uses, provided a frequent theme in her earlier work. For example, a slide projection records a visit she made to a medical museum in Montpellier. Photography was forbidden, so she took pictures surreptitiously while pretending to copy human reproductive organs from Gray's Anatomy. Parts of the body we normally keep secret were accessible, but the whole of medical science symbolised by the anatomical collection was a secret. For Borland the paradox reflected the hermetic nature of medicine: how it is a mystery closed against the world in order to disregard the taboos that protect human remains and to treat them instead as just so much anonymous material. Borland challenged this attitude. One of the most beautiful and economical pieces here is called Second Class Male, Second Class Female. Made in 1996, it includes two actual skulls, male and female. She had learned that a longestablished trade in human skeletal material for medical purposes was about to end and, with the assistance of the firm involved, she procured the last two human skulls in the trade. They are here. They were once people. Their identity was lost, but she gave it back. Their features were reconstructed using modern forensic methods and then cast in bronze. Quite beautiful, these are the unknown soldiers of medical science. Equally beautiful, though very different, is Bullet Proof Breath, a glass model of a human bronchial tract, bound around with spider's silk. It looks like an exquisite glass tree and a recurrent theme in her work is the similarity between different forms of growth, but she loves spiders, and the work is a homage to them and their miraculous skills. The American military sees spider silk as potential material for bulletproof vests. The military wouldn't let her in, but a fabric firm did, and so she witnessed spiders being milked of their silk. They were put to sleep by the carbon dioxide in a puff of human breath. Hence the title and the connection between the spider and the bronchial tract, and should spider silk be copied, the bulletproof vests it would make will protect that same part of the body - and through it the breath of life itself. Upstairs are two major recent works. One is a collection of 100 prints remade from a 16th-century herbal. But this is not just any collection of herbs - they are the herbs chosen by a remarkable 16th-century medical pioneer, Mark Jamesone. The herbal belonged to him and he seems to have planned a specifically gynaecological herb garden in Glasgow. It was an idea far ahead of its time, but it also looks back to the medieval idea of the garden as female, the hortus conclusus, the enclosed garden, often used in images of the Madonna, but also well known from the tapestry of La Dame à la Licorne, the Woman with a Unicorn sitting in a wonderful garden. Beyond that kind of imagery, Borland employed the women in a botanical drawing class in the Royal Botanical Gardens to colour the prints. The women thus become a kind of anonymous cooperative, invisible, but a real presence in the project, representing the women it was Jamesone's far-sighted intention to assist so long ago. At a more humorous level, the apple jelly belongs here too. Though Newton never married, perhaps some lady made jelly from his apples for him, and how are we to judge what part that may have played in his discovery? Finally, the exhibition has been the occasion for a major commission. Half the top floor of the Fruitmaket is occupied by a huge steel structure. It is a three-quarter-scale model of the framework that supports the ancient plane tree on the island of Kos, in whose shade Hippocrates once taught (or so it is said). Saplings from the tree are sent out to medical schools around the world, linking today's teaching back to the Hippocrates. Borland went out to Kos with a tape measure, and with her daughter to hold the ladder while she measured the tree's support so she could recreate it. Now you can stand in the space occupied by the tree's hollow trunk and even at this reduced scale you feel its mighty size. The frame around you is a metaphor for the whole history of medicine as it has evolved, from its beginnings with Hippocrates, to support the tree of life itself. Until 28 January. 

Magic Numbers

MAGIC NUMBERS, BARROWLAND, GLASGOW **** AS GUSTS of wind blasted the Gallowgate and cold December rain lashed the giant neon sign adorning the faded frontispiece of the Barrowland, the dapper denizens of Glasgow were no doubt in need of something to warm their collective cockles, and the Magic Numbers did their best to oblige. The band are so popular in these parts that they had to pencil in not one but two gigs, on consecutive nights, and hirsute frontman Romeo Stodart seemed genuinely delighted to announce that Glasgow was the first date on this UK tour in support of new album Those the Brokes to completely sell out. 
And how the Magic Numbers repaid such loyalty. As the revellers straggled in from the grim winter night, they were quickly warmed in the sonic equivalent of a tumble dryer, which dried the rain and shook out the creases. This is a Song and You Never Had It warmed things up nicely, before crowd-pleasers Forever Lost, Love Me Like You, Take a Chance and Love is a Game raised the thermostat even further. Like all true poets, the Magic Numbers know a sad song is best for winter, and I See You, You See Me shone out as the exquisite pearl of pathos it is. After an encore that included a lovely rendition of Take Me or Leave Me from the new album Stodart bade the crowd farewell, at least until the next night. It may be difficult to imagine wanting to see some bands two nights in a row, but not the Magic Numbers.


Lunch: The Series: Food miles

How far would you go for a good lunch? In part two of our week-long series looking at how Scotland spends its lunch hour, Emma Cowing revewals six eating places which give you the opportunity to work up a hunger en route
WHOEVER said that it's better to travel than to arrive was obviously not on their way to lunch. However, there are some notable Scottish lunch destinations where the journey itself contributes much to the gastronomic experience. We've tracked down six of Scotland's most remote eating places, for which it's worth travelling the extra mile - or significantly more. It's a dream for most of us, when a 10-minute dash to the sandwich bar is the workaday reality. But Simon Etchells, a commercial property lawyer with Semple Fraser in Glasgow, regularly books a seaplane to enjoy lunch in some of Scotland's most far-flung locations.
"It's such a surprising thing to do. You ask someone, 'can I take you out to lunch?' then take them 100 miles away. And of course, by seaplane, it takes only minutes. You end up in a place which is usually pretty inaccessible, yet it becomes a totally achievable experience.
"The food has to be good, though. It's an upmarket experience, so you've got to match the food to [the occasion].
"To surprise my wife, I once flew to Crinan with her. We landed in front of the Crinan Hotel, then drifted to the pontoon where we were met by the staff. That was just wonderful.
"Another thing I've done, which has been a huge success, is use a seaplane for business. I act for many high net-worth individuals, who've had lots of upmarket experiences, and taking them out to a posh restaurant doesn't quite cut it. But they have all been effusive in their thanks for the seaplane experience: they feel they've done something very special."
THE FISH &amp; CHIP SHOP VAN, TOBERMORY, MULL
How do I get there?
Many fans of this chip van with a difference sail in to Tobermory harbour by yacht. Otherwise it requires a trip to Oban, followed by a 40-minute ferry crossing to Craignure, and then a half-hour drive down to Mull's biggest town, the pretty and colourful Tobermory.
What's for lunch?
Quite literally, the catch of the day. The seafood is landed just feet away from the van and is available on the menu within a few hours. Specialities include fresh prawns and king scallops, seared to order while you wait, as well as a good old-fashioned fish supper.
Who goes there?
Daytrippers, sailors, fishermen, and HRH Prince Charles, who is a great fan of the scallops.
Why is it worth the trek?
For a unique outdoor takeaway experience, and one of the best fish suppers in the country. Munch on your lunch while perching on a lobster creel on the pier, and soak up the harbour atmosphere. This is the first fish-and-chip van in the world to be given a Les Routiers award: the guide even created a new category in order to include it.
Details, please!
The Fish &amp; Chip Van, Fisherman's Pier, Tobermory, Mull 01688 302390 www.silverswift.co.uk/van.htm
Open April to December, noon to 9pm
THE THREE CHIMNEYS, COLBOST, SKYE
Where is it?
Nestled on the shores of Loch Dunvegan, on the far-flung north-west coast of Skye.
How do I get there?
Via the Skye Bridge. London-based Three Chimneys fans think nothing of flying to Inverness and driving for three and a half hours to get to Colbost in time for lunch.
If you're really pressed for time (but not short of money), the patch of grass between the road and the sea opposite the restaurant, happily, acts as a helipad.
What's for lunch?
Deliciously fresh local produce cooked to perfection by Shirley Spear and her staff. Think Drumfearn mussels in white wine, roast loin of Caithness saddleback pork, or try the Seven Courses of Skye tasting lunch, with King Sconser scallops, Dunvegan lobster and Bracadale crab.
Who goes there?
Everyone from honeymooning couples to the serious foodie brigade. Egon Ronay, Rick Stein, Anthony Worrall Thompson and the LA Times' food critic have all made the pilgrimage.
Why is it worth the trek?
People come from all over the world to eat at The Three Chimneys, thanks to its Scottish home cooking and isolated romance. Some say it's worth the trip for the hot marmalade pudding alone.
Details, please!
The Three Chimneys, Colbost, Dunvegan, Isle of Skye, IV55 8ZT
01470 511258
www.three chimneys.co.uk
Lunch is served Monday- Saturday, 12:30pm onwards, from late March to the end of October.

