Forget the myth, this is the real Mozart...

Mozart And His Operas by David Cairns Penguin Pounds 22 .Pounds 17.60 (0870 165 0870)
The Man Who Wrote Mozart by Anthony Holden Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson Pounds 18.99 .Pounds 15.19 (0870 165 0870)
The Viennese will be gorging themselves on Kirsch-filled chocolate and marzipan figurines right now in celebration of the 250th anniversary of the birth of their favourite son.
But Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was not honoured highly enough by his compatriots during his short lifetime.
No amount of marzipan eaten today can atone for the shabby way they treated him then. The Viennese were reluctant to employ Mozart, were stingy with praise and, as is well known, allowed his mortal remains to disappear into an unmarked grave in 1791, so that his final resting place is to this day unidentified and unacknowledged.
But we should not be too hard on the Austrians, for genius is seldom spotted when it looms so close. Another prime example is the French Romantic composer Hector Berlioz. Ignored by his compatriots not only during his lifetime but for almost a century after his death, Berlioz owes his present exalted reputation to two Englishmen: the conductor Sir Colin Davis and the writer David Cairns. Cairns's life of Berlioz remains the most compelling biography, on any subject, that I have ever read.
It comes as no surprise, then, that in the slurry heap of Mozartiana that has splurged forth this year CDs, concerts, broadcasts, books and souvenirs the very best should be represented by David Cairns's single short volume about Mozart and his operas.
You might think there is little more to be said about Mozart after the glut of publications that appeared in 1991, the 200th anniversary of his death.
But Cairns does not claim to fill his book with fresh information; what he offers instead is a new way of thinking about Mozart. He achieves this by concentrating on the engrossing history of Mozart's operatic life: his working relationships with singers and librettists, his passion for hard work, his disappointments over the flops and his elation at the successes.
At last, the reader is treated to a portrait of Mozart that is neither saccharine nor divine. Gone is the lofty notion that he was some sort of weird channel through which sophisticated music miraculously and effortlessly materialised or, as Pushkin put it, 'an immortal genius inside ... an idle hooligan's skull'.
Gone, too, is the idea that Mozart's music, however beautiful, is somehow emotionally less vivid than that of Handel or Beethoven, or that he was some sort of drunkard or serial womaniser.
Even his obsession with human faeces finds a new and plausible provenance through bizarre letters written by his mother Anna Maria to her husband Leopold, which show her strange obsession with all things scatological.
Through sheer enthusiasm, devotion to his subject and an incomparable breadth of knowledge, Cairns has steered the character of Mozart round a new corner, portraying him, for once, as an ordinary man (his talent aside) who loved his work.
By veering away from the fabulous accretions of the Mozart legend, this book has paradoxically succeeded where so many others have failed, for Cairns's 'ordinary' Mozart reveals, at a stroke, a livelier, more convincing personality than the 'extraordinary' man of previous books.
Anthony Holden is also trying to exploit the latest Mozart anniversary with his new biography of Lorenzo Da Ponte. Da Ponte was the lecherous librettist with whom Mozart collaborated on three of his best operas: The Marriage Of Figaro, Don Giovanni and Cosi Fan Tutte.
His captivating life story has been told many times over, not least by the man himself in a series of conceited memoirs.
Da Ponte rose from obscurity, changing his name from Emanuele Conegliano, to become official poet to the Court Theatre in Vienna. He then went bankrupt, married an English woman and became friends with the legendary Casanova. Da Ponte later spent time as a grocer and a book dealer in Pennsylvania before living out his final years as Professor of Italian at Columbia College.
Of Mozart, he once memorably boasted: 'I can never recall without satisfaction and joy that Europe and the whole world owe the exquisite vocal music of this remarkable genius largely to my perseverance and determination.' These adventures may not be new, but a good yarn never stales as long as it is well recounted, and Holden's companionable new biography is a refreshing take on an old story.

SARTRE BLEU!

Tete-a-Tete: The Lives And Loves Of Simone De Beauvoir And Jean-Paul Sartre
byHazel Rowley .Pounds 16 (0870 165 0870) Chatto Pounds 20
He was an unlikely Casanova, as Casanovas so often are.
The French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre was 5ft 1in tall and his skin was pockmarked and so dotted with blackheads that his face most closely resembled a jointhedots competition. He stuffed himself with food, smoked two packets of untipped cigarettes a day, and chomped away on so many stimulant drugs that his mouth was often pitch black.
In a photograph of him with one of his hundreds of girlfriends, taken in Paris during the Second World War, the two of them look just like Charles Hawtrey and Barbara Windsor, ready to start shooting Carry On Philosophising.
He was well aware of his ugliness, so much so that his relentless seductions may have sprung from a need for revenge. In his autobiography, he recalled himself as a child falling in love with a 12-year-old girl, and boasting about her to his friends.
Spotting her in a group, he bicycled around and around, not quite knowing what to do, until she snapped at him: 'Have you finished, you cross-eyed old fool?' In his late teens, he told a girlfriend: 'Until last year I was very melancholy because I was ugly and that made me suffer. I have absolutely rid myself of that, because it's a weakness.' He may have conquered his weakness, but he never really enjoyed the sex itself, generally withdrawing at the last moment. 'I often made love, but without very great pleasure. Just a little pleasure at the end, but pretty feeble,' he once confessed. Years later, Simone de Beauvoir agreed with his diagnosis. 'He is a warm, lively man everywhere,' she told a friend. 'But not in bed.' He first met Simone de Beauvoir when they were students at the Sorbonne in the Twenties. He was already something of a Lothario. While engaged to a girl from Lyon, he had had an affair with a blonde prostitute from a brothel in Toulouse: when he went off to university, she gave him a lampshade made out of her purple lace panties.
Hazel Rowley considers de Beauvoir and Sartre 'one of the world's legendary couples'.
In the very first sentence of her joint biography, she compares them to Abelard and Heloise. 'We think of Sartre and de Beauvoir and we think of freedom,' she gushes.
But freedom for whom? Rowley scarcely touches on Sartre's politics or philosophy, which is perhaps just as well, because it would mean she would have to acknowledge the millions of people whose captivity he was happy to defend. In her recent biography of Chairman Mao, Jung Chang reminds us that as late as 1968 Sartre praised what he called 'the revolutionary violence' of Mao as 'profoundly moral'.
She estimates, as others have done, that 70 million Chinese citizens perished under his rule.
Sartre was scarcely less enthusiastic about the Soviet Union. In 1952, when other intellectuals were beginning to see through the propaganda of Stalin, he wrote a book called The Communists And Peace, in which he heralded him as a great hero. Two years later, when he wrote articles extolling the 'complete freedom of expression' enjoyed by people in the USSR, even the tame Soviet writers who had first sucked up to him felt obliged to complain.
Ten years and as many Soviet visits later, he condemned the Nobel Prize committee for awarding the literature prize to the dissident Pasternak, rather than the obedient Sholokhov. 'I did it because I considered that it is not polite to pour s*** on your hosts as soon as you are back home,' he later explained. So much for his ideals about freedom!
No doubt, the author was thinking of Sartre's love of sexual, rather than political, freedom. Rowley's book concentrates not on the thoughts of Sartre and de Beauvoir, but on their sex lives. She writes in a breathy, wide-eyed prose, occasionally interrupted with a soupcon of analysis. It is rather as though Barbara Cartland had just mugged up for a GCSE in Existentialism.
'Never had de Beauvoir felt more utterly alone,' is a typical way for a paragraph to end. She will then come out with a frothy generalisation such as: 'As a philosopher, de Beauvoir knew that death gave life meaning.' Come again?
Sartre and de Beauvoir embarked on a long affair at university. At the end of her life, she said she always felt that she loved Sartre more than he loved her. Judging by the evidence, she was undoubtedly right.
Sartre soon lost interest in having sex with her. He informed her that jealousy was simply a form of control, and control was an infringement of liberty. In less theoretical terms, this meant that he could have it off with whoever he wanted, and she would just have to lump it.
Furthermore, he decided that the best way to prevent sexual jealousy between them was for each to tell the other every detail of the affairs they had.
This may have worked for him he seems to have got a sexual thrill out of keeping his old girlfriend abreast of his seductions but for de Beauvoir, giving up her old lover was rather more difficult.
At first she suffered Cartlandesque ' torments of jealousy', as Sartre talked her through his success in knocking off one sexy young girl after another. But she soon proved no slouch herself, and was just as happy to go to bed with women as with men.
Creepily, as a teacher she seduced various of her female students, before passing them on to Sartre. One of them was a 16-year-old called Bianca Bienenfeld. In old age, she recalled walking with Sartre to the hotel where they were to have their tryst. On the way, Sartre remarked cheerfully that the hotel chambermaid would be in for a surprise, as he had taken another girl's virginity the day before. 'I shuddered inside but I said and did nothing,' Bianca told Hazel Rowley. 'He was not his usual, gentle self; it was as if he wanted to brutalise something in me ... and was driven by a destructive impulse.' Years later, when the Sartre/de Beauvoir correspondence was published, Bianca was horrified to realise that they had all the while been plotting her seduction, and then sharing details with one another. The analogy with the cold, scheming couple in Les Liaisons Dangereuses is never far away.
'To tell the truth I gain territory every time,' Sartre reported back to de Beauvoir, in a despatch from his battle to win the body of young Wanda Kosakiewicz. De Beauvoir had herself seduced Wanda's sister Olga, and Sartre had wanted to follow suit, but had been rejected. 'The woman I loved had refused me. They look very alike you see, and so it had to be her. It could not be anyone other than this sister.' He never gave up, even after Wanda had rushed to the loo and vomited after he had forced a kiss from her. Sure enough, his stubbornness paid off: they were soon lovers, and, despite herself, de Beauvoir was consumed by jealousy, never once acknowledging Wanda's existence. Wanda, for her part, kept a voodoo doll of de Beauvoir, and never held back with the pins.
Sartre and de Beauvoir, those two great standard-bearers for the truth, were, in fact, notably selective with it, bending it this way and that whenever it suited them.
Sartre lied to de Beauvoir when it suited him to do so, and de Beauvoir always denied in public that she had ever had any sexual interest in women.
The pair of them are still considered great romantic heroes by ageing French radicals who wish to keep alive their Sixties dreams of youth and rebellion.
But they make a very awkward fit in a book that reads like a Mills &amp; Boon romance. Whatever next?
Jilly Cooper on The Life And Loves Of Chairman Mao?
The Review bookstore
All books reviewed on these pages can be ordered direct at the special reduced prices shown next to the telephone symbol. Call 0870 165 0870 or send a UK cheque, payable to The Review Bookstore, to: The Review Bookstore, Parc Menai, Bangor LL57 4FB. UK p&amp;p: 99p for orders less than Pounds 10 rrp, Pounds 1.95 for more than Pounds 10 rrp.

