Love in a cold climate

As the camera soars over the Antarctic wilderness, David Attenborough is in magisterial form, talking of 'Terra Incognita' and 'giant cathedrals of ice'.
Then, two minutes in, with a 'click, click, click, click' on comes the entertainment. You can't help but smile at the comical sight of an Adelie penguin jogging across the ice, followed by an army of companions waddling and sliding on their bellies, desperately looking for outcrops of rock where they can breed as the all-tooshort polar summer approaches.
As with the first series of Planet Earth, everything has been filmed in jaw-dropping high definition. And as before, it mixes the spectacular and the cute, along with the odd touch of sex and violence.
Tonight's first episode spends time at both Poles.
The hardest graft is put in to filming Emperor penguins enduring a long, dark, cruel winter in Antarctica only brightened by the Southern Lights. The male penguins draw the short straw, left to guard an egg each, without food, while temperatures drop to -60C and winds howl at 100mph. They only survive the ordeal because they shuffle together into vast scrums or huddles. It's not until four months later that the females return.
Up north, the focus shifts to polar bear cubs and a hungry male bear desperately searching for food.
As the climate changes and the ice retreats, so the future of the bears, too, looks unstable.
Stick around for the ten-minute diary at the end to see the hardships and dangers the film crews faced just imagine seeing a huge, slavering polar bear peering in through your kitchen window one night.


The king of chat is back in his castle

Clive James Talking Friday, Artsworld, 8pm
Talk is cheap, but talk on television is very weak currency indeed. Over the past two decades, talk shows which ought by definition to be a genre in which words are uncommonly valuable appear to have been handed out to anyone capable of opening their mouth, regardless of whether or not they have anything to say. In their heyday, talk shows were flagship events for the channels that made them. Now they seem to have become the default format for people Sharon Osbourne, for instance who are on TV anyway, yet seem compelled to find ways of being on it even more.
The tragedy of programmes based on the mistaken assumption that any celebrity can host their own talk show is they obscure the fact that, in the right hands, a well-made talk show can be a rare and beautiful thing. Which is why it's cause for celebration that Clive James, a true king of what Alan Partridge once referred to as 'the castle of chat', is returning to TV to remind us how it's done.
TV critics are duty-bound to genuflect to James's talents, given that he pretty much invented modern TV criticism in the Seventies. But no one who enjoyed TV in the Eighties will have forgotten how good many of James's own programmes were. He was a skilled enough interviewer to interrogate people over a live satellite link (back when that was still an innovative and often fallible technology) and single-handedly, through his championing of the game show Endurance, turned Britain on to the captivating strangeness of Japanese TV. If by reason of youth or incarceration you missed out on Eighties telly and require evidence of his finesse, then take as exhibits his observations that 'even in moments of great tranquility, Murray Walker sounds like a man whose trousers are on fire', and that Arnold Schwarzenegger's physique looks like 'a condom full of walnuts'.
The premise behind Clive James Talking is that he dispenses with the hindrances of the TV studio and instead interviews his guests at his home, in his library. Despite its lofty self-assessment as 'a series of vital dialogues about the arts', the show promises to be interesting because the people appearing on it don't appear to have anything obvious to sell. They really are just talking. And from that comes great things.
This week's guest is Richard E Grant, about whom I knew little other than that I liked him a lot in the 1987 film Withnail &amp; I and I disliked him a lot in those Argos adverts. However, after 30 minutes with James I learned, among many other things, that Grant had been shot at by his own father 'Well, I provoked him' and once embarrassed himself in a urinal with Boris Becker.
In return, Clive spills the beans on the toilet facilities at Buckingham Palace and throws in gems of trivia such as the fact that Brad Dexter (the one from The Magnificent Seven whose name no one remembers) once saved Frank Sinatra from drowning. If the show suffers from anything it is the fact that host and guest find it difficult to refrain from praising each other though with the sheer quality of the lively debate and sparkling conversation, that seems like petty carping.

PAPERBACKS

Nothing That Meets The Eye
by Patricia Highsmith
Bloomsbury Pounds 9.99 .Pounds 9.99 free p&amp;p (0870 165 0870)
****
Patricia Highsmith was, in my view, the undisputed mistress as well as one of the creators of the modern psychological crime novel. Her best-known character, Tom Ripley, is the paradigm of the amoral antihero and it's fascinating to see in this career-spanning selection of short stories the genesis of many of her recurring themes.
Graham Greene said she wrote about men the way a spider would write about flies. In one of the best stories, a misogynistic salesman is caught taking a peculiar revenge against the female sex. The combination of cool prose and sinister comedy is irresistible.
The Duff Cooper Diaries
edited by John Julius Norwich
Phoenix Pounds 10.99 .Pounds 10.99 free p&amp;p (0870 165 0870)
*****
Duff Cooper was a politician, diplomat and man about town who was a firsthand witness to many of the great events of the last century. His finest hour came in 1938, when he resigned from Chamberlain's government in protest over appeasement. His observations on Churchill, King Edward VIII, De Gaulle and others are fascinating, but it's the combination of the public with the personal that makes these diaries riveting. Cooper was a bon viveur and, despite his marriage to one of the great beauties of the era, Lady Diana Manners, an accomplished and candid philanderer.
The Door
by Magda Szabo
Vintage Pounds 7.99
.Pounds 7.99 free p&amp;p (0870 165 0870)
****
Szabo is one of Hungary's most famous writers, but it's rare to find her work translated into English. I must confess my first reaction, as I began this intense, semi-autobiographical novel, was that perhaps this isn't so surprising: it takes a while to get going, and the central relationship between the narrator, a writer, and her proud old housekeeper Emerence seems odd. But as it develops, and the reasons for Emerence's bizarre behaviour are revealed, the story becomes ever more compelling. The tragic denouement is genuinely shocking. Not an easy read, but ultimately a rewarding one.


A bittersweet Candy

Heath Ledger and rising star Abbie Cornish are mightily impressive as Dan and Candy, young lovers chasing dragon dreams in Sydney in Candy (15) ***.
They shoot up heroin in car washes, make love all day,caress each other's track marks, shoplift, steal cash from her parents, go swimming, read E. E.
Cummings and content themselves with being the 'coolest people in McDonald's'.
Ledger does a lot of furtive meetings on park benches while Cornish does a lot of lolling around in her knickers. But when Candy turns to prostitution to fund their addiction, things turn darker or as the subheadings in Neil Armfield's film have it go from Heaven, to Earth, to Hell.
Soon they are arguing, lying, marrying, pregnant and going cold turkey together.
Later, after a harrowing miscarriage, they move to the country and invite her parents for Sunday lunch, cooking a frozen chicken one step forward, one step back after cold turkey, I guess. But the drug still holds them and Candy goes bonkers.
There's rather too much anguish here but it's attractively performed.
Cornish looks amazingly like the young Nicole Kidman and Naomi Watts, so there's clearly something more pleasant in the water down there than sharks.
Romanzo Criminale (15) *** (Crime Novel) is a flashy, lengthy but enjoyable gangster epic from Italy that owes much to the Italian-American classics: Once Upon A Time In America, Goodfellas and The Godfather. Or maybe it's just that they're all indebted to those Italian B-movies from the Sixties that have so influenced Tarantino.
Its star, Kim Rossi Stewart, has obviously been taking handsome lessons and steals the picture with his charisma and luxuriant beard. There's an ambitious, though not entirely successful, attempt to mirror the gangsters' lives to a political sweep from the Seventies terrorism of the Red Brigades to the 1982 World Cup and the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989.
Denis Dercourt's The Page Turner (15) *** has pretty but icy young Melanie (Deborah Francois) inveigling her way to working for a famous concert pianist (Catherine Frot, from Lucas Belvaux's Trilogy) after her childhood dream of becoming a pianist has been thwarted. There's a lot of Claude Chabrol in this creepy film, taut as violin strings and set to edgy Shostakovich.
Brit-film Mischief Night (18) ** is crude and embarrassing alongside such refined French cinema. It tries, and fails, for a new genre of raucous social realism, a strange brew of East Is East, Rita, Sue And Bob Too and My Son The Fanatic.
John Houston's The Asphalt Jungle (PG) ***** is reissued. I rejoice in its perfection: the dialogue crackles, the tension mounts, the heist grips and, in her first credited appearance, Marilyn Monroe dazzles like a flawed diamond.


Travel BOOK OF THE WEEK

JANE AUSTEN'S aunt Jane Leigh Perrot was once accused of shoplifting a piece of white lace from a Bath shop. This paints a rather beguiling image of Pride And Prejudice meets The Bill.
Mrs Perrot managed to avoid conviction and a possible sentence of transportation to Australia. But this incident is said to have clouded Jane's opinion of Bath.
Caroline Sanderson's A Rambling Fancy: In The Footsteps Of Jane Austen (Cadogan, Pounds 8.99) plays down this dark episode on her strolls through the places of the author's life and novels.
Her home in Steventon, Hampshire, is an excellent museum and all pilgrimages end at Austen's tomb in Winchester Cathedral.
The book is a must for all Austen lovers.
To order your copy of A Rambling Fancy by Caroline Sanderson at Pounds 8.99 with free p&amp;p call 0870 191 9907.

Readinggroup

MOTHER, MISSING by Joyce Carol Oates (Harper Perennial, Pounds 7.99)
Journalist Nikki Eaton has a prickly relationship with her mother Gwen, but when she hugs her goodbye one Mother's Day she little imagines that it's for the last time. Two days later, after a string of phone calls goes unreturned, Nikki drives over to find Gwen brutally murdered. Despite this dramatic opening, Joyce Carol Oates's perceptive study of family ties is not a traditional crime novel; rather, the focus of the book concerns the psychological fallout from Gwen's untimely death. Nikki has been leading a 'slapdash' life, dating an older married man, colouring her spiky hair purple and dressing to shock. At 31, she seems to have more in common with her teenage niece than her bossy big sister. Yet over the coming, tearstained months, she adopts her mother's cat, takes to wearing her hand-knitted jumpers and learns to bake.
At the same time, she finds herself increasingly drawn to a local police detective. Meanwhile, attic excavations reveal some surprising truths about her late mother, enabling Nikki to glimpse the determined, passionate woman hidden behind Gwen's do-gooding exterior. This belated coming-of-age story has been hailed by critics as 'a brilliant, unmissable novel' from an author who has 'a genius for inventing page-turning plots'.
ORDER YOUR BOOK TODAY AT A BARGAIN PRICE
You can buy Mother, Missing for just Pounds 3.99, plus 99p delivery. To order, call 0870 162 5006, or visit you-reading-group.co.uk, where you can read more about the book and post your own reviews. You can also write to YOU Bookshop, Parc Menai, Bangor LL57 4FB, stating your name, address and the number of copies you require, making cheques payable to YOU Bookshop. Each order will include notes on the book and suggested points for discussion.



