It's the league of gentlewomen...: ON TELEVISION: WHAT SHE WATCHED

CRANFORD BBC1
I'M A CELEBRITY. . . GET ME OUT OF HERE! ITV1
I'M A CELEBRITY. . . NOW ITV2
UGLY BETTY C4
'WE ARE no longer merely neighbours, we are friends,' declared Eileen Atkins's Miss Deborah to Jim Carter's Captain Brown as Carl Davis's score swelled over the end credits of Cranford , though you could have been forgiven for expecting a cheery little tune by Tony Hatch and Jackie Trent. Just a friendly wave each morning? Next door only a footstep away? Indeed, as there was a role for practically everybody else you've ever seen on the telly, there could have been one for Ian 'Harold Bishop' Smith of Neighbours , too. And maybe there is.
Cranford is an upscale sudsy delight, of course. Gorgeous to look at (its luscious painterly tableaux vivants make its art direction and photography possibly the most beautiful in any costume drama ever), pacy, witty, poignant and stuffed full of actors who tick the box 'Licence fee increase? Yes please, Mr Thompson!'
It's early days, admittedly, but in the battle of the Dames it is Atkins rather than Dench who has had all the best lines and opportunities to display amusingly pursed-lipped disapproval of countless breaches of small-town etiquette.
Much comic mileage is had from Cranford's quirky ways, policed by Miss Deborah with unwavering respect for arcane unwritten social rules. Visiting hours, for example, are between 12 and 3pm, and one must never overstay a welcome past 15 minutes, which strictly allotted time must be judged by guesswork, clock-watching being rude. Ladies may have started attending funerals in Manchester, but 'it's not the custom in Cranford'. Oranges must not be sucked in public ('consuming them is a most incommodious business'), or at least their sucking must not be discussed - sucking being something babies do to breasts, which quite clearly do not exist, and anyway Miss Deborah is uncomfortable with the word 'suck'. And while a gentleman may assist a pregnant woman (of the lower orders) who has stumbled, he may not 'take her arm and offer to escort her home', an action which, according to Miss D, 'shows a revolting lack of decorum'.
Elsewhere, compounds have been purchased for cats who have swallowed antique lace with their buttermilk, bowls of arrowroot have been consumed by distressed ladies, broken bones have been re-set by candlelight, sickly gels have passed away, romances have blossomed under cherry trees, summer muslins have arrived 'direct from Paris' in the local store. . . and if that's what you call plot, then everything has moved along to somewhere or other at a cracking pace. But as it all unfolded I became aware of a potent atmosphere of oddness about Cranford - possibly even a darkness at its very heart - that calls to mind the isolated northern town of Royston Vasey. Welcome, then, to The League of Gentlewomen
In Australia, about 1,100 miles and a 22-hour drive north of Melbourne's fictional, neighbourly Ramsay Street, lies the I'm a Celebrity. . . Get Me Out Of Here! encampment, a place with its own dark heart. It may boast a handful of slebs, but the size of this show's production team increases the headcount dramatically.
I am quite riveted by this I'm a Celebrity. . . With a less than stellar lineup, ITV has had to rely on us becoming interested in the personalities despite ourselves, and it's paid off brilliantly. In week one, for example, we had Janice's histrionics to keep us amused, while last week Lynne Franks's bullying at the hands of two of the most profoundly unpleasant men ever to unwittingly reveal their insecurities live on national television night after night (the frankly terrifying John Burton Race, a man with all the good looks, charm and interpersonal skills of a coiled cobra, and the risible Rodney Marsh, if you need me to name names) vied for our attention with the awkward blossoming love/lust 'holiday' romance between the predatory Cerys Matthews and the not-remotely-resistant-to-her-charms Marc Bannerman. (Don't know who they are in the real world? Doesn't matter in the least.)
On Wednesday, Bannerman - a charmer, incidentally - was the first to be voted out of the jungle by the public in a rare moment of collective moral opprobrium, largely due to the sleight-of-hand of a production team who chose to screen a sad, dignified little interview with Bannerman's heartbroken long-term girlfriend, the actor Sarah Matravers, in the last 15 minutes of available voting time.
Having flown to Australia to support her man, Matravers spent a couple of days watching footage of Bannerman flirting intensely with a woman he had just met, and then flew home again after only 48 hours. On his exit, Bannerman was shown enough footage of his emotional crimes and physical misdemeanours to know that he was in serious trouble. Looking nervously over his shoulder towards the exit during his post-eviction interview with Ant and Dec, he asked if Sarah was waiting for him. 'She was here, but she's gone home.'
The story unfolded afterwards over on ITV2, during I'm A Celebrity. . . Get Me Out Of Here Now! , in which Bannerman was shunted into an interview with last year's boy-band star-turned-jungle-victor-turned-TV presenter Matt Willis, who was gloriously unprepared for the challenge.
'So, um, what are you going to have to eat?! Um, that's normally the first thing that. . .' chirruped Willis, revealing why he will not make a Newsnight presenter shortlist in this lifetime, before being interrupted by a panicky Bannerman.
'Food isn't on my mind at the moment, mate. I've just got to make a phone call and get back to London and sort things out. . . I don't care about food. I'm sorry, mate, but nothing else is important at the moment.'
'Of course, of course. . .'
'I don't give a monkey's about food. I don't care about alcohol. I've embarrassed myself and embarrassed my missus, mate.'
It may have lost something in the translation from screen to page, but watching somebody suddenly realise that when reality TV bites it has a grip like a croc with lockjaw was a genuinely riveting bit of live telly. Back in the camp there seemed to be a great deal of surprise at Bannerman's exit - he'd been popular with everybody and seemed like a nice guy - but they hadn't seen what we'd seen.
The following night, Rodney Marsh looked sick when he learned of Croatia's 3-2 defeat of England and Katie-from- The-Apprentice was evicted, but the story was still all about Bannerman, Matravers and Matthews. In the back of a car, Bannerman opened his heart to a producer and a camera, as one is no doubt capable of doing when the goalposts of real life have been moved 12,000 miles apart from each other.
'I was betraying my partner. Not in the overtly physical sense, but mentally.' He looked distraught. 'I've fallen hook, line and sinker.'
'Are you in love?'
'I'm in love with two people. What a prat. I've just listened to [Sarah] crying down the phone. . . I really regret hurting someone, but I don't regret anything else.'
It may seem extraordinary that anybody could behave the way Bannerman did, knowing his every move was being broadcast on national TV every night, but clearly the jungle has its own strange rules of social engagement, quite the equal of anything that goes on in Cranford . It's like joining some strange cult, where the normal, external, real-world rules simply do not apply. In The Cult Of I'm A Celebrity , you presumably feel immune.
And then, on Friday, I was having a chat about the show with somebody who doesn't work in the media, and is therefore no more cynical than your average viewer.
'That thing with Marc Bannerman and his girlfriend. . . there's something weird about it. He walks into the jungle and, almost from day one, starts conducting this big romance. He and his girlfriend weren't exactly household names, were they? Someone stands to make a lot of money. I think it was cooked up. The wedding pictures will be worth a fortune.'
I was completely disarmed. It hadn't even occurred to me, but, funnily enough, now I can't get the idea out of my head.
Narcissistic poster-girl for the cult of celebrity, Victoria 'I can't get me out of my head' Beckham, has made one of her periodic, self-parodying forays into 'acting'. With that lollipop head helmeted by her trademark high-maintenance blond 'pob' and accessorised by a skin-tight outfit and killer heels, she pulled the usual unsmiling, nose-in-the-air Posh routine to the point where it is now all but impossible to gauge precisely where Posh the-media-friendly-construct ends and the real Mrs Beckham begins. Anyway, watching Posh and her fellow Spices in those Tesco ads certainly livens up a commercial break. And I believe she may have made an appearance as Wilhelmina's maid-of-honour in Ugly Betty too.

FROM JAILHOUSE TO HENHOUSE

Anybody else find Chris Langham's cosy chat with Anna Botting (Sky News) - his first TV interview since leaving jail - inappropriate, to say the least? Filmed at home in Kent, Langham (below) told us that prison 'really is vile', that it was 'arrogant to think I'm above the law just because my feelings are so lovely' and that because he had been abused as a child by a man with a cine-camera, he had wondered, while downloading images of child abuse and torture, whether 'it was going to be me' he saw on screen. Then, in the thick of it all, we cut to Anna Botting, behind whose head Langham's two Baftas were, one can only assume, strategically, rather than randomly, placed. Later we saw him feeding his chickens while Botting's voiceover informed us 'Chris Langham is now broke', though according to Langham he is receiving offers of work. What on earth could they be?

POP: VOX POP: Lord of misrule or shambolic fool? You decide

TONY McGARDLE
39, chef
It was excellent, a good night, though I thought he could have played more Libertines songs. It was the first time I've seen Babyshambles - I was impressed by how good they were. Pete is a legend, a really good performer.
THERESA McGARDLE
33, youth worker
Considering all the problems Pete Doherty has had, I think he was fantastic. It was exactly the kind of performance that indie rock stars should give. I think he is an excellent role model for young people, to get them to learn music.
PAUL KELLO
63, printer from Belgium
It was very good. This was the first time I had seen the band and I didn't really know them before but their songs are excellent, very catchy, and they performed well as a group. The singer really stood out to me, he has a lot of charisma.
PETE McGARITY
26, chef
It was amazing. I've been wanting to see the band for ages. Some of my friends have seen Pete play when he's on drugs and reckon he's a better performer then, but I think he was great tonight. It's good he's sober now.
DIANA MEZEI
20, student from Hungary
It was fantastic. I have never seen the band before, but they were really good. Pete Doherty was brilliant and really got the crowd going.

THREE TO SEE: Eastern Promises: Ratatouille: American Gangster

Eastern Promises (18) The author of Dirty Pretty Things and creator of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? explores London's Russian criminal world where people do some pretty dirty things in their search for millions.
Ratatouille (U) The Pixar team at their most animated with the tale of a culinary rat who saves a sinking Paris restaurant.
American Gangster (18) Ridley Scott gives the Godfather treatment to Harlem with this epic biopic starring Denzel Washington as crime boss Frank Lucas.

