CRITICS: ART: Masters of the universe: THE MAIN EVENT > From monarch to man: with this grand gathering of 150 fascinating paintings, the Royal Academy shows how dramatic changes in the art of portraiture reflect the power shifts of the Enlightenment itself: Citizens and Kings: Portraits in the Age of Revolution, 1760-1830 Royal Academy, London W1, until 20 April

SOME SHOWS can only be done by museums on a grand scale because they aim to change the way we look at art. 'Citizens and Kings', a tremendous undertaking by the Louvre, the Guggenheim and the Royal Academy, is such an event. It gathers together 150 masterpieces by great names including Delacroix, Gericault, Goya and David but also by artists you may never have heard of: weird Scandinavians, early US republicans, the Frenchman who sculpted Voltaire in the nude. Its argument - that the age of revolution sees a revolution in portraiture too - may not exactly be new. But in its intelligence and range the show is exceptional and displays to an extraordinary degree what portraits try to make you believe.
Or perhaps, even more interesting, what artists try to make themselves believe. Take the stupendous opening room: monarchs from all over Europe. Everyone is doing their best, rulers as well as painters. Reynolds' George III poses in a tide of ermine that washes out of the picture in waves. Shubin's Catherine the Great struggles beneath a preposterously oversized crown. Goya's awkward Ferdinand VII is barely able to keep his royal robes from slipping to the floor, no matter that Goya paints them with great ceremony. Is it the role or the man himself? Either way, he's a bully in fancy dress.
Most unstable is Ingres's Napoleon on the Imperial Throne , which might seem like staggering flattery: a triumph of sceptres and satins, gold tassels and white fur with Napoleon as an Olympic deity. But look again and the whole image is conspicuously made up. The arms and legs don't fit, the imperial accoutrements come apart; it is an assemblage of expensive parts, as fabricated as the made-up emperor himself: Napoleon as Bokassa.
Uneasy rulers; wars and revolutions around the corner. It may be the benefit of hindsight, or a painter's own politics edging into the picture. Or it may be that these artists could no longer bring off this most implausible of art forms, the royal state portrait. Go from these 10ft monarchs to George Washington in Gilbert Stuart's deathless icon next door and you can see the power literally change hands. When Thomas Lawrence's George IV flexes his fingers forcefully on a table it is just empty rhetoric. When Washington makes the identical gesture it says 'Here is the plan'.
Pose and scale are the first to change, from billboard monarchs standing like armatures beneath a ton of royal trappings to human-scale mortals sitting cross-legged in armchairs. David's The Marquise d'Orvilliers , slumming it without jewels, wig or hat, sits sideways in her seat, one arm hooked over the back. Ingres's Madame Marcotte lolls on her cushions reading a book. Gerard's marvellous portrait of the artist Isabey shows him tenderly helping his little girl downstairs - one of very few images of fathers and daughters in painting.
Even when the scale remains majestic, the pose may go the other way. Talleyrand, that scheming political survivor, leans casually back in his robes as Napoleon's Grand Chamberlain. Prud'hon painted him again as Foreign Minister and then again in the same pose, wearing town clothes, after Napoleon's exile. Talleyrand knew how to remake his image. And what this sequence of portraits illustrates is that the man shouldn't be confused with the office.
Which is surely the whole point of David's hyper-clear portrait of Napoleon hemmed in between chair, desk and us: so close he could be viewed through a zoom-lens. The candles are guttering, the clock stands at 4.13, presumably in the morning. Napoleon has worked all night on his papers but still has time for his public. The Marquis of Douglas, who commissioned a portrait of his hero in action, must have been horrified when he opened the crate and found Napoleon not even dressed for the part. Instead, David asserts that the leader's mind is what matters.
Enlightenment portraits make mental notes. They often do it in writing. David's emperor has just been working on The Napoleonic Code . Samuel Adams, in Copley's stirring republican despatch, points down at a petition protest ing at the Boston Massacre as if asking what you're going to do about that. David Hume leans on a volume of Tacitus: not just a great philosopher but a historian too. One of Mirabeau's dazzling speeches lies at his feet as he opens his mouth (no need for notes). And since art history also repeats itself as farce, Elizabeth Vigee-LeBrun, cottoning on to the concept of words, has one of her toffs brandishing a letter addressed 'To The King' and another affecting to read a novel the right way up.
But no more direct form of public speech has ever been inscribed in a painting than David's The Death of Marat , where the martyr lies stabbed through the heart in the bath that has become his coffin, one hand stubbing the nib of his quill on the floor, the other still holding the assassin's false letter of introduction. The simple wooden crate the indefatigable revolutionary has been using as a desk now becomes his monument: covered in his writings and also inscribed with David's personal homage 'A Marat'.
The painting was carried through the streets soon after the murder. It was a news report as much as a history painting, a protest as well as a glorification in which half of the picture holds nothing but a kind of beatific twilight. It is Exhibit A of Enlightenment art: a portrait that breaks the shackles to become so much else. 'Citizens and Kings' is filled with such advanced aspirations - to show children playing like children at last, men as house-husbands or women as professionals; to express grief, madness and sudden laughter in a portrait as opposed to a type; to get away from the inflated fictions of the past into the prose of real life. And even, in the case of Pigalle's shattering sculpture of the emaciated Voltaire, his aged shanks covered by nothing more than a bit of writing (what else?) to commemorate the naked truth.
But fiction returns in the end of course. Politicians start to be depicted as classical heroes once more, especially in sculpture. Lady painters become dainty muses. Madame de Stael appears in a toga twanging a lyre. This generous show doesn't stint on the regressions of the age, although it always favours progress. And it ends as it began with a wonderfully ambiguous portrait by Ingres, of the newspaper editor and mighty polemicist, Louis-Francois Bertin.
Bertin is a figure of overpowering bulk. He leans forward, waistcoat straining, thighs spread, fingertips poised on his knees like the menacing claws of a crab. His expression is shrewd, voracious, dynamic. As an icon of masculine power, there is nothing in art to touch it. But beneath the splayed crotch is a patch of rude red paint alluding to his trousered genitals, as if Ingres simply could not help imagining the great public intellectual without any clothes.

DVD club: No 57 Caravaggio

Derek Jarman (1942-94) was one of a quartet of immensely gifted British cineastes who rejected the influence and blandishments of Hollywood, looked to Europe for finance and, at a time when our native cinema was turning into a cottage industry, bravely decided to make their careers here. The other three were Ken Loach, Terence Davies and Peter Greenaway.
The articulate, intelligent, deeply English, openly gay Jarman was trained as a painter, designed Ken Russell's The Devils and achieved early notoriety with the flagrantly homoerotic Sebastiane (1976), the cheapest ever Roman epic, made in Latin, and Jubilee (1979), a Republican challenge to Queen Elizabeth II's silver jubilee celebrations. He never stopped working, even when dying from Aids. His last movie, Blue , made when he was blind, was preceded by Wittgenstein (1993), a witty cinematic essay on the homosexual philosopher.
I have immense affection for his 1979 version of Shakespeare's The Tempest , in which Elisabeth Welch sings 'Stormy Weather' with a chorus of prancing matelots, and the 1991 version of Marlowe's Edward II , where Annie Lennox marks the separation between king and court favourite by performing Cole Porter's 'Every Time We Say Goodbye'. There's no question, however, that Caravaggio , his long-gestated, deeply personal biopic of the complex, unaccommodated homosexual painter, is his masterpiece. Made on a budget of £ 500,000 in a small studio in London's East End but with sounds recorded on the streets of Italy, the picture unfolds in flashback from the 1610 deathbed of the painter (a brooding, dangerous Nigel Terry). He reviews his life, his crimes, his relations with ecclesiastic patrons and his obsession with an honest depiction of the world.
Back in 1986, I disliked the deliberate anachronisms (the Roman banker operating a gold pocket calculator, the vicious critic battering a manual typewriter, Pope Paul V addressing Caravaggio (left, played by Dexter Fletcher) as 'you little bugger'). They now seem an essential part of the way Jarman compares our times with Caravaggio's.

Trailer Trash

Old school ties that bind
After the London Film Festival's opening gala of The Last King of Scotland , I reported the sad news that the Ndere arts school in Kampala, which supplied many performers for the film, was under threat of closure. Happily, the school has been saved, with some help from the film's stars Forest Whitaker and James McAvoy and through a series of charity screenings organised by director Kevin Macdonald (below). The Ndere school will perform at the film's African premiere in Uganda on 17 February. I understand, however, that the long-term security of this remarkable institution (founded and funded by Kampala actor Stephen Rwangyezi, who plays Idi Amin's health minister in the film) is doubtful and that they are desperate for benefactors. Anyone interested should contact the film's producer, Andrea Calderwood, on info@slatefilms.com
East End Frodo
What was with all the screaming emanating from the playground of a girl's school in Bethnal Green? 'Elijah Wood (below) is on the set today and I can hardly hear myself think,' says actor/director Alex Cox. 'He's small, yes, but he has very beautiful eyes.' The unlikely pair are currently filming The Oxford Murders for Spanish director Alex de Iglesias. It's a gruesome tale, says Alex, 'in the style of Borges - and I am getting ritually humiliated on set every day. I'm stuck in box, have a lobotomy, get my legs cut off and lie in a pool of vomit.' Some might call it karma, I venture, for the time, when directing Sid and Nancy , that he had Gary Oldman lie in vomit? 'I'm sure it is,' agrees Cox. 'But I'm not sure Gary can remember anything about it.'

Revolution in the head: did the exhibition achieve its stated aim? Your verdict on the show

DON WALTER
writer
I felt that the intellectual framework on which it was built was possibly just a little bit beyond me. But just going along looking at the pictures was a tremendously satisfying experience.
KRYSIA WILLIAMS
local councillor
It palled in the middle, but then you have the relief of the complete change in style to the family portraits. As you come out of the final room, back into the paintings of royalty, you have the sense of having been on a journey.
SHEENA OLIVER
writer
I thought you really saw the personalities of a lot of the subjects, regardless of their class. I loved Catherine the Great. She looked like a very feisty lady - which she was. Goya, David and Ingres stood out.
TOBY TATUM
artist
It's good to see the works, particularly Goya, and to see them in context - you get a feel for the time. In that way the exhibition is a success. It's large, but I didn't go in expecting to see everything. I let individual works draw me in.
LOUISE WILLIAMS
student
It was a bit long. It's interesting to see how the events outside of portraiture were affecting it, and you could see the change all the way through. But it was a bit samey.

