Dramatic licence

Can a Pop Idol-style TV show make a West End hit, asks SIMON FANSHAWE
Alan Ayckbourn once said that 75% of the people in this country were about to start or were in the act of finishing a play. And he knew that, he said, "because they all send them to me". But over the past year his postbox must have been slightly emptier. When Channel 4 was wondering how it could create a culturally upmarket Pop Idol-style success, it eventually came up with The Play's the Thing.
It invited submissions of first plays from new writers, with the winner to be produced in the West End.
The guiding light of the process is Sonia Friedman, the prodigious producer who has just earned four Tony nominations for Brian Friel's Faith Healer, on Broadway, as well as stunning reviews for a new London production of Michael Frayn's Donkeys' Years. Despite the accolades for these revivals, though, she has a kind of demented enthusiasm for new writing. She used to work for the company Out of Joint, with Max Stafford-Clark, the former artistic director of the Royal Court, where, she says: "New writers were the reason to come to work every day."
No producer has launched a first-time writer directly onto Shaftesbury Avenue since the celebrated Michael Codron started his still successful career by doing exactly that with Harold Pinter, Michael Frayn, Simon Gray and John Mortimer. But even he says: "I have also always brought plays into the West End from the subsidised sector. Don't make me out to be a complete lunatic." Codron started producing before the National Theatre existed. There is now a vibrant subsidised sector, and the National, along with the Almeida and the Donmar, often transfers shows into the West End and its subsidies hedge the risk.
Part of the lunacy of producing in the West End is financial. A straight play with a cast of, say, six costs in the region of £ 350,000 to get to opening night.
The weekly expenses are then about £ 60,000, and producers pretty much have to sign six-week agreements with theatres and actors. Which brings the total exposure to close to £ 750,000 before a single bum has hit the red velvet or a review is out. It is also rare for a first-timer to be able to write on the scale the West End demands. Theatres, on average, have about 700 seats and proscenium arches, and audience expectation is high, with tickets at £ 25 and more. As Friedman says of Martin McDonagh's instant success with his first play, The Beauty Queen of Leenane, in 1996: "People like him only come along once in a generation."
C4's competition attracted about 2,000 submissions. They were whittled down to 50 by a team of 40 readers. It was relatively easy to reject 1,950 of them. Then Friedman spent a fortnight discarding another 20, largely following her gut instinct, before bringing in the actor Neil Pearson and the literary agent Mel Kenyon to go through the final process, which C4 filmed. The difficulty was to find a play for the West End.
"This wasn't going to be for a 60-seat studio," Friedman says. And as we talk, it's clear that at this stage (several weeks ago), a certain amount of panic has set in as to whether or not they have a play they can be confident about. It's clear Pearson and Kenyon fought over this crucial issue. "They sparked off each other," says Friedman carefully. "We had free and frank exchanges," says Pearson, before jumping off the diplomatic trolley. "Mel was looking for a new Sarah Kane or Mark Ravenhill, a genius over whom she could fawn. But we had to look for a West End play. It wasn't just about good writing per se. You can have the most perfect string quartet, but you wouldn't put it on in the Albert Hall."
Kenyon admits she has been lucky to work in the company started by the agent Peggy Ramsay. "I have been allowed to develop an aesthetic, take time to develop writers. Sonia, though she started in the same place as me, has gone into the West End and has to make pragmatic decisions. Neil is an actor. And he's male! It would have been very dull if we'd all sat around agreeing. What we argued about was the nature of theatre and what makes a good play. More than that, what makes a good West End play. And," she adds, "whether a West End play is necessarily a good play."
One thing that did move Friedman was the themes of the writing. "Did they have a play? In most cases, no. Were they writing from experience? Yes. The most common themes were street violence, domestic violence and abuse -from physical to drugs.
There were three plays called Crack." Which is not exactly Penelope Keith territory. Anyway, they were trying to run a competition where the play was the thing, not the star. "It's about the writer. In the West End, star names matter.
The Lady in the Van was a new play that went straight to the West End. But it was by Alan Bennett and starred Maggie Smith."
What saved the process from being both a kind of Pop Idol with A-levels and a complete disaster was the work the writers had to do once on the shortlist. "They really had to write, to work," says Friedman. C4 invested an estimated £ 100,000 in the development of the contest, though they are a bit coy about exactly how much they are underwriting the process. But that enabled the authors to be supported while they developed their submission into a full play.
There is now a winner -a closely guarded secret. Friedman is nervous. "Can I say that if it fell on my desk out of the blue, I'd have produced it? Probably not," she says with characteristic frankness. But she rallies. "Faith Healer is up for the Tonys; Donkeys' Years is a hit. Nobody else has a job where they wake up to that news in one day. I love it.
The Play's the Thing starts on Channel 4 on June 12; the winning play previews from June 14 at the New Ambassadors, WC2

Hey, buster, we ain't no muppets!

Cameron Mackintosh tells MATT WOLF why musical puppets will be his next big smash
David is very nearly outpacing Goliath these days in the world of the musical, where the big guns are getting a run for their money from smaller upstarts: Mack and Mabel, for one, or the slimmed-down Sweeney Todd, both directed by John Doyle.
Of course, the West End, just like Broadway, lives in feverish anticipation of the next musical behemoth, a Spamalot or Wicked, intended to keep box offices busy for years. What has changed is the appetite for smaller-scale shows, which are turning out to be more than capable of holding their own.
Arguably the best reviews of the theatre year thus far have gone to the West End transfer of Stephen Sondheim's art musical, Sunday in the Park with George, at a venue, the 710-seat Wyndham's, more often given over to plays like Art. And it's now been joined (the two productions share a stage door) at the adjacent Noel Coward Theatre by the little Broadway show that could, Avenue Q. Spawned in an intimate Off Broadway theatre near Manhattan's Union Square, director Jason Moore's production moved, in July 2003, to a small Broadway house, where it is going strong nearly $65m in box-office receipts later. This London opening, under the auspices of Cameron Mackintosh, marks only its third staging.
So, does size matter? "It's what you do with it," laughs Mackintosh, who points out that, three decades ago, the American musical Godspell -featuring, he says, "12 people in rags and some chicken wire" -ran for several years at Wyndham's. Now it's the turn of Avenue Q, bringing its mixture of puppetry and live action for the first time to foreign soil.
Described time and again as "Sesame Street with sass", this show appealed to Mackintosh because, he says: "It wasn't musical theatre pastiche, either musically or lyrically. Yes, there's the odd little thing if you want to get it, but the jokes are still about real life, not theatre life: that's the attraction. It's the only show I've seen recently that isn't a nudge and a wink to Broadway's past - which I find enjoyable, but that's never been material I've been attracted to putting on myself." Instead of ragging on Andrew Lloyd Webber (who is skewered in Spamalot) or Elton John (who gets knocked in current Tony favourite The Drowsy Chaperone), Avenue Q's buoyant score sings of topics as diverse as racism, internet porn, and even -the title of one number -schadenfreude. Big Bird and Cookie Monster were never like this, which explains why all material for the show goes to some lengths to point out that the Jim Henson Company and his Sesame Workshop have nothing whatsoever to do with Avenue Q. "It's a courtesy thing, not a legal thing," says director Moore.
The musical's commercial transfer in New York won three Tony Awards -for Jeff Whitty's, uh, witty book; for the score, by Broadway newcomers Robert Lopez and Jeff Marx, both now in their thirties; and, most astonishingly, for best musical, beating odds-on favourite Wicked (which itself reaches London in September).
"Even now, I'm astonished they didn't give the big prize to Wicked," says Ann Harada, the one member of the New York ensemble who has come over to join an otherwise all-British cast, repeating her role as a Japanese-born therapist called Christmas Eve. "Believe me, that night when it was happening, we were the most stunned people on earth. We're a tiny little show, and they're a huge extravaganza; I'm sure if they could have given two awards, they would have."
Tiny, yes, but possessed of teeth, as well. "That's part of the bait and switch of the show," says Moore, whose future Broadway ventures include a stage musical of the animated film Shrek. Of Avenue Q, he says: "You think it's going to be cute, and then they say f***." There are two different, equally vivid hand puppets, played by the same performer: a bright-eyed, cloth-loving creature called Princeton and the clamped-down, closeted-gay Republican, Rod. Moore explains: "We never really censored ourselves: are we making fun of gays, or laughing with them? Avenue Q is about finding where that line is."
Steeped in the world of American children's TV, Avenue Q was originally intended for the small screen -and may end up there, if talk of a television spin-off bears fruit. "The whole idea was to fuse theatre and television together," says Moore. "Most musicals have overtures, and TV shows have theme songs, so we thought, let's have a theme song and an overture." The result, though, very much lives in three dimensions.
Its begetters hope Avenue Q will find a life in London. "We're slightly terrified," says Marx, who describes lyrics being changed from "taxi" to "minicab" and back again, to tailor the show to London audiences. Mackintosh says: "People ask, 'Aren't you worried?', but the thing I think we've got going for it is that Avenue Q is different. It's an original show." Original? In this age of jukebox extravaganzas and movie knock-offs, that word alone should be music to a fan's ears.
Avenue Q is in preview at the Noel Coward, London WC2

