The rise of the rock goddess: Rock music has always been primarily a boys' club. But this year a crowd of brilliant women have broken through. And 2008 promises to be just as exciting. Here Leonie Cooper speaks to five exciting new acts

Over the years, there have, of course, been many incredible women in rock - Aretha Franklin with her awesome range, Kate Bush with her warrior whoops and Deborah Harry with her insouciant cool, to name but a few. On balance, though, the world of rock has always seemed a boy's club, distinctly male-dominated. This year, that balance suddenly shifted. The all-woman band Bat for Lashes (and particularly frontwoman, Natasha Khan) hit the big time; piano-playing Kate Nash stormed the charts; and Swedish comeback kid Robyn proved that teen-pop careers don't have to end when an artist hits their mid-20s. Amy Winehouse, New Young Pony Club and Gossip's Beth Ditto, all made waves too. "There are more women going to gigs and buying music magazines than ever before, so it makes complete sense that we have more rock goddesses," says NME's deputy editor, Krissi Murison. "After all, when you're looking for a badly behaved, unattainably cool icon, Lily Allen or Lovefoxxx (from Brazilian band CSS), are obviously going to speak more directly to the ladies than, say, Tom from Kasabian."
It's a development that shows no signs of letting up. In 2008 even more women artists look set to break through, and they are just as original and unusual as the current crop - Bishi, for instance, a London-based multi-instrumentalist, who has recently released her debut album, Nights at the Circus. (The title is pilfered from the dream-weaving feminist writer Angela Carter.) Bishi started playing piano at three, and has travelled the world honing her sound - a mixture of English folk, classical Indian music . . . "and disco," she says. "I like to leave a comedy pause before that."
Every year she goes to the Ravi Shankar School in Delhi where six of Shankar's disciples teach sitar. Though Shankar no longer works at the school, Bishi has met him. "I've been round to his for lunch," she confesses. "He has known my mum (who is also a musician) since the 1960s. He's actually really funny - he's got an incredibly sharp, witty sense of humour."
Back in the UK now, Bishi is indulging her outrageous predilections to the hilt; she regularly plays with close friend and art-pop star, Patrick Wolf, and has a fondness for fantastic fashion. "A lot of people around style take it far too seriously, but if you look at bands like Parliament and Funkadelic, the way they dress is about representing their music." Hence Bishi's current range of outfits - which have a "futurist burlesque" theme and are designed for her by Sybil Rouge, "an old London nightclub legend, who was a seamstress with Lacroix".
Another future fashion heroine is Ebony Bones, 24, who plays her shows kitted out in necklaces made of huge beads and sporting almost as much neon as a Las Vegas casino. The singer used to make her own clobber, but now has a dedicated following of fashion students who ply her with gifts. "Someone gave me a ring made out of a shard of glass. That took a few people's eyes out," she jokes. Bones (nee Ebony Thomas), has been making her own unique brand of post-punk influenced electro for the past year, since her acting career was left in limbo when Family Affairs - the Channel Five soap she had starred in since she was 15 - was taken off air. "There are so many out-of-work actors temping," says Ebony, who decided to start making songs in her kitchen instead of waiting for the phone to ring. She was influenced by the music she loved growing up to, and as well as the trendy likes of Liquid Liquid, The Tom Tom Club and Gang of Four, this included a passion for music from 1980s adverts - the Kia-Ora and Um Bongo themes being favourites. "That's what I played to the producers I was working with recently, YouTube footage from those adverts, along with a few clips of Oompa Loompas from the first film version of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory." For Ebony, "making music is about not ignoring those silly thoughts that you might have". The juddering echo-pop of Don't Fart On My Heart is a prime example; "To be honest," she says, "they're songs that I never thought people would end up hearing, otherwise I probably wouldn't have called them what I did - y'know, Don't Fart On My Heart isn't my gran's favourite title."
After Ebony uploaded her first songs onto MySpace, dance duo Basement Jaxx contacted her and asked her to support them at a gig. But that is not the only piece of luck she has had - at the start of her music career she got talking to a man in a west London pub about the Holy Grail. It transpired that he was Rat Scabies of punk legends the Damned, who then helped her with her songs. Ebony has also dallied with another punk icon, Ari Up of the Slits. "I was invited to play an all-woman festival in France - I was the only unsigned act, which was great, and the Slits were playing as well." Ebony played with the band and hung out with her childhood hero. "We got on like absolute magic," she grins, "which was amazing."
Across the Atlantic, Clare Muldaur has been fronting Clare &amp; the Reasons, a Brooklyn-based group, for the past two years. The seven-piece band's roots are firmly entrenched in the prestigious Berklee College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts, where Muldaur studied. The college counts traditional country singer Gillian Welch and jazz artist Diana Krall among its alumni, and Muldaur notes that people "either love it or hate it. I loved it. It's like being in a weird, incestuous music bubble that you can't get out of. I was flipped out on a daily basis by the talent of people around me." While studying jazz composition and arrangement - "I didn't do too much in the vocal department because I felt like I didn't want to lose my sound" - Muldaur met her future husband, Olivier Manchon, who plays in the Reasons. The band specialises in well-structured, grown-up lounge music, combined with Muldaur's lunging soprano, and lyrics that tell the stories of the characters she creates for each song. "You can go wherever you want to go if you create characters," she says. "You don't have to limit it to your own experience."
One such song that appears on the band's debut record, The Movie, is Cook for You; a romantic ballad about a woman cooking and talking to her lover. "Later in the song you realise that he's actually dead. It's a character that's going through a delusional period of not accepting that somebody's gone - but I've never been through that," says Muldaur. Inspiration-wise, Muldaur owes a huge debt to blues singer Bessie Smith, whose music she first heard at the age of eight, after her father gave her a tape of Smith's music. "It changed my life. I was a barn-rat; a major horse competitor, so I would work in the barn all day and clean the horses and muck out listening to Smith on headphones, which is probably a kind of weird thing to do. I just remember feeling that it was the most powerful music I'd heard."
In a less serious vein are the Duloks, a self-confessed joke band based in London. "If you come to our show and don't laugh," says the band's singer, Mira, "you've got no soul." The Duloks' live shows are becoming semi-legendary, down to Mira's habit of heckling, flirting and laughing with the crowd, occasionally pulling out the leads to her band members' equipment so she can carry on wisecracking. The group's insatiable fondness for fancy dress has also attracted attention. The band was formed at a birthday bash for their Canadian drummer, Mar, and the party had a 1980s jocks v nerds theme - the band's default uniform is therefore short shorts, tennis headbands and knee socks, but their gigs have seen them plough through a whole range of absurd subjects.
"We've done army, nautical - that was in Brighton, because it's by the sea, and in Bath, because it's, like, a bath - and we were mums for Mother's Day," says Mar. The launch party for their limited edition single, (I'm Gonna Follow Your) Star Trail, however, was possibly the most impressive so far, and saw the band kitted out as the cast of Fawlty Towers. The trio, who are named after the enemies of the Ewoks in Star Wars, have a no-guitar policy and make lo-fi digital-rock about everything from pescetarianism (Bad Vegetarian) and becoming members of the Rolling Stones (Help! I'm Turning Into Mick Jagger). They also have a more sentimental side. "Mira likes to write songs about boys," says keyboardist Mina disdainfully, "they're the conceptual songs with loads of metaphor. If you looked at the lyrics, you wouldn't know what she was writing about." Mina is a college student in her late teens, and the latest addition to the band, recruited while working with Mira in a cosmetics shop, Lush. They are a shambolic act, confesses Mina, but, she reasons, "It's like if your room is untidy - YOU know where everything is but your mother's like, 'What is going on?'"
Lou Hayter has already enjoyed musical success over the past year as keyboardist with London-based electro poppers and Mercury Music award nominees, New Young Pony Club. "It's great that the industry is becoming more balanced," says Hayter of the past year's shift toward women, adding that the female artists who have come to the fore all seem "pro-active and smart". Hayter is currently working on a solo project, The New Sins, which she began before joining New Young Pony Club in 2005, but has only recently had the time to return to. The New Sins' debut single, It Doesn't Work Like That, is a catchy, upbeat dance track that Hayter describes as unashamedly pop. "I want the New Sins to be accessible but have substance and longevity. Andrew Hale, who I work with, says it harks back to the days of pop music when 'pop' wasn't a dirty word. I'd like it to have the sensibilities of bands like Talk Talk and Bananarama."
Hayter's tip for great things next year is East London's Cock 'n' Bull Kid - a 21-year-old Morrissey fan whose slinky cover-version of Talking Heads' Psycho Killer is currently making waves. Brixton group, the Real Heat - a glam trio who fuse early-Nineties rave sounds with the edgy girl-group stylings of bands such as the Sugababes - are also favourites of both Hayter and Krissi Murison. Murison is a fan of Effi Briest, a New York seven-piece named after Theodor Fontane's 19th-century novel, though she can't imagine them "becoming much more than a cult concern," as "they sound like 'the Slits go pagan-goth'"; she also thinks a lot of Santogold, a New York performer, aka Santi White, a former reggae punk musician who now makes dubby, disco-inspired dance-hall music of the same calibre as her friend, MIA.
It's not just in America and the UK that fresh new female acts are raising the benchmark. Those Dancing Days are a teen five-piece from Sweden, who make lush almost-giddy tunes that give knowing nods to everything from Northern soul to early-Nineties girl punk, underpinned by 17-year-old singer, Linnea Jonsson's, weighty, soul-drenched vocals.
Back in Great Britain, Peggy Sue and the Pirates have just finished supporting Kate Nash on her sold out UK tour, having previously played alongside Gossip, Joan As Police Woman, and the half-female Blood Red Shoes. The folky, Brighton-based duo, make acoustic tunes layered with harmonies and with an edgy punk sensibility that sees them skipping between howls and shrieks and delicate bluesy croons. Gothic female four piece Ipso Facto are also stalking the scene, with their slick mod-meets-Victoriana style, brandishing pared down, eerie new wave tunes to match.
And with all this going on, it's hardly surprising when the sitar-toting Bishi notes that "most of the interesting music in the world is created by women at the moment". Frankly, who could argue?

