Once upon a dime..

NEW YORK FAIRYTALE IS PUREMAGIC
ENCHANTED *****
PLOT: A prince, princess and wicked queen are transported from a classic Disney fairytale into the middle of modern-day New York-with catastrophic results.
IMAGINE this. For years you live a cartoonish, unreal existence where your every whim is catered for and smiling attendants constantly reassure you you're all sweetness and charm.
Then suddenly you're plunged unpleasantly into the filth and bustle of modern day America, where most people reckon you're nothing more than a pop-eyed, simpering goon with wild delusions of your own self-importance.
Sounds like a story that would make for great viewing-but then that Victoria Beckham doc didn't turn out too well, did it?
Thankfully, Enchanted's a billion times better.
Plot
It's the story of Giselle (Amy Adams), a fair maiden from the bright, beautiful and strictly two-dimensional animated world of Andalasia.
She falls for the warbling Prince Edward (James Marsden), who instantly whisks her off to his palace for a wedding-much to the disgust of the evil Queen Narissa (Susan Sarandon).
Narissa cooks up a plot to get rid of Giselle once and for all, by transporting her to present-day New York City-at which point the film leaps from cartoon into spangly live action.
Giselle bumps into single dad and divorce lawyer Robert Philip (Patrick Dempsey), who does his best to look after her as Edward, the queen's manservant Nathaniel (Timothy Spall), and finally the Queen herself all emerge in NYC for a classic fairytale showdown.
It's rare to see a Christmas film where every member of the cast without exception delivers like Santa after a year off, but Enchanted is that film.
Everyone's superb, from Timothy Spall (a man who looks more like a cartoon in the live action sequences than the animated ones) to Amy Adams, whose perfect performance boots her straight into the Hollywood stratosphere.
And there's genuinely something for everyone.
Kids, and particularly girls, will adore the lot.
There are excellent songs penned by Disney stalwart Alan Menken, pin-sharp dialogue and an astonishing degree of visual flair in everything from Giselle's outfits to the vaguely irritating chipmunk called, inevitably, Pip.
Mums and teenagers will love spotting the references to Disney classics from yesteryear.
There are cameos from the actresses who played Ariel in The Little Mermaid, Belle in Beauty And The Beast, and Pocahontas. Turns out they all have excellent faces for cartoon voiceover work.
Not to mention a hilarious Whistle While You Work sequence that swaps Snow White's magical animal helpers for grimy pigeons and cockroaches.
And for the dads? Well, Amy Adams's kooky, sexy charm occasionally brings the film stimulatingly close to There's Something About Snow White territory.
Nothing remotely unsuitable for the young 'uns, of course. But there are a couple of mildly racy moments you would never have got in the old Disney films from the likes of Angela Lansbury. Thank feck.
Like the bit when Giselle emerges from the shower, and Robert cops a full frontal glimpse of her bedknobs and broomstick.
Her modesty's preserved for the audience by two birds carrying a towel.
Great tits, they looked like.
(But-all together now-it's hard to tell with those ruddy birds in the way.) Enchanted's so brilliant because it pulls off the impossible trick of taking an ironic jab at the old Disney flicks without losing a single sparkly ounce of magic itself.
Cheer
It has its cake and eats it in a way that even the mighty Shrek never quite managed.
If you were being really picky, you could complain that the animation isn't quite up to scratch with Disney's best (which it isn't) or that Susan Sarandon isn't in it for nearly long enough (which she's not).
But these are quibbling, fiddly little complaints and they won't spoil for a second your enjoyment of what's undoubtedly the best Christmas movie this year so far.
You'll laugh, you'll cheer, you'll shed a tear-and you'll be whistling those songs while you work well into the New Year.

Gig of the week

DURAN DURAN Lyceum, London
THE Lyceum is the West End theatre which usually hosts The Lion King. But a one-off gig from these 80s veterans could have been like a panto.
Inviting a load of Z-listers like Tara Palmer-Tomkinson and Brendan Cole to pose on a red carpet outside (to tie in with new album title Red Carpet Massacre) doesn't help. It's the fans who are in for a massacre, as they start by playing the album, in full. But, at £ 75 a ticket, only hardcore Durannies are in.
The album is surprisingly good R&amp;B. Simon LeBon may overfill his black jacket, but the likes of Skin Divers give Justin Timberlake a run for money. Then it's a barmy 20-minute take-off of synth legends Kraftwerk.
Finally, after 90 minutes, they end with an hour of hits: Rio, Planet Earth, Girls On Film-and if there's a more '80s moment than Le Bon dancing to the sax solo in The Reflex, Channel 4 would have to commission an I Love The 80s programme about it!

Bee's a humstinger!

PLOT: Barry B Benson, an adventurous bee, leaves his hive to find what happens to honey.
WHERE do you go after pulling in $1million an episode in the world's most popular sitcom for nine years?
If you're Jerry Seinfeld, no further than the sofa apparently.
Cos since the last episode of Seinfeld 10 years ago he's had the work schedule of Dean Gaffney (although having the bank balance of JK Rowling probably helped a bit).
Now he's back as a cartoon bee in this Dreamworks animation written largely by him.
It's the story of Barry B Benson, a bee who decides there's more to life than his 9-to-5 in the hive. So he heads out into the wide world where he learns where all the honey goes to. He also falls in love with Vanessa Bloome (perfectly played by Renee Zellweger), a New York florist who takes the bee-human relationship worryingly in her stride.
Although there's an adventure story of sorts, the film's largely about Seinfeld the bee acting like Seinfeld the comic.
A buzzman's holiday, if you like.
At first, especially when compared to the breathtaking Ratatouille, it looks about as robust as Winehouse on a 5am stroll.
The chunky, simplistic animation is nowhere near as artful as Disney Pixar's rodent tour de force and the lukewarm opening doesn't bode well. But what Bee Movie lacks in visual finesse, emotional heft and a decent intro, it more than makes up for it with a shedload of laughs.
Easily the most hilarious film of the year, this. Breathtakingly, astonishingly funny. 'Laugh until the end credits stop rolling' funny. And the never-ending bee puns are great too.
Well, a lot better than "buzzman's holiday" anyway.

CD's of the week

SINGLE:JACK PENATE-Have I Been A Fool? Along with Jamie T, Penate was tipped to be the male answer to Lily Allen. He hasn't had the same success, and this is more of a summer singalong than a Christmas classic. But it's a cute bop, perfect to bounce along to in order to work off the mince pies.
A fair bit like The Housemartins' 1980s hit Happy Hour, which is no bad thing.****
ALBUM: JONNY GREEN-WOOD-There Will Be Blood. He's the guitarist from Radiohead, and, during breaks from recording their new album, he composed this soundtrack for an eco-thriller starring Daniel Day-Lewis.
You'd never guess this was by one of Radiohead as, helped by the BBC Concert Orchestra, Greenwood makes a tense and moody film score.
Hollywood will be most impressed.***

Hot tickets

THE GOLDEN COMPASS Fantasy CERT: PG ****
LYRA Belacqua is a young orphan who embarks on a quest to rescue her kidnapped friend Roger from the fiendish experiments of an evil organisation. Adaptation of Philip Pullman's Northern Lights book.
THE KILLING OF JOHN LENNON Biopic CERT: 15 ****
CHILLING docudrama about John Lennon's killer Mark Chapman (played brilliantly by Jonas Ball) which gives an incredible insight into the mind of a murderer and the 1980 assassination.
SOUTHLAND TALES Sci-fi CERT: 15 ***
A NUCLEAR attack takes place in the US after which an evil power firm, an uprising by LA residents and a breach in the space-time continuum cause world chaos. Stars Sarah Michelle Gellar.

Mr Magorium's wonder emporium

PLOT: Mr Magorium tries to find an heir who will take over his magical toy shop.
THIS film promises you'll be overawed with wonder. And, sweet flippin' mercy, have they got that one right.
Wonder just how brain-dissolvingly dull a children's film can be? Watch this and find out.
Cos this is a movie in which (no joke) a scene where two people bounce on a bed is sold as the action-packed, side-splittingly hilarious high point.
Mr Magorium (Dustin Hoffman) is the eccentric, purple-suit-wearing, about-to-pop-his-clogs-and-needs -a-protege owner of a magical chocolate factory.
Sorry, toy shop. And a sorrier sight than Hoffman's turgid turn as this chump I've yet to behold.
Waddling with his dignity round his ankles and speaking in a 'golly gorsh' drawl that suggests massive brain damage, Magorium's the most monumentally unlikeable kids' film character in recent memory.
Yawning
Because he's a lazy Willy Wonka rip-off, yes. But mainly because he's boring.
There's that bed-jumping scene, and another bit where he 'mischievously' sets all the clocks in a clock shop to the same time.
Shriek! Who needs fighting polar bears, talking bees and fairytale princesses when you've got that to keep the children entertained this Christmas?
Kids in the preview screening I went to were yawning so widely they looked like boa constrictors about to swallow a goat.
So may I suggest for a sequel, Mr Magiarism's Lawsuit for Plagiarism. Which would be based on a true story, if someone from Roald Dahl's estate ever sees this.

Win a copy of Simpsons hit movie

THE entire planet breathed a sigh of relief this summer when The Simpsons Movie actually managed to live up to the brilliance of the TV series.
The story's something to do with saving Springfield from destruction, but that's much less important than the top-notch gags-which come thick and fast.
DVD extras aren't particularly inventive, but there's plenty to be getting on with, including a hilarious appearance from Homer on The Tonight Show and two commentary tracks.
I'VE got 15 copies of this week's DVD of the week, The Simpsons Movie, to give away. Just answer the following question:
In probably the most overquoted film gag of the decade, what did Homer nickname his pet pig?
A. Spider-pig B. Bat-ham C. Francis Bacon Send your answers to movies@notw.co.uk by next Saturday. First 15 names out of the metaphorical hat win a copy.

Mum to forget

I'M A CELEBRITY-COM-ING OUT. Great unseen footage of Katie Hopkins (below) outlining her priorities minutes after being evicted.
"I'm looking forward to seeing my man, a hot shower, a big white towel, a hot coffee, treacle sponge with clotted cream, spotted dick with custard, cheese, real bread and some butter. Erm, and I'm looking forward to speaking to my daughters."
That's Katie Hopkins, folks. Coming soon to a Mum Of The Year contest near you.
THE big CORRIE question: Has Jim McDonald changed since we last saw him? Answer? No. He's still wearing the same denim mismatch he always did. So he is.
RANDOM fact from BBC1's dreary docu MONARCHY: There are 25,000 bottles of wine in the Buck House cellars.
Aye, until Harry gets hold of the key.


Mr Magorium

AT 243 years old and with jokes at least twice that age, Edward Magorium may be the owner of the world's most exciting toy shop, but he's about half as exciting as the average Dixons staffer. Described as an 'avid shoe wearer' in the credits to Mr Magorium's Wonder Emporium, it's about the most interesting thing he does in the entire film. What a turkey.

