Bear row 'distracts world from Darfur'

THE pardon this week of the British teacher Gillian Gibbons, jailed in Sudan for blasphemy because her class had named a teddy bear Muhammad, has been welcomed by religious leaders in Britain. 
The President of Sudan, Omar al-Bashir, issued the pardon to the 54-year-old after he was visited by two Muslim peers from Britain. He had been under strong international pressure to intervene. 
The Archbishop of Canterbury, speaking from Singapore on Monday, said the episode was “a most unhappy overreaction, which has distressed people of all faiths, and has caused such suffering to someone manifestly dedicated to the welfare of Sudan and its people”. 
The Archbishop of York, Dr Sentamu, said on Monday that sense had prevailed. Mrs Gibbons had been “the victim of misunderstanding and muddled thinking”. 
“I am hopeful that, for ourselves, if we have strangers in our midst, we will do better and treat those different from us with the care, understanding, and loving kindness that Gillian displayed to the children she taught. 
“I also hope that the same media focus and energy given to Gillian's case may now be directed to those helping people in Darfur, and pressure may be applied upon the president to ensure his own people are released from their suffering.” 
The Muslim Council of Britain also welcomed the decision. “There was clearly no intention on the part of the teacher to deliberately insult the Islamic faith,” said its Secretary General, Dr Muhammad Abdul Bari, on Tuesday. 
Mrs Gibbons, who is now jobless, arrived back in Britain on Tuesday, after two British Muslim peers, Baroness Warsi and Lord Ahmed, met Khartoum officials on Sunday. 
On her return, she told reporters that she was in shock after her ordeal, although she had been treated well in custody. “I am just an ordinary primary-school teacher. I am very sorry to leave Sudan. I had a fabulous time. It's a beautiful place, and I had a chance to see some of the countryside. The Sudanese people I found to be extremely kind, and, until this happened, I only had a good experience.” 
The headmaster of her school in Sudan, Robert Boulos, told Reuters news agency that everyone was very happy in the school at her release. 
Judith Melby, the International Editor at Christian Aid, said the affair had been a distraction from the worsening crisis in Darfur. “We are getting down to crunch time: there is less and less space for humanitarian development.” The affair had played into the hands of the Sudanese president, who had been obstructing the joint African Union/United Nations peace-keeping force, which had been intended to replace the African Union force. 
“This is looking more and more like a distant prospect because of the obstacles being put in the way by the Sudanese government,” she said.

Bishop joins calls for shorter shopping hours at Christmas

THE Bishop of Bath &amp; Wells, the Rt Revd Peter Price, is among those calling for shorter shopping hours over Christmas. He said this week that he found it depressing that shops would open on 26 December.
“I think of the shop workers, who have struggled through the frantic preparations of other people's Christmas, and who arrive at their own Christmas Day weary and unable to relax and enjoy the festival because they have to be back at work the next day.” 
The Keep Sunday Special Campaign also called for more time for families at Christmas. Its public-affairs director, Martyn Eden, said on Tuesday: “Research by the Department of Education in 2005 showed that there was a direct correlation with kid's performance in school and how much they saw their parents. Then there is also the health aspect that for some shopworkers their only day off might be Christmas Day.” 
  Rosemary Kempsell, worldwide president of the Mothers' Union, said on Wednesday: “Space for families to grow together is really important. We . . . speak out on issues such as extended shopping hours on what are, traditionally, family holiday days, and against the commercialisation of childhood.” 
The Bishop of Southwell &amp; Nottingham, the Rt Revd George Cassidy, said last month in the House of Lords that the nation, marriage, family life, and the NHS would all benefit if everyone stopped work for a day a week. 
Nativity plays defended
After a Daily Telegraph survey suggested that only one in five primary schools was planning a traditional nativity play, Mary Hawes, the C of E's National Children's Adviser, said on Wednesday: “Because of the diversity of views within each faith, it is not surprising that there are differing attitudes to nativity plays and Christmas celebrations. . . However, this should not deter schools, particularly church schools, from staging these much-loved plays with confidence and creativity, safe in the knowledge that most people of all faiths and none enjoy them as much as Christians do.” 
Jon Reynolds, the St Albans diocesan director of education, said: “Church schools are not among those who have dropped nativity plays. Many are putting on not just nativity plays, but also Advent and Christmas assemblies, carol services, and church services.” These, he said, were appreciated by people of different faiths. 
A St Albans diocesan spokesman said: “The BBC will show a dramatised version of the Easter story next year, and does not think this offends anyone; so what reasons are there for any school to drop their nativity play?”

BBC's Passion to be 'truthful'

THE PASSION of Jesus will be told in a series of dramatic soap-opera-style programmes to be broadcast on BBC1 during Holy Week next year, it was announced on Tuesday. The story will be presented in a “truthful and simple way”.
The Passion series has been written by Frank Deasy, who won an Emmy for his final instalment of Prime Suspect. Joseph Mawle, who played a deaf man in the BBC drama Soundproof, plays Jesus, and James Nesbitt is Pilate.

The drama series, which cost £4 million and was shot in Morocco, views the last days of Jesus's earthly ministry from three perspectives: Caiaphas, Pilate, and the disciples. It is a co-production with HBO, the American company behind The Sopranos, and will also be shown in the United States. 
Andrew Graystone, the director of the Churches' Media Council, who has seen extracts of the drama, said that Christians should welcome it. “This is a straightforward account of the last few days of the life of Jesus, told with honesty and passion.” 
The BBC is to mark Christmas this year with a nativity play, to be performed live and in public on the streets of Liverpool. Mary and Joseph appear as asylum-seekers reporting to a passport office. 
The play, to be broadcast live on BBC3 on 16 December, has a 300-strong cast, and features and the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra and the music of the Beatles.

Restore trust, say churchmen, as climate talks open

CHURCHES and aid agencies have renewed their lobbying as nearly 200 nations' representatives meet in Bali until 14 December for the Intergovernmental Conference on Climate Change. 
It opened on Monday amid fears that developing countries will pay the price of any new treaty aimed at cutting carbon-dioxide emissions. 
The need for an “equitable and just” settlement was asserted in a letter sent last Friday to the President of the European Union by the Archbishop of Canterbury; the Archbishop of Uppsala, Sweden, the Most Revd Anders Wejryd; and the chairman of the Evangelical Church in Germany, Bishop Dr Wolfgang Huber. 
They said that trust had to be restored between North and South after so many broken promises, and that governments needed to look beyond national interests to provide for “the global common good”. 
“Informed by the prevailing scientific evidence, all countries should commit to reduce collectively global emissions by at least 80 per cent by 2050.” 
In their view, “developed countries need to reduce their collective emissions by between 30 per cent and 40 per cent by 2020. Rapidly industrialising countries should be encouraged to commit to reduce their energy intensity by 30 per cent by 2020 (an average of 4 per cent per year) and agree to emissions targets thereafter.” 
These reductions would force heavily industrialised nations to make technological developments needed for carbon reduction. Those could be passed on to developing countries to enable them to continue growing while keeping to the new targets. Poor countries needed better access to mitigation funds to offset the immediate impact of climate change. 
Marchers in the London Campaign against Climate Change rally tomorrow have been invited to attend an ecumenical service in St Matthew's, Westminster, at 11 a.m. It is organised by the Christian Ecology Link, Churches Together in Britain, and the Churches' climate change group, Operation Noah. 
The march will end outside the American Embassy. 
In the House of Lords, the Bishop of London, the Rt Revd Richard Chartres, said on Monday the C of E would “urgently review” the option to move to an 80-per-cent target for carbon reduction. It would consider doing more to use renewable sources of energy. “Already we have put solar panels on all sorts of church roofs.” 
The Church of Scotland said this week that it had added its 1.5 million members to the “Stop Climate Chaos” campaign. 

Pope finds hope in eternal life, not human progress

HOPE does not lie in human progress, but in faith in Christ and in the justice of his Last Judgement, the Pope declares in his new encyclical, Spe Salvi, published last Friday. 
“If technical progress is not matched by corresponding progress in man's ethical formation, in man's inner growth . . . then it is not progress at all, but a threat for man and for the world.” 
The Pope refers to the “classical form” of the baptism service, in which the priest asks the parents: “What do you ask of the Church?” The answer given is “Faith.” Then he asks: “What does faith give you?” The answer given is “Eternal life.” 
“Perhaps many people reject faith today simply because they do not find the prospect of eternal life attractive,” the Pope comments. “What they desire is not eternal life at all, but this present life, for which faith in eternal life seems something of an impediment.” 
But the word “eternal” should not frighten them, he writes. “Eternity is not an unending succession of days in the calendar, but something more like the supreme moment of satisfaction, in which totality embraces us and we embrace totality.” 
The Pope traces the evolution of the idea of hope from the New Testament to the modern day, criticising a line of thought which he traces through Francis Bacon and Kant to Marx, whose “fundamental error” was to show how to overthrow the existing order, but not to say how matters should proceed thereafter. 
Because of free will, the world's moral well-being cannot be guaranteed through structures alone, the Pope writes. Incremental progress is possible only in the material, not the moral, sphere. “Freedom must be constantly won over for the cause of good.” 
It is not science, but love, that redeems humankind. “Anyone who does not know God, even though he may entertain all kinds of hopes, is ultimately without hope.” But Christian hope is social in character, not only individual. 
The settings for learning hope, the Pope writes, are prayer; action and suffering; and judgement. These subjects are discussed at length. 
Christian artists in the past had depicted the Last Judgement in churches so that the horror concealed the “splendour of hope”. But in the modern era, the idea of the Last Judgement has faded into the background, the Pope writes. This has led to disbelief in God; for how can God be good “with responsibility for such a world”? 
But the Pope argues: “If in the face of this world's suffering, protest against God is understandable, the claim that humanity can and must do what no God actually does or is able to do is presumptuous and intrinsically false.” 

