
Consenting Adults!
2 Kings 2:1–15 [Last Sunday after Epiphany]
Reverend Canon Marilyn McCord Adams
Christ Church, Oxford


Give me a double portion of your Spirit!
Twenty-five years ago, my father-in-law was
dying of cancer. For me, he was one of those
pillars of faith, a person for whom the reality
of God was so clear, God's claim to shape who we
are and what we do, so unequivocal, that his life was
a shining testimony. After youthful flirtation with
an acting career, despite his enormous admiration
for successful business leaders whose ranks he
could easily have joined, he put his hand to the
plow of Presbyterian ministry and never looked
back. After building three urban churches into
thriving institutions, he took a 'soft' retirement to
teach church administration and serve as dean of
Princeton Theological Seminary. He embodied what
I sensed were the deepest truths of the universe.
'Who will people “catch” Christianity from now
that he is dying?' I asked the rector of the parish I
was attending. With a twinkle in his eye and a tone
of voice that sounded both demand and invitation,
he replied: 'Look in the mirror!'
Give me a double portion of your Spirit!
Today's Hebrew bible story is about adult
spirituality, about standing up into the full stature
of who we are called to be in Christ. Elisha and
the other sons of prophets were apprentices. They
had begun to exercise prophetic gifts; they all had
foreknowledge of Elijah's immanent departure. But
they were still sons of prophets. They were counting
on someone else to really do it, some father prophet
to be really in charge.
They all knew the time had come for rites of
passage. Elijah was about to be whirlwinded up into
retirement by horses and chariots of fire. Elijah knew,
GOD had chosen Elisha to be his successor. The call
of God is irrevocable, but answering, entering into it,
is at least partly up to us. For better and worse, for
most of us, there is not just one hour of decision, but
many in succession. A double portion of Holy Spirit
is a hard thing. And God is courteous. You really
have to want it to inherit the eldest son's share!
For Elisha, there was a series of tests. He was
out in the field, plowing the family farm with eight
yokes of oxen. Elijah came and found him, passing
by, threw his mantle over him. Immediately grasping
the ritual meaning, Elisha responded with 'yes, but
. . .' and bargained for a concession: 'Let me first
say “goodbye” to my parents. Then I will follow
you.' Elijah lets him dangle, strings him out in the
tension of taking responsibility for the decision.
Elisha resolves, celebrates this first rite of passage
by sacrificing the plow oxen, and becomes a son of
the prophet.
In today's story, the 'stick-with-it' test is repeated
the proverbial three times: 'Tarry here, for the Lord
has called me to Bethel . . . to Jericho . . . to Jordan!'
'As the Lord lives, as you yourself live, I will not leave
you!' Elisha reaffirms his vow to follow with an oath.
Other sons of prophets meet them at Jericho, also
follow but at a distance to the banks of the Jordan.
They are now in what anthropologists call a 'liminal'
situation: to cross over risks another rite of passage,
consents to the possibility of reconfigured identity, in
Christian terms, of dying and rising to new life.
Like Moses at the Reed Sea, like Joshua entering
the Promised Land, Elijah rolls up his mantle and
parts the waters. Elijah and Elisha walk on dry
ground to the other side. Only now does Elijah
'pop' the question: 'What do you want? Do you
really want it?' Elisha answers: 'Give me a double
portion of your Spirit!' In the bible as in life and
myth and fairy tales, the real prize is hard to get.
Elisha's wish will be granted conditional upon one
further test. Elisha has to be vigilant: 'If you see me
as I am being taken from you, it shall be so for you;
otherwise, not.'

Elisha keeps his eyes open, watches fiery horsemen
and chariots of Israel come to take Elijah away.
Elisha picks up the mantle, strikes the Jordan with
it, claims his commission: 'Where is the Lord, the
God of Elijah?' The others who did not cross over
see and confirm, 'The Spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha.'
Still sons, they bow before Elisha now. Elisha strides
into a ministry studded with signs and wonders
– cleansing lepers, raising the dead, multiplying
barley loaves, violating Archimedes' principle
– later to become messianic signs. The others who
did not cross over begin to doubt the gifts they had,
wonder, insist on searching to see whether Elijah
has not really ascended into heaven but only been
Spirit-blown into the next canyon.
'Give me a double portion of your Spirit!' 'Do we
really want it?'
Surely there seem to be strong reasons not to
want it. Even Elijah says, a double portion of Holy
Spirit is a hard thing. Re-read 1 Kings and realize,
he should know! The double portion of Holy Spirit
is uprooting, in many ways alienating. We can make
God's claim one among others of our interests
and commitments, even one we engage repeatedly
(many Sundays a month, many days a week) and
seriously, and still keep our horizontal ambitions
and conventional ways of living in place. But if we
call down the double portion, if – invited – we keep
crossing to that other side of Jordan, if we keep our
eyes open, we will keep bumping into the Holy, won't
be able to deny that the Reality and Goodness of God
is utterly outclassing. We won't be able to refuse Its
demand to define who we are and what we ought
to be.
Notice: the issue is not that trafficking with the
Spirit forces career changes. At one level, bishop,
priest, and deacon are as much conventional roles
as plumber, electrician, business CEO, school
teacher, or Oxford don. Trafficking with the Spirit
is uprooting and alienating because it devalues the
claim of any and all social roles to have the last
word on who we are and what life should mean.
Unless we become hermits, we will all occupy some
conventional cubby holes or others. But when Spirittraffickers
take these places, it's like pouring new
wine into old skins, they split, or at least stretch and
strain. If we call down the double portion, we will be
in the world but not of it; our way of inhabiting our
social positions will be 'off', in many and various
ways seem to caricature what others expect. Like the
Gospel twelve, other people will find this confusing,
bewildering. Like Synoptic religious leaders, some
will feel insulted and threatened by it. To have our
whole way of being called into question is a very
scary thing.
'Give me a double portion of your Spirit!' 'Do we
really want it?'
The Bible is full of reasons why we should.
Maturity wins the advantage of stability that is
not blown about by every wind of controversy.
Not that adulthood brings instant clarity about
the rights and wrongs of every social and political
crisis, about where God is leading the Church at
this or that moment of her life! The New Testament,
Church history records, this was not the apostles'
experience, nor that of our mother–father forebears
in the faith. Rather, what maturity does is
to ground us in Christ, that Rock against which
all things must be tested, proved or broken. When
upheavals come, our fundamental norms will not
come unstuck. We will not find ourselves suddenly
wondering whether human life is so sacred after
all, whether lies are so pernicious or stealing from
corporations so unjustifiable, or whether God really
loves us.
Moreover, maturity puts us in a position to
speak the truth in love. For daily traffic with the
outclassing Reality of God robs cultural storms of
their power to intimidate, proves that the situation
is not really desperate. It fosters humility to admit
that both the past social systems and our tinkeringto-
revolutionary improvements are temporary and
imperfect approximations to God's Reign. Letting
the Holy barge Its way into the center of our lives
also convinces us of Divine Power to make good on
our mistakes, through Christ to make us all blessings
to one another on the whole and in the end.
'Give me a double portion of your Spirit!' 'Do we
really want it?'
We have everything to lose, AND we are going to
lose it anyway. Certainly, for us, death will bring this
present order to an end. Give me a double portion
of your Spirit! 'Do we really want it?' We have
everything to gain – integrity, our own true selves,
who we really are in Christ, healthy functioning as
members of Christ's Body. Put otherwise, God defines
what's really REAL, what's really worthwhile. We are
going to have to adjust to God's Reality sooner or
later. Lent is upon us. Why not call down the double
portion and get started in advance?

BOOK OF THE MONTH
Faithful Reason

There are some books which cannot be read in
the wrong way (for their authors will that it
should be so and take measures accordingly),
and others again which might very well be read in the
wrong way (because of their author's indifference),
and a third group which must be read in the wrong
way (for that is what their author intends, as
constituting the only possibility that the book might
actually be read in the right way after all). The
Gospels come to mind as an example of the third
kind, since the birth of Christ can only properly be
read in the light of the end of time, concerning which
the innocent reader does not as yet know. Thomas
Aquinas' Summa Theologiae, likewise, seems to offer
itself to misreading, since the modern reader at least
finds it difficult to suppose that the opening sections
on the Five Ways represent a point of arrival rather
than one of departure.
Denys Turner's Faith, Reason and the Existence
of God is possibly also the kind of book that first
must be read in the wrong way if the reader is to
undergo the kind of discursive journeying which
alone will open up the possibility of a correct
reading. More simply stated, the reader who begins
at the beginning (as most readers do) will quickly find
herself embroiled in all kinds of specialist debates.
These include 'clarifications' in questions to do with
negative theology, natural theology and atheism. She
will find herself at the centre of a debate on Zwingli's
account of the Eucharist, an extended discussion of
the semantics of both poetry and music, and a highly
perceptive critique of both Nietzsche and Derrida's
deconstructive semantic philosophy. As the book
progresses, or deepens, she will then find herself
confronted by detailed analyses of texts by Scotus
and Thomas on univocity and analogy and the
possibility of the inference of God's existence from our experience of the world. The reader may well
conclude that the case for a far-reaching congruence
between issues in postmodern thinking to do with
reason and otherness, and certain late medieval
positions, is well made. She may also feel that there is
sound evidence here that some distinguished modern
thinkers have subjected medieval texts to superficial
and ultimately destructive readings (destructive
with respect to the integrity of the texts to hand)
as expositions of their own decisively contemporary
and programmatic theologies.
On the other hand, any reader who begins with
the end of Faith, Reason and the Existence of God
will discover there a succinct statement of a powerful
and unitive theological vision which runs throughout
the many complex and difficult arguments of the
earlier chapters. It is an argument that concerns
the nature of thought itself, and which can best be
understood as a plea for the view that the everyday
reality of our embodied existence is the primary and
non-negotiable place in which God comes to meet us.


TIMES

