Remarks on the Catholic Conscience and Public Life 
Thomas D'Andrea - Wolfson College, Cambridge
"[Many] cases of 'social' sin are the result of the accumulation and concentration of many personal sins. . . . It is a case of the very personal sins of those who cause or support evil or who exploit it; of those who are in a position to avoid, eliminate or at least limit social evils but who fail to do so out of laziness, fear, or the conspiracy of silence, through secret complicity or indifference; or, of those who take refuge in the supposed impossibility of changing the world, and also of those who sidestep the effort and sacrifice required, producing specious reasons of a higher order" (Pope John Paul II, On Reconciliation and Penance, para. 16). 
"Scandal is anything said, done, or omitted which leads another to commit sin" (St. Pius X, Catechism of Christian Doctrine, 417) 
Since it is Catholicism that we are primarily concerned with here, it might be appropriate to begin with a number of background considerations. I take it that among Catholics the following set of clustered propositions can be assumed true (since these propositions express fairly rudimentary tenets of the Catholic faith, I will for the most part forego citing or quoting the scriptural passages and authoritative church documents which warrant them). I take it also that there is nothing in these propositions that any acceptance-worthy theory of democratic politics would have political grounds upon which to object. 
1. God founded the Catholic Church and can alone as principal cause call individuals to membership in it and sustain them in that membership; the Church is a strictly voluntary society, but a divine society not a human society. God has proprietary rights over the Church, included in which is a right to establish how it shall be governed, who shall govern it, and what conditions must be met for membership in it. God, thankfully and in His infinite wisdom, saw fit to make the Church's regime of government neither democratic nor in any straightforward sense meritocratic, but hierarchical and charismatic. God governs the Church through the Apostles and their descendants in an un-broken line of succession and provides them with grace, special divine assistance, to act on His behalf. 
2. The Catholic faith which we share has come to us as an unmerited divine gift by the work of the Holy Spirit. By this faith and aided by the Holy Spirit we make a free assent, a full submission of intellect and will, to God revealing. We can have more cognitive certitude about the deliverances of faith than we can about any of the products of our own reasoning and experience, since the former rely on the trustworthiness of God's own mind, the latter on our own highly fallible mind. 
3. The bishops of the Catholic Church have in virtue of their ordination as descendants of the Apostles the grace and the duty to instruct the faithful of their diocese or particular church concerning what God has revealed to us and what things are necessary for that revelation to be accepted wholly and preserved intact. The Pope assisted by the bishops and the papal curia has this same duty for the universal Church, He also has the duty to preserve unity in faith and morals between the particular churches, each of which is meant to instantiate the universal Church. God's revelation includes both doctrines to be believed, matters of faith, and actions to be performed, that is, mores ("morality" and matters of conduct in a broader sense). 
4. When we as faithful in Christ assent to the teachings of the magisterium of the Church--the Pope and those bishops in communion with him acting within the limits of their divinely established competence and authority--we are assenting not to any human authority but to God himself through these his chosen representatives: representatives who are in this capacity but instrument-servants of revealed truth, or shepherds acting prudentially for the good of their flock on behalf of the chief Shepherd. As the Catechism of the Catholic Church states, we do not believe in the Church, we believe the Church, but we "believe in God the Father the almighty . . . and in Jesus Christ his only Son," etc. (CCC, para. 750) 
5. These members of the hierarchy teach and govern in God's name. Through them, He prescribes what it is necessary to believe and to do to enter into full communion with Him through his Mystical Body the Church, and He identifies and proscribes what is incompatible with that communion. No priest or theologian belongs to the magisterium, but priests and theologians have a duty to assist the magisterium in its governance and teaching and humbly to submit to its lawful actions and pronouncements. 
6. God created the world, owns the world, governs the world, while endowing it with a relative autonomy. All non-rational creatures obey His laws spontaneously: human creatures have an innate intellectual capacity to grasp God's basic laws for their nature (the "natural moral law" or simply "the natural law"), to understand these laws' value, point, and purpose, and freely to submit to these laws in belief and action. Included among these naturally knowable divine precepts is a duty to work for the common human good, putting it ahead of personal interest. 
7. Abortion is not a mere unfortunate occurrence, like an unpleasant invasive procedure necessary to remove a cyst or a tumorous growth: it is a horrific crime against humanity. This is both knowable by natural reason and a matter of divine revelation witnessed to infallibly by the ordinary universal magisterium of the Church. There are no conceivable circumstances, including cases of rape or incest, which would make the direct and intentional taking of a child in the womb morally permissible, or the taking of any human life permissible--whether innocent or guilty, young or elderly and infirm--except in cases of self-defence. Human life from conception to death is therefore sacred, that is, subject to the sovereignty of God the Creator alone.
Thus a short list of some of the "things of God" as Catholics understand them. What now for some of the relevant things of Caesar-of any Caesar, that is, that we might regard as legitimate today? I take it that the following admittedly highly general propositions would be maintained by any credible version of democratic theory: 
1. Every citizen in a political order of suitable age, etc. has the right and the duty to vote according to the un-coerced dictates of their conscience both on given matters of legislation that will affect their lives as citizens and as to who shall represent them in government. In so voting, each citizen has the right to draw on a wide variety of background sources concerning what is best for the common good and for the persons that make up that political society. 
2. Every citizen, including those who are also authority figures within an organized religion, have the right to speak freely in the public square about matters of political concern (e.g. human rights and common dignity) and to attempt reasoned persuasion of other citizens, as long as in doing so they respect the basic norms of public safety and respect for persons in that political order.
So where exactly is the conflict today between the res Dei and the res Caesaris --assuming, as is overwhelmingly the case in the developed world today, that Caesar is democratically elected? Why all the fuss? Bishops, the Holy Father, the various Vatican congregations do their job, democratically elected politicians do theirs. Sometimes the civil and the ecclesiastical authorities agree on matters of law and public policy, sometimes they don't. Referenda are also held, the people speak, their voice, right or wrong, becomes law. The democratic process moves today this way and tomorrow that. As long as each authority respects its legitimate sphere there would seem to be ample space for fairly conducted reasoned exchange--and disagreement-precisely in the realm of mores, the realm, so to speak, of their overlapping jurisdiction--and little space for outright violent conflict or coercion. 
Of course, the past history of the relationship between the Church hierarchy and political authorities has often been highly conflictual and violent, almost invariably so when either the civil authority or the ecclesiastical authority has sought to act ultra vires and outside its legitimate respective competence and remit. There have been numerous cases of abuse of power and transgression of lawful authority on both sides. But the Church for her part has progressed quite a bit. No more do members of the hierarchy or clergy seek or claim any right of political rule (the error of clericalism): authoritative magisterial teaching now denies them this and specifies that while members of the clergy and those in religious life retain citizen's rights, direct political action is reserved to the laity (see, for instance, the Congregation for the Clergy, Directory for the Ministry and Life of Priests, 31 March 1994, para. 33). 
So why can't members of the hierarchy exercise their citizen's rights and speak out to all their fellow citizens against perceived moral, social, and political abuses? They can and they do, and a vivid recent case in point are those interventions of various U.S. Catholic bishops on the human rights of the unborn and the responsibilities of Catholic and of all candidates for political office toward the unborn. Other examples in the recent past abound-interventions by the bishops on the licitness of the death penalty, or on the economic rights of migrant workers, or the conditions state-sponsored coercive action must meet in order to be considered just. All of these fit a similar pattern of what should be a mutually acceptable form of interaction between those purporting to speak for God and those for Caesar; for purposes of brevity now, however, I will focus my remarks on ecclesiastical interventions on the question of abortion, but what applies here applies mutatis mutandis to other moral issues. 
To consider the matter schematically: suppose Bishop A, whose diocese is in a pluralistic political society, writes a pastoral letter to the faithful of his diocese condemning as a grave crime against humanity not only abortion on demand but abortion simpliciter. In this letter he urges those entrusted to his pastoral guidance and care to exercise their civic rights and responsibilities vis a vis the electoral and legislative processes and to seek by established, procedurally democratic means to outlaw abortion. He also advises those Catholics standing for elected office in his diocese that they must steadfastly aim to abolish laws permitting the crime of abortion, or, within the limit of the practical best, seek progressively to tighten the restrictions on abortion aimed at its eventual abolition. He notifies them that in failing to do so they will as a matter of soteriological fact be separating themselves from full communion with Christ and the Church for committing the mortal sin of formal cooperation in an intrinsic evil, and that they will be the subject, if they fail publicly to repent of this grave, persistent public sin, of ecclesiastical sanctions culminating, if necessary, in declared excommunication. 
Suppose Bishop A also writes an open letter to a secular newspaper, such as The New York Times, for instance, urging all his fellow citizens to defend the right to life of the unborn by outlawing abortion and by giving the abortion question first priority in their decision as to which candidate to vote into office. In this open letter, he quotes the words Blessed Mother Teresa of Calcutta addressed to President William Jefferson Clinton and Mrs. Clinton at a prayer breakfast organized by the then President in Washington a number of years ago-that no society which fails to protect its weakest and most innocent and defenceless, and which moreover sanctions a human or even a civil "right" to kill them, can call itself just. 
Now in either of these epistolary actions has Bishop A in any sense transgressed either, a) in exercising his ordained office within the Catholic Church as a descendant of the apostles and a shepherd of the flock, or, b) in his rights and duties as a citizen of a non-sectarian democratic polity? Consider two objections that he has: 

