REVIEW ARTICLES AND AUTHOR
RESPONSES
Solidarity and Difference: A Contemporary Reading of Paul's Ethics,
David G. Horrell, T&amp;T Clark, 2005 (ISBN: 0-567-04322-3), 339 pp., Paper
$49.95
Reviewed by Leslie Houlden
Temple Balsall, UK
Recent years have seen the publication of a substantial number of
studies of Paul's ethics, many stimulated by the work of W.A. Meeks,
Dale Martin, and others, on the social and cultural background in
which Paul lived and worked. But there have also been more strictly
theological works and, while far from ignoring Paul's real-life setting,
David Horrell has produced a work of thorough biblical scholarship,
supporting his every move with evidence and correlation, which
makes a serious contribution to theological ethics. But he has done this
with an interesting twist, which gives his work unusual modern resonance.
He has taken as discussion partner for Paul the modern controversy
between what he sums up as liberals and communitarians. At
first sight, it may seem a hopelessly anachronistic task; but then, so,
from a realistic historical point of view, may the continued study of the
work of Paul himself, at least if done in other than an antiquarian spirit.
But his canonical role and the sheer weight of persisting interest he
attracts as a result ensure his importance – and, we may say, his survival
in some sense as a contemporary of our own. While anachronism
of a kind – the feeling, why should I continue to care what Paul said
about x, y or z in his world, so different from ours? – comes to mind
from time to time, Horrell makes every effort to keep it at bay.
'Liberal' and 'communitarian' are both labels that cover a number of
distinct packages of thought, and they are further simplified for the
sake of convenience in Horrell's book under the labels of the two
thinkers, Habermas (hm) and Hauerwas (hw). (Such further shortenings
may be permitted to a reviewer in a case like this, where both
writers appear both as sources and as symbols of broad positions.) Put
briefly, the question is this: how does Paul fare when tested against two
broad styles of ethical thinking? On the one hand, is he concerned to
seek out or to recognize universal ethical concerns and ideals which
can find a place in a wide range of human societies, whatever their ideological
character; or is he concerned to provide for the conduct of a
special human group, with its own beliefs and communal life which
separate it from the world around – a group like the Christian church?
Now it certainly seems as if Paul falls into the second category. He
writes from within the new Christian community, in which he strives
for gentile recruits in situations of considerable difficulty, above all over
the question of the relation with traditional Judaism. Most notably,
Paul's strong Christological center in much of his ethical thinking must
mean that he is theologically motivated up to the hilt. Why otherwise
would he find it necessary to justify and encourage a straightforward
quality like humility with a profound theological argument about
Christ's entry into the world by an act of abandonment and then his
crucifixion and ultimate triumph (Phil. 2:1–11)? And why is it desirable
to back the fostering of decent tolerance of difference of views among
Christians about the fare at their tables or reluctance to contribute to a
collection with the full (heavy, does it seem?) apparatus of the saving
act of incarnation (I Cor. 8:6; II Cor. 8:9)? Is this not a matter of
wheeling in the tanks to quieten a group of binge-drinkers in a city
street?
However, though Paul does indeed 'err' on the hw side, he does also
show tendencies – perhaps illogically – that work the other way. For
example, he can claim (though not in so many words) that you do
not have to be Christian to disapprove of a man who lives with his
stepmother (if that is what it means) (I Cor. 5:1). And he can exhort
Christians to obey the dictates of secular government because it is a
God-provided authority (Rom. 13:1–7); as well as believing that non-
Christian gentiles have a valid law 'written on their hearts' and may
well obey it (Rom. 2.14–16).
So does Paul show distinct signs of being – at least sometimes – a
'liberal' rather than a 'communitarian', hm rather than hw? And does
this at least put a brake on modern hw styles of Christian ethical teaching
which see valid Christian behavior as entirely Scripture-led and
church-centered? This school of Christian ethics can go a long way: I
recall one of its leading advocates telling us that because of the example
of the early Jerusalem church in Acts 1–5, where financial generosity
was confined to the needy in the church itself, modern Christians
should only give to the needs of the church, especially their local Christian
community. Sad for OXFAM, etc. Following biblical ethics can
have strange effects. Such a view is a fair distance removed from,
for example, the Paul of Galatians 6.10: 'Do good to all', even though
he does add 'especially to those of the household of faith'. Horrell
acquits Paul totally of hw-style narrowness, and points firmly to the
implications of his more hm judgments. It looks as if, despite strong
pressures in the other direction, Paul recognizes (as many Jews would
have done) the natural virtue to be found among those beyond the
bounds of the community. Of course, he has no sense of a worked-out
hm doctrine: but then he had no need to legislate for the policies of the
Roman Empire or indeed anyone beyond his own group of Christians
congregations. He should be commended for the breadth of sympathy
and vision that he displays: and it shows up well in comparison with
some of his narrower latter-day devotees.
That does of course bring us back to the haunting large question of
anachronism. It is true that the modern controversy between hm and
hw tendencies in ethical thought can profit from being bounced off
thinkers of quite different times and cultures. But Paul was no systematician,
no policymaker for the human race, in all its diversity and
complexity. His responsibilities were in practice much more confined,
though he certainly saw human destiny in general as bound up with
his lifework – in a way that modern people, even Christians, may or
may not find convincing: His apocalyptic hopes were after all not fulfilled
in the way he undoubtedly thought they would be – and did they
not condition his ethical teaching, for example, on marriage in I
Corinthians 7? It is hard not to feel that Horrell's exercise, though
worthwhile, only carries real force if you think that Paul is a voice
worth listening to in our day. Does that force not derive largely from
his canonical status? And is it sufficiently warranted by his role down
the centuries in the church? But then, the church has had its own many
ways of hearing his voice, and now we specialize in being as realistic
as we can be in hearing Paul in his own 1st-century settings – which
both brings him near and puts him firmly at a distance.
But it is not unrealistic in the least to swing back to the business of
'hearing' Paul. His influence has after all been uninterrupted in European
culture since his own time, whatever the diversity of interpretation
he has received; and the canonical role carries its own sacred
weight. Within the terms of his enquiry, Horrell offers us three choices
for the future: hw's 'ecclesial ethics' is certainly the most obvious front
runner, and 'weaknesses', in the sense of gestures toward the society
beyond the church, such as were identified earlier, do not dominate the
scene – but would we expect them to be present at all in the context
of Paul's intensely church-centered work? Second, we can adopt a
halfway house, a modified hw picture: 'his appeal is for the members
of the Christian community to do better than their contemporaries at
meeting common ethical standards' (p. 288). And third, we can take the
hint from Paul's conditioning by his narrow situation and his apocalyptic
framework of thought, and develop, in the light of the continuing
world order, the hints of an ethic for common humanity: that must
now be a legitimate legacy to take from him and to work with. It may
even be essential if he is to survive and to mean anything very much
outside narrowing Christian circles.
The bulk of Horrell's book is devoted to a consideration of different
areas of Paul's ethical teaching in the light of the twin points of comparison:
areas such as his intense sense of Christian solidarity in Christ,
created and fostered in baptism and eucharist; his not wholly consistent
sense of Christian boundaries within the society around him; the
question of how much diversity of opinion and practice may a community
like the church tolerate without being faithless; and the question
of the width of Christian concern for those in need of succor. Of
course, it seems to us strange that only in relation to divorce does he
make any major use of traditions of the teaching of Jesus: only 'life in
Christ' fills his horizon, and it gets him an amazing distance in both
forming ethical principles and guiding his practice – which was both
wider in its concerns and more aware of its social context than that of
numbers of his latter-day devotees.
Response to Leslie Houlden
By David G. Horrell
University of Exeter, UK
I am very grateful to Leslie Houlden for taking the time to engage with
my book and for raising a number of interesting points for discussion.
One key issue, that of anachronism, which frames his discussion at
the beginning and end, I shall return to later. First let me pick up
some more specific points. In summarizing the orientation of my book
around the liberal/communitarian debate, Houlden suggests that I
simplify these 'packages of thought . . . under the labels of the two
thinkers', Habermas and Hauerwas, who 'appear both as sources and
as symbols of broad positions'. As I make clear, however, while there
are certain key features of both liberalism and communitarianism,
neither forms a clear or single 'package' (pp. 48–49), such that
one needs to study the particular construal of a liberal-like or
communitarian-like position in specific writers. And that is what I try
to do in taking Hauerwas's 'ecclesial ethics' – a very distinctive and
particular style of communitarianism – and Habermas's 'discourse
ethics' – a very particular form of liberalism – as reference points for a
conversation with Paul, even though I do indeed broaden out the conversation
such that I outline points of contact and contrast between
Paul and both liberalism and communitarianism. Furthermore, I stress
that it is not simply or even primarily a matter of 'testing' Paul to see
how he fares when compared with these modern approaches to ethics.
Rather, I attempt to read Paul in a way informed by these contemporary
approaches, partly to articulate a fresh understanding of Paul's
ethics but also, and importantly, to see how Paul's thought might shape
our own reflections on these current debates (p. 4). That, of course,
quickly raises questions about anachronism and relevance, which I
shall again defer for the moment.
For much of his essay, though this may not be entirely clear to
readers, Houlden gives a sort of sketch of the material in my book,
though cast in his own terms and language. For example, I presume
that the comment that 'Paul falls into the second category' – that is, that
his ethics are primarily 'ecclesial' in focus – is a representation of a
point I make in a number of places (e.g. pp. 243–244, 246, 280–281),
with reference to some of the examples with which I illustrate the point,
even if the way in which Houlden depicts these examples differs somewhat
from my own. 

