National Assembly Against Racism Condemns BNP
Nick Griffin and Mark Collett, leading members of the BNP have been charged with incitement to racial hatred for comments they made against Islam and Muslims. This election will see them use the airwaves and mail shots to further whip up racism and Islamophobia. If Britain is to remain a modern multicultural society that is accepting of all people, there can be no platform for the far right  -  we call on broadcasters to pull the plug on fascism. "The BNP should not be given a platform on our broadcast media to spread their racist and Islamophobic poison. We call on our broadcasters to be mindful of the divisive agenda of the BNP and to deny them the opportunity to pollute any more minds," said Iqbal Sacranie, Secretary-General of the Muslim Council of Britain.
MCB Calls for Combat Against Hatred Directed at Religious Groups
The MCB wrote to the leaders of the Conservative Party and the Liberal Democrats and urged them to support the legislation on Incitement to Religious Hatred which was put before the Commons as part of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Bill on 7th February 2005. Letters were also addressed to individual MPs which also urged support for the proposed legislation: 
“T “The Muslim community will be greatly disappointed if MPs oppose what most British Muslims see as a vital piece of equality legislation. Indeed, we see it as an important step towards ensuring the long-term safety of our community." Said Iqbal Sacranie, Secretary-General of the Muslim Council of Britain. The government's proposals were passed on 7th Feb in the House of Commons by 291 votes to 191, however the Bill still needs to go before the House of Lords for approval.
The MCB wrote to the leaders of the Conservative Party and the Liberal Democrats and urged them to support the legislation on Incitement to Religious Hatred which was put before the Commons as part of the Serious Organised Crime and Police Bill on 7th February 2005. Letters were also addressed to individual MPs which also urged support for the proposed legislation: 
“T “The Muslim community will be greatly disappointed if MPs oppose what most British Muslims see as a vital piece of equality legislation. Indeed, we see it as an important step towards ensuring the long-term safety of our community." Said Iqbal Sacranie, Secretary-General of the Muslim Council of Britain. The government's proposals were passed on 7th Feb in the House of Commons by 291 votes to 191, however the Bill still needs to go before the House of Lords for approval. 
Religious Hatred Incitement Law: British Muslims Let Down Again 
The Muslim Council of Britain is deeply disappointed by the announcement on 7 April, 2005 that the Government was dropping the Incitement to Religious Hatred section from the Serious and Organised Crime Bill, due to opposition from the Liberal Democrats and the Conservative Party.
“Sadly, British Muslims will now continue to remain second-class citizens and denied the legal protection that is given to some racial and religious groups such as Jews and Sikhs under existing racial incitement laws. We deplore the position of the Liberal Democrats – who had proposed an amendment backed by the Tory Party - that would have regarded Muslims as a racial group, notwithstanding the fact that Muslims transcend racial boundaries. We regarded this as a vital piece of equality legislation that would have accorded Muslims and other faith groups protection from those who are deliberately inciting hatred against them,” said Iqbal Sacranie, Secretary-General of the Muslim Council of Britain.
The Muslim Council of Britain is currently seeking an urgent assurance from the Labour Party that it will include a clear commitment to prohibit Incitement to Religious Hatred at the earliest opportunity in its Election Manifesto. The MCB also calls upon the Liberal Democrats and the Conservative Party to make a similar pledge and support equality for all sections of British society including all faith groups. 
 
 
MCB Clarifies Hajj Rites in Light of  Muslim Job Victory

The Muslim Council of Britain's Secretary-General Iqbal Sacranie commented on the 15 Jan, 2005 in response to a landmark discrimination case. Mohammed Khan, 43 was sacked after going on Hajj for six weeks and has been awarded £10,000 in damages. 
An employment industrial tribunal in Leeds on 13 Jan, 2005 disagreed with Mr Khan's employers that he had taken 'unauthorised leave' and ruled that Mr Khan had been unfairly dismissed and suffered discrimination as per the Employment Equality (Religion or Belief) regulations. 
Iqbal Sacranie, Secretary-General of the Muslim Council of Britain, said: “This is a landmark victory. Employers need to understand that there is nothing incompatible between being a Muslim and a good employee. 
“Just as employers have made accommodations to employ women in the workforce they should do so to accommodate people of faith. To be fair, many employers are already making progress in this regard.” 
He continued: “All Muslims, men and women, are required to undertake the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca, Saudi Arabia, once in their lifetimes if they have the financial and physical ability to do so. Many Muslims save for several years to fulfil this fifth of the five pillars of Islam. 
“It is an awesome occasion and the visit of a lifetime. Those who complete the Hajj rites — with due humility and reverence for God — return home, the Prophet Mohammed said, as sinless as new-born babies.”

The Need to Protect Faith Communities from Incitement to Hatred 

The MCB Secretary General Iqbal Sacranie and Sher Khan Head of the MCB's Public Affairs Committee attended a meeting on the 13th January 2005 at Portcullis House, Westminster, which was jointly convened with the MCB the Commission for Racial Equality, the British Humanist Association and Justice. Speakers at the event included Trevor Phillips, Chair, CRE; Hanne Stinson, Director, BHA; Robert Beckley, Asst. Chief Constable, ACPO; Gay Moon, Head of Equality Project, Justice. The meeting addressed the deep concern about the gross misrepresentation of the proposed legislation on incitement to religious hatred. There had been many misleading statements made in the press about the purpose behind extending the protection currently given to two faith groups (Sikhs and Jews) under present legislation to other faith and belief communities. The MCB was keen to clarify and explain its reasons in supporting the proposed legislation. 
 “It is our view that the public debate on this issue to date has caused more confusion about what the purpose of the legislation is, than shed light on what it is trying to achieve. Primary among the fears and concerns expressed is the belief that our right to freedom of speech is threatened by the proposal being put forward by the Government. Further to this there are people who have been ringing alarms bells about alleged curtailment of the right to criticise religious beliefs. This is emphatically not the case. The proposed legislation is meant to protect believers from incitement and not protect their faiths from criticism,” said Iqbal Sacranie, the Secretary-General of the Muslim Council of Britain.
 “The Purpose of this meeting was to rescue the debate from gross misrepresentation found in current reporting in the media. In respect to this the speakers and the debate that followed made an important contribution in putting the record straight,” added Sher Khan.
Muslim Council of Britain Defends Incitement to Religious Hatred Proposal
The Secretary-General of the Muslim Council of Britain has written the following article which is to appear in the February issue of The Londoner, the paper is produced by the Greater London Authority (GLA) and is circulated to all households in London.
The Muslim Council of Britain strongly supports the government's proposals to prohibit Incitement to Religious Hatred. 
The proposal, we believe, will help close a dangerous loophole in our current legislation which while prohibiting incitement to racial hatred, at present is powerless when it comes to incitement to religious hatred. This anomaly has not gone unnoticed by far right groups in the UK - particularly the British National Party - who have been busy exploiting this loophole by publicly adapting their old racist rhetoric of yesteryear into a more virulently anti-Muslim invective deliberately designed to foment divisions in our society. 
The latest annual statistics issued earlier this month by the Crown Prosecution Service confirm this trend and show that when it came to religiously aggravated crime, in 50% of cases, the actual or perceived religion of the victim was Islam.
The criticisms of those who believe that the proposed legislation will restrict freedom of speech are, we believe, misplaced. The proposed legislation is meant to protect believers from incitement and not protect their faiths from criticism. 
In addition, the Attorney-General has taken a very strict view of what constitutes incitement with our existing race hate laws. Only 4 out of over 80 cases brought to him have been approved for prosecution in the past three years. There is no reason to suppose he would be any less strict in the application of the proposed new religious hatred law.
We should all value our freedoms. At the same, time, there needs to be a recognition that one of the most important freedoms for all of us must be the freedom from hate.
Iqbal Sacranie OBE, 
Secretary-General,
The Muslim Council of Britain
 
MCB Clarifies Misrepresentations Regarding Holocaust Memorial Day
In response to media queries about this year's Holocaust Memorial Day, the Muslim Council of Britain has made the following statement in order to correct any false impression that may have been created by a misleading report in the Sunday Times (23rd January 2005) entitled 'Muslims Boycott Holocaust Remembrance': 
1. The Nazi Holocaust was a truly evil and abhorrent crime and we stand together with our fellow British Jews in their sense of pain and anguish. None of us must ever forget how the Holocaust began. We must remember it began with a hatred that dehumanised an entire people, that fostered state brutality, made second class citizens of honest, innocent people because of their religion and ethnic identity. Those who were vilified and seen as a threat could be subjected to group punishment; dispossession and impoverishment while the rest of the world stood idly by, washing its hands off despair and suffering that kept getting worse. The MCB believes, that we have therefore to do more than just remember and reflect on the past - we must be able to see when the same abuses occur in our own time. 
2. The MCB's principled position from the outset since 2001 - when the Holocaust Memorial Day was first commemorated - has been for the memorial day to be inclusive of the sufferings of all people and urged that it be named the 'Genocide Memorial Day'. The best living memorial for the victims of the Nazi Holocaust is trying to ensure that we make the cry 'Never Again' real for all people who suffer, everywhere. We honour the dead most sincerely by working to end suffering and bring peace with justice to those who live without hope today. 
3. Sadly, 'Ethnic cleansing' and mass killings are not a thing of the past; they are a continuing terror. Remembrance must, therefore, refocus our moral vision and rededicate our commitment to prevent current and future inhumanity, state brutality and crimes against humanity. In order to help ensure that such crimes against humanity do not recur and repeat themselves we believe that the Memorial Day can better be observed by making it inclusive to cover the ongoing mass killings and human rights abuses around the world, notably, in the occupied Palestinian Territories, Chechnya and Kashmir and also recent mass killings and genocide on Bosnia, Kosova and Rwanda. Genocide is the most abhorrent and outrageous crime and we are not going to prevent it by selectively remembering only some of its victims. 
 

