1 Revelation, Sanctification and Inspiration
Holy Scripture is not a single or simple entity. The term'Holy Scripture'
refers primarily to a set of texts, but importantly and secondarily
to its divine origin and its use by the church. Thus the content of
the term can only be thoroughly mapped by seeing this set of texts
in connection with purposive divine action in its interaction with
an assemblage of creaturely events, communities, agents, practices
and attitudes. To talk of the biblical writings as Holy Scripture is
ultimately to refer to more (but not to less!) than those writings per
se. It is, on the one hand, to depict these texts in the light of their
origin, function and end in divine self-communication, and, on the
other hand, to make recommendations about the kinds of responses
to these texts which are fitting in view of their origin, function and
end. 'Holy Scripture' is a shorthand termfor the nature and function
of the biblical writings in a set of communicative acts which stretch
from God's merciful self-manifestation to the obedient hearing of
the community of faith.
The sufficiency of Scripture, that is, is not quite the same as its
'self-sufficiency'.1 Yetwhilst 'Holy Scripture' does refer to a composite
reality (texts in relation to revelation and reception), there is a definite
order to its elements.Most of all, both the texts and the processes
surrounding their reception are subservient to the self-presentation
of the triune God, of which the text is a servant and by which readers
are accosted, as by a word of supreme dignity, legitimacy and effectiveness.
This order is critically important because, unless their strict
subservience to communicative divine activity is stated with some
firmness, both text and practices of reading and reception may break
loose and become matters for independent or quasi-independent investigation
and explanation. When that is allowed to take place, the
result is a disorderly ontology of Holy Scripture.
One type of disorder – the isolation of the text both from its place
in God's revelatory activity and from its reception in the community
of faith – has, aswe shall see, long been a problem in Western divinity
since the Reformation. A somewhat different kind of disorder results
when the term 'Holy Scripture' is expounded in such a way that
its primary (or sometimes exclusive) reference is to the uses of the
biblical texts made by readers, and only secondarily (if at all) to the
place of the texts in the economy of God's communicative grace. By
wayof example: inWhatis Scripture? WilfredCantwell Smith presents
a sustained argument that 'Scriptures are not texts!'2 – that the term
 'Scripture' is a way of talking about human practices vis-`a-vis texts
rather than about texts themselves:
There is no ontology of scripture. The concept has no metaphysical, nor
logical, referent; there is nothing that scripture finally 'is' . . . [A]t issue
is not the texts of scripture that are to be understood and aboutwhich
a theory is to be sought, but the dynamic of human involvement with
them . . . Scripture has been . . . a human activity: it has been also a
human propensity, a potentiality. There is no ontology of scripture;
just as, at a lower level, there is no ontology of art, nor of language,
nor of other things that we human beings do, and are. Rather than
existing independently of us, all these are subsections of the ontology
of our being persons.3
A much more theologically complex examination of the issues is
offered by Ingolf Dalferth, who explores a distinction between the
singular term 'Scripture' (Schrift) and the plural term 'scriptures' or
'writings' (Schriften). Where the latter refers to the biblical writings
per se, the former refers to these writings in their use by the faith
community. 'Scripture' is thus 'the use made of the scriptures of the
Bible in . . . the event of the church's proclamation';4 hence ingredient
within the concept of 'Scripture' is 'the Christian community
or church' which uses the biblical writings as Scripture.5 Dalferth's
concern is, clearly, a legitimate Reformation point of conscience: the
desire to avoid any account of the nature of Scripture extra usum, and
to insist on determining the nature of Scripture in usu et actione. The
difficulty arises when use and action are identified too closely with
'kerygmatic-doxological use' of Scripture by the church.6 Dalferth
certainly avoids Cantwell Smith's collapse of the notion of Scripture
into that of community usage by insisting on the coinherence
of Scripture, church and faith with communicative divine presence;
but his claim that, nevertheless, the term 'Scripture' identifies an aspect
of Christian Lebenspraxis without empirical content7 points in
a quite different direction, one in which the corporate subjectivity
of the church looms very large.
What is required, and what this book tries to sketch, is a dogmatic
account of the nature of Holy Scripture which neither restricts the
scope of what the termindicates (texts in relation to God's communication
and its hearing) nor allows the element of creaturely reception
to become inflated. The first three chapters undertake such an account
by looking at the relation of Scripture to the divine acts of
revelation, sanctification and inspiration, and then at the churchly
and readerly acts of receiving the Word of God. Crucially, my suggestion
is that the proper connections between the various elements
(revelation, text, community, faithful reception) can only be retained
by their careful dogmatic specification.
This first chapter begins the task of mapping Christian talk of
the Bible as Holy Scripture in a dogmatic projection by arguing that
an essential task of the term 'Holy Scripture' is to indicate the place
occupied by the biblical texts in the revealing, sanctifying and inspiring
acts of the triune God. Holy Scripture is dogmatically explicated
in terms of its role in God's self-communication, that is, the acts
of Father, Son and Spirit which establish and maintain that saving
fellowship with humankind in which God makes himself known to
us and by us.8 The 'sanctification' of Scripture (its 'holiness') and
its 'inspiration' (its proceeding from God) are aspects of the process
whereby God employs creaturely reality in his service, for the attestation
of his saving self-revelation. Thus, what is said about the
sanctification and inspiration of Scripture is an extension of what is
said about revelation; but what is said about revelation is an extension
of what is said about the triune God. What Scripture is as sanctified
and inspired is a function of divine revelatory activity, and divine
revelatory activity is God's triune being in its external orientation,
its gracious and self-bestowing turn to the creation.
The first task, then, is to offer an overall sketch of the doctrine
of Holy Scripture by examining three primary concepts: revelation,
sanctification and inspiration. The first and third terms are familiar
in theological discussion of the nature of Scripture, and, although
I argue that some careful dogmatic specification of these terms is
required if they are to be serviceable, appeal to them should hold
no surprises. However, the second term, 'sanctification', may seem
somewhat out of place, since its more usual application is in discussion
of soteriology, specifically in giving a theological account of the
'application' of salvation, that is, the effectiveness of Christ in the
lives of believers. But although the primary field in which the term
is deployed remains that of the relation between divine and human
persons, it may legitimately be extended to non-personal realities in
so far as they are instruments of the personal relations between God
and humankind. 'Sanctification' is not improperly used in this way
in, for example, sacramental theology, to indicate the segregation of
creaturely realities by virtue of their moulding and use by God to
undertake specific tasks in the economy of salvation. In this sense, a
'sanctified' reality is most generally described as set apart byGod as a
means of divine self-communication. In the context of discussing the
relation between divine self-revelation and the nature ofHoly Scripture,
sanctification functions as a middle term, indicating in a general
way God's activity of appointing and ordering the creaturely realities
of the biblical texts towards the end of the divine self-manifestation.
The scope of its application is thus wider than the term 'inspiration',
which is best restricted to discussion of the more specific question of
the relation between divine self-communicative acts and Scripture
as textual entity. It is certainly true that, with declining confidence
in the viability of a dogmatic notion of verbal inspiration, the range
of the term 'inspiration' has in some modern theology been considerably
broadened, to become equivalent to, for example, a supposed
intuitive awareness of the divine on the part of the biblical authors,
or the illumination of the readers of the biblical text. Amore orderly
account of the matter will, however, restrict the application of the
term to the specific set of divine acts in respect of the production of
the biblical texts, and look for a term of wider reach to indicate the
overall process of God's ordering of creaturely realities as servants of
his self-presentation. For this wider task, I suggest the adoption of
the term 'sanctification'.
As used here, it is closely related to two other tracts of theological
doctrine, namely providence and the theology of mediation.
'Providence' speaks of the divine activities of ordering creaturely
realities to their ends; 'mediation' speaks of the instrumentality of
created realities in the divine working. Both terms are readily applicable
in the context of discussing the nature of Scripture. God's
work of overseeing such processes as tradition-history, redaction,
authorship and canonisation could well be described in terms of
the divine providential acts of preserving, accompanying and ruling
creaturely activities, annexing them to his self-revelation. And the
function of these providentially ordered texts in the divine economy
could be depicted as mediatorial. If the term'sanctification' is still to
be preferred, it is, as I hope to show, because it covers much of the
same ground as both of these terms, whilst also addressing in a direct
way the relation of divine activity to creaturely process, without
sliding into dualism. But the terms are certainly porous, and in and
of themselves they are of little consequence; all that matters is their
fittingness for the task of orderly explication of the matter itself.
Revelation
Like many other stretches of Christian teaching, the Christian doctrine
of revelation suffers fromthe distortions of its shape introduced
by attempts to formulate and expound it in relation to and, in some
measure, in dependence upon, dominant modern intellectual and
spiritual conventions. Indeed, this locus of Christian theology is a
particularly acute register of the distress felt by modern Christian
theology when faced by the collapse of the cultural metaphysic in
which classical Christianity had developed and which, indeed, it
helped to form. As that overarching framework crumbled, Christian
theological teaching about revelation became at one and the same
time desperately unworkable and desperately necessary: unworkable,
because of what was feared to be irrefutable philosophical and
moral challenge; necessary, because any possible response to that
challenge seemed ultimately to require a defence of Christian claims
by a reconstruction of the possibility of revelation, a reconstruction
in which the guiding hand was very often philosophical rather than
dogmatic. Both the lack of viability and the urgent need for reconstruction
are symptomatic, however, of the severe doctrinal disarray
in which Christian teaching found itself in modernity. If the doctrine
of revelation has stumbled and fallen, it has not only been because
Christian theology was tongue-tied in trying to answer its critics to
their satisfaction; it has also been because Christian theology found
itself largely incapable of following and deploying the inner logic of
Christian conviction in its apologetic and polemical undertakings.
And the reason for that failure onthe part ofChristian theology is that
theology itself had in important respects already lost touch with an
orderly understanding of God's self-communication, and in its place
offered rather stripped-down or misshapen versions of the topic.
Most tellingly, these reduced accounts of revelation were seriously
under-determined by the specifically Christian content of Christian
teaching about God. 'Revelation', that is, was transposed rather readily
into a feature of generally 'theistic'metaphysical outlooks.

