Summa Theologiae, Questions on God

Question 1
The nature and scope of sacred doctrine
In order to confine the scope of my inquiry, I must first investigate the nature and range of sacred doctrine,1 on which I have ten questions to raise:
1. Is there any need for this teaching?
2. Is it a science?2
3. Is it one science or many?
4. Is it theoretical or practical?
5. How does it compare with other sciences?
6. Is it wisdom?
7. What is its subject?
8. Does it employ arguments?
9. Does it rightly employ metaphorical or figurative language?
10. Can we interpret its sacred writings in different senses?
Article I: Is any teaching needed apart from what philosophy provides?
1. It seems that we need no teaching beyond that of philosophy. For we should not seek to know what lies beyond our reason. As Ecclesiasticus says, 'Do not seek after things above you.'3 But philosophy deals well enough with what lies within the range of reason. So, additional teaching seems unnecessary.
2. Moreover, we can only be taught about some being or other. For we only know the true, and the true and being are convertible.4 But the philosophical sciences5 deal with all beings, even God. So we call a part of philosophy 'theology', or 'the science of God', as the Philosopher makes clear in his Metaphysics.6 So, there is no need for teaching other than what philosophy can provide.
   On the contrary, 2 Timothy says, 'All divinely inspired scripture is useful for teaching, reproving, correcting, and instructing in righteousness.'7 But divinely inspired Scripture does not belong to the branches of philosophy which come from human reasoning. So it is useful to have a divinely inspired science over and above philosophical ones.
   Reply: It was necessary for human salvation that there should be instruction by divine revelation in addition to the philosophical sciences pursued by human reasoning – chiefly because we are ordered to God as an end beyond the grasp of reason. As Isaiah says, 'Without you, God, no eye has seen what you have prepared for those who love you.'8 But we have to know about an end before we can direct our intentions and actions towards it. So, it was necessary for the salvation of human beings that truths surpassing reason should be made known to us through divine revelation.
   We also stood in need of being instructed by divine revelation even in matters to do with God which human reason is able to investigate. For the truth about God that reason investigates would have occurred only to few, and only after a long time, and only with many mistakes mixed in. But our salvation, which lies in God, depends on us knowing the truth about him. So, in order that our salvation might be effected more suitably and surely, we needed to be instructed by divine revelation concerning God. We had, therefore, to have sacred doctrine by revelation – teaching over and above that given to us by philosophical sciences.
   Hence:
1. Human reason should indeed not pry into things above human knowledge. But we should welcome them in faith when God reveals them to us. As the passage in Ecclesiasticus continues, 'You are shown many things that are above the understanding of human beings.'9 And sacred doctrine contains such things.
2. When there is more than one aspect under which a given item can be known, there will be more than one science concerning it. After all, both an astronomer and a natural scientist might demonstrate the same conclusion – that the earth is round, for instance. The former, however, employs a middle term that is mathematical (i.e. one that prescinds from matter), whereas the latter employs a middle term that takes matter into account. So, there is nothing to stop what is treated by philosophical sciences (in so far as it can be known by natural reason) from also being dealt with by another science (in so far as it is known by the light of divine revelation). The theology that belongs to sacred doctrine therefore differs in kind from the theology ranked as a part of philosophy.
Article 2: Is sacred doctrine a science?
1. It seems that sacred doctrine is not a science. For every science advances from self-evident first principles.10 But sacred doctrine advances from articles of faith,11 which are not self-evident since not everybody grants them. As 2 Thessalonians says, 'not all have faith'.12 So, sacred doctrine is not a science.
2. Again, a science is not concerned with individual things. But sacred doctrine deals with individual events and people (the lives of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and so on). So, sacred doctrine is not a science.
   On the other hand, Augustine says that 'this science alone is credited with begetting, nourishing, protecting, and strengthening the most saving faith'.13 These functions belong only to the science of sacred doctrine. So, sacred doctrine is a science.
   Reply: Sacred doctrine is a science. Yet bear in mind sciences differ from each other. Some work from first principles known by the natural light of the intellect – such as arithmetic, geometry, and the like. Others, however, work from principles known by the light of a higher science. Optics, for instance, begins from geometrical principles, and music proceeds from arithmetical ones.
   Sacred doctrine is a science in the second sense here, for it proceeds from principles made known by a higher science – that of God and the blessed. So, just as music relies on principles taken from arithmetic, sacred doctrine relies on principles revealed by God.
   Hence:
1. The first principles of any science are either self-evident in themselves or can be traced back to what a higher science recognizes. Such are the principles of sacred doctrine, as I have noted.
2. Sacred doctrine deals with individual things not because it is primarily concerned with them but to introduce examples for our lives (as in moral sciences), and to make clear the authority of the people through whom divine revelation (on which sacred Scripture or teaching is based) has come down to us.
Article 3: Is sacred doctrine a single science?
1. It seems that sacred doctrine is not a single science. For, according to Aristotle, 'one science has one kind of subject'.14 But the creator and creature, both treated of in sacred doctrine, are not contained in one kind of subject. So, sacred doctrine is not a single science.
2. Moreover, sacred doctrine treats of angels, bodily creatures, and human conduct – all of which belong to different philosophical sciences. So, sacred doctrine is not a single science.
   On the contrary, sacred Scripture refers to it as a single science: 'He gave him the science of sacred things.'15
   Reply: Sacred doctrine is a single science. For we gauge the unity of a faculty16 or habit17 by its object, considered not with regard to matter,18 but with respect to some formal characteristic.19 Thus, for example, people, donkeys and stones all share one formal characteristic, that of being coloured, and colour is the object of sight. Now since, as I have already noted,20 sacred Scripture looks at things with respect to them being divinely revealed, all divinely revealed things share in the one formal aspect which is the object of this science. They are, therefore, included under sacred doctrine as under a single science.
   Hence:
1. Sacred doctrine does not draw conclusions about God and creatures equally. It is chiefly concerned with God, and it turns to creatures considered as being in relation to him, their origin and end. So, its unity as a science is not compromised.
2. Nothing prevents lower faculties or habits from being diversified by different subject matters that all fall under one higher power or habit, for the higher is related to its object under a more universal formality. Take, for instance, the common sense.21 Both visual and audible phenomena (perceptible to the senses) are included in its object. Yet, while gathering in all the objects of the five external senses, it remains a single faculty. Likewise, different classes of object separately treated by different philosophical sciences can be treated by sacred doctrine that retains its unity in so far as all of them are brought into the same focus, namely, in so far as they are divinely revealed. In effect, therefore, sacred doctrine is like an imprint of God's own knowledge, which is a single and simple knowledge of everything.
Article 4: Is sacred doctrine a practical science?
1. It seems that sacred doctrine is a practical science. For Aristotle says that 'a practical science has action as its end'.22 But according to the letter of James, sacred doctrine is directed to action: 'Be doers of the word and not only hearers.'23 So, sacred doctrine is a practical science.
2. Moreover, sacred doctrine is divided into the Old Law and the New Law. But law relates to moral science, which is practical. So, sacred doctrine is a practical science.
   On the contrary, every practical science is concerned with what people can do. Thus ethics is concerned with human acts, and architecture is concerned with buildings. Sacred doctrine, however, is chiefly about God, whose first and foremost work is people. So, it is a theoretical science rather than a practical one.
   Reply: As I have already said,24 sacred doctrine, while remaining single, nevertheless extends to things belonging to different philosophical sciences because of the common formal factor that it considers in all things, namely, their knowability by illumination from God. While some philosophical sciences are theoretical and others are practical, sacred doctrine is both – in this being like the single science by which God knows himself and the things that he makes.
   All the same, it is more theoretical than practical. For it is more concerned with divine things than with what people do. It deals with human acts only in so far as they prepare us for the perfect knowledge of God in which our eternal bliss consists.
   This makes it clear how the objections noted above should be answered.
Article 5: Is sacred doctrine more noble than any other science?
1. It seems that sacred doctrine is not more noble than any other science. For certainty is part of a science's value. But the other sciences (whose first principles are indubitable) look more assured and certain than sacred doctrine, whose first principles (the articles of faith) are open to doubt. So, these other sciences seem more noble.
2. Again, a lower science draws on a higher, as, for example, music draws on arithmetic. But sacred doctrine draws on philosophical learning. Jerome says that 'the ancient writers so filled their books with the theories and verdicts of philosophers that at first you are at a loss which to admire more: their secular erudition or their knowledge25 of the Scriptures'.26 So, sacred doctrine has a lower standing than other sciences.
   On the contrary, Proverbs describes the other sciences as its maidservants: 'Wisdom has sent her maidservants to extend an invitation to the tower.'27
   Reply: Since the science of sacred doctrine is partly theoretical and partly practical, it ranks above any other science, whether theoretical or practical.
   We reckon one theoretical science to be more noble than another first because of the certitude it brings, and then because of the dignity of its subject matter. The science of sacred doctrine surpasses the others on both counts. As to certainty, because theirs comes from the natural light of human reason, which can make mistakes, whereas sacred doctrine is held in the light of God's knowledge which cannot be mistaken. As to nobility of subject matter, because their business is only with things that reason can grasp, whereas sacred science leads to heights to which reason cannot climb.

