The origins of this essay lie in the struggle to write the sequel to Cities of God (Routledge, 2001), a book concerned more closely with examining Christian social practice in the context of the contemporary city; a book attempting to rethink Christian social ethics in an age characterised by radical pluralism, strong public narratives, global economic interests, cyber-realities and post-secularism. In order to clarify how Christian practices relate to (or are marginalised by) what is commonly held to be true or possible,1 I increasingly recognised that it was necessary to provide a model for how cultures change. I needed to have some understanding of how discourses of truth become credible;2 how such discourses and their accreditation are produced and transform or fail to transform their cultural milieu. The question I am trying to sketch an answer for is: what makes a belief believable?
   I recognise this is a question at the heart of several continental projects – Michel de Certeau's, Michel Foucault's and Pierre Bourdieu's, to name a few. I will in part be drawing upon their work for my answer. But it is necessary to recognise in their work, as in the social sciences more generally, that the framework within which their thinking is done is a secular one. In some respects it is a framework not neutral to the discourse of theology, but antithetical. For each of these continental projects stands within a tradition of critique that has been handed down to the social scientists by Kant, Marx and Nietzsche. And as Marx understood in his 1843/4 essay 'Towards a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right', the central object of such critique is religion.3 The resources that are theology's own – liturgies, sacred texts, creedal statements, Church council documents – are not analytical tools. They are not fashioned for theology's engagement with its contextualising cultures and only partially fashioned to facilitate theology's own self-reflection.4 Theology needs to borrow, then, tools honed in the social and human sciences, in order to understand the processes of enculturation and accreditation that situate and govern any theologically orientated project. The analysis issues from a Christian question; a question fundamental to theological notions such as mission, apologetics, the divine telos of being human, doctrines of time, history, parousia, eschatology and ecclesiology: how do we read the signs of the times? So the critical question about what makes a belief believable becomes more specific: in understanding the operation of cultural forces in the production of public truth, within any given social context, how do the discursive practices of Christianity fare, and why do they fare in that way rather than in any other way? Only by demonstrating how this question might be answered can an account be given of the relationship between Christian living (and talking) and the implicit values of public consciousness. Only by being able to give an account of this relationship can a space be cleared for rethinking the gospel's specific transformative practices of hope in the new urban landscape. And so theology has to engage with social, political and cultural theory, cultural anthropology, philosophy, hermeneutics, contextual accounts of epistemology, social semiotics and performative notions of gendered subjectivity (among a few of the contemporary 'sciences') – while remaining theological.
   The burden of this essay is a description of that engagement. It is an engagement that is only made possible where the cultural conditions have allowed new objects for critique to emerge. As I said, the object of early critique was religion and the effect of that critique was to discredit religion and privatise its sentiments and practices. While such cultural conditions remained theology could not engage in a cultural hermeneutics. Where rapprochements were made in the past they either radically disengaged theology from its cultural context (Catholic antimodernism; conservative Protestantism) or said they were the same thing (Protestant liberalism). But a new public visibility for religion has led to its deprivatisation and calls for rethinking theories of secularism.5
   Religion that was once the object of critique is now presented with an object for its own critique – the secular logics of Western global capitalism. Theology is in a new place, with questions to ask, and must attempt to fashion methods for analysing and answering the questions about where we stand.
   In Cities of God, after considerable indecision, I eventually situated its theologically driven methodology in the opening chapter. It could have come at the end or even in an appendix since it articulated a level of thinking that emerged only after all the analyses composing the other chapters were in place. It was a metadiscourse, in all the complex senses of that Greek prefix. It was not the theory that subsequently would be demonstrated. No idealist intention lay behind posting it at the beginning. In fact, the argument of that book rejected the dichotomy of theory and practice, idealism and materialism, in the name of incarnational theology, while recognising the need to make some specific observations at a meta-level of generalisation heavily dependent upon various forms of social and cultural theory. The methodology was reflexively understood through and after the specific analyses. However, I finally opened the book with these observations on heuristic grounds: I hoped it would enable the readers to understand the approach I was taking to theology's relationship to the new urban environment. In trying, in the sequel to Cities of God, to identify the place where a more methodological and reflective section should come, I decided against opening the volume with a meta-account of the processes whereby any culture comes to believe certain things and reject others. I considered, once more, moving the section to the middle of the book – as an interlude – or placing it in an appendix. But, as this account grew and became more detailed in its attempt to become as comprehensive as possible (an impossible task to execute), it seemed best to separate it altogether from the sequel, establishing it as an independent, reflective essay on what is the focus of my own theological project: the negotiation between Christian living and thinking and the contemporary world.
The essay is divided, for clarity, into three sections; each section attempts to answer one question. The first section attempts to answer the question, from where does the theologian speak? And it attempts to do this by reading with and against Karl Barth's rejection of apologetics and demand for a purely theological discourse. The second section attempts to answer a wider question opened by the conclusions that follow from the examination of Karl Barth's work. That is, what are the processes by which cultures and, thereby, the public perceptions of reality change? I choose to emphasise cultures rather than societies for I am uncertain how we would define a 'society' today that would not also be a definition of a 'culture'. The neo-tribal understanding of societies (in Bauman and Maffesoli) and the description of the imaginary nature of society (in Anderson and Castoriadis), both tend towards the conflation of society and culture. I wish to argue for and retain a strong notion of the 'social' as the sphere of human interaction and affiliation – I want to resist the apocalyptic fantasies of the posthuman as the cyborg – but reflections on the 'social' are only mediated through the cultural. So my question is how cultures change, while recognising that such changes affect understandings of the social. To answer this question I draw upon a number of leading critical thinkers from de Certeau and Bourdieu, to Adorno, Taylor and Bernstein, to the work by a number of feminist philosophers on standpoint epistemology and Žižek's brilliant (though sometimes exasperating) explorations of the cultural imaginary. While, inevitably, the discussion of subjectivity, agency, intentionality, praxis and hermeneutics here is abstract, I attempt to anchor some of the thinking with respect to aspects of my own standpoint within the Christian tradition. But the main negotiation between the nature of theological discourse (the focus for section 1) and the processes of cultural transformation and transmission (the focus for section 2) takes place in part three. For in section 3, on the basis of the two previous examinations, I attempt to answer the question of the relationship between Christian discursive practices and the production and transformation of public truth or shared knowledge. The answer to this question, it seems to me, will provide a new way of looking at theological discourse and therefore open up questions concerning theological apologetics and mission.
   But there are several words, already employed in this introduction, that are not introductory and need some elucidation before we can proceed with the analyses and the argument of this essay. Specifically, what do I mean by culture, discourse/discursivity and practice? These are slippery and much contested terms. Most of the other terms will be discussed in what follows, but these are key terms that we need some grasp of before we can begin. (And they are often the subject of questions raised by those who have patiently listened to the working papers I have given on the way to writing this text.)
   The most difficult of the terms, because historically it is the richest, is 'culture'. The critical theorists I am writing both with and against use the word in different ways. For example, Pierre Bourdieu and Theodore Adorno have a 'high' understanding of culture that associates it with social hierarchies and involves the production and appreciation of 'artistic' goods: painting, music, literature. Although neither would hold to a divorce between the social and the cultural, both would maintain the importance of a distinction between them in order to examine their structural relations to class and power. On the other hand, Michel de Certeau, Michel Foucault, Stephen Greenblatt, Clifford Geertz and James Clifford understand culture much more loosely in terms of certain semiotic systems that produce shared knowledges and values among groups of people, constituting their beliefs about the nature of reality. For each of these theorists, in different ways, the social is profoundly encultured. Neither can be rendered too distinct from the other, for each cultural grouping or system not only comprises a social body, but holds beliefs about the nature of what the social is or should be. I am employing the word 'culture' in this second way, as a symbolic world-view, embedded, reproduced and modified through specific social practices.
   This understanding of culture has the advantage of being able to see multiple notions of the social being negotiated continually within and between various cultures that are simultaneously in operation and production. The motility of cultures and the exchanges within and between them are important to the construal of transformation that I wish to argue for; the fundamental syncretism that I view as bearing the projects of hope. Cultures are polyphonic, hybrid, and fragmentary, always being composed and recomposed. They are sites of displacement and newly fashioned affiliation. They are dialogic entities, in the way Mikhail Bakhtin understands 'dialogic'. They are not monolithic and homogenous, though some cultures and views of the social are often more officially legitimated than others. Subject positions can be viewed not as belonging or aspiring to belong to a cultured, usually bourgeois, elite, but as belonging to several groupings and so moving across various cultures, each organising and practising levels of meaning and value, establishing goals and systems of belief.
   The danger of treating culture in terms of semiotics, as Bourdieu has pointed out, is the pantextualism that results. That is, that everything is viewed in terms of a text and the circulations of signs composing these texts. This form of analysis can diminish the importance of agents and institutions; underestimating, on the one hand, the freedom to invert, divert and pervert the accepted while, on the other, underestimating the cultural domination and shaping effected by sanctioned social institutions and their power-bases: schools, courts of law, medical practices, churches, etc. We will have to treat this criticism, for cultural hermeneutics as a theological task cannot renounce agency or institutionalism – theologians speak from somewhere (as do social scientists, though some of them, even the most self-reflexive, forget that).

