Delhi - Old and New * Sir Edwin Lutyens and the House that Never Was * Babaji * Number 7 * The Lady in White * The Kite

The orchard site had housed our family homestead only since the early decades of the twentieth century. My family came from the walled city, often called Old Delhi, just to the south, built by the Moghul emperor Shah Jahan in the seventeenth century. My family referred to it simply as 'Shahar' or 'the city'. 

There are many Delhis, as we were to study in school, built either alongside or wholly or partly on top of each other, often reusing materials from buildings knocked down in bloody efforts at domination. Our original family home was in Chailpuri, in the narrow lanes of the Old City. As its carefully chosen foundation, it had sturdy stones 'borrowed' from the walls of Ferozshah Kotla, the fourteenth-century fortress and emperor's palace. 

Starting with the ancient Vedic city of Indraprastha that ¯ourished in the (r)fteenth century BC, a succession of Delhis was built (r)rst by generations of Hindu rajas, only to be followed in AD 1193 by a roll call of Muslim dynasties: Ghori, Ghaznavi, Qutubshahi, Khilji, Tughlak, Lodhi and Moghul. They seemed to trust the dubious comfort of walled cities, and their leaders chose to name Delhi, again and again, after themselves. This ended, at least from my childhood point of view, with the British version, sans walls - New Delhi - designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens and built in the ruinfilled wilderness south of the Old City walls. 

The Moghul capital Shahjahanabad, or Shahar, was where the written history of my family began. We were blessed only with our paternal side of it. My mother's side either kept few records or humbly kept its accomplishments under wraps. This written history, bound in red, was kept in my grandfather's home office. 

When my grandfather - Babaji as we called him - decided to move out of the city to the orchard estate, he was already a very successful barrister. His new house, the one in which I was born, was a brick and plaster version of a multi-roomed, grand Moghul tent with bits of British fortress and Graeco-Roman classicism thrown in to hint vaguely at grandeur. The road it was built on was named after my grandfather, Raj Narain Road (with the patriotic Hindification of names that followed Independence, it is now Raj Narain Marg), and had the number seven on its front gate. From the time I can remember, we always referred to that house as Number 7, as in 'I'm going to Number 7' or 'You know that big tamarind tree in Number 7 . . .' 

Not wishing to waste money, and full of the brio of one recently 'England-returned' (he had been studying law in London), my grandfather designed it all himself. As the family story goes, it was at this time that the British had decided to move their capital from Calcutta to Delhi, and Lutyens was in the process of building the new capital, to be named New Delhi. Lutyens asked my grandfather to pick any piece of land there and build on it - Lutyens might have designed the house himself had my grandfather asked - but my grandfather dismissed the whole idea, saying, 'Who wants to live in that jungle!' Properties in 'that jungle' are now worth as much as those in central London and Manhattan. 

Years later, having proceeded beyond my three score and ten years, I was awarded an honorary CBE (Commander of the Order of the British Empire) by Queen Elizabeth II in Washington, DC, another city designed by Lutyens. The ceremony took place in a house also designed by Lutyens, the British Ambassador's residence. As I stared at my reflection there in a pair of dark Lutyens mirrors dotted with glass rosettes, I couldn't help thinking that my life might have come full circle. I could have been born in a Lutyens house and received a grand recognition of my life in a Lutyens house. But I was not destined for such easy symmetry, for easy anything. 

Babaji's whitewashed house consisted of a central gallery, a hall really, leading to five very large rooms with fireplaces. One of these was the drawing room, and the others served as bedrooms, one to a family. Running along the front and back of the house were two long verandahs lined with semi-classical pillars. The back, east-facing verandah looked out on the Yamuna River, or, as we called it with great familiarity, the Jumna. It was here that so many of us, as infants, were rubbed with oil and left to absorb the morning sun. Because the land must have sloped down to the water, this verandah was one floor up, built over a large, partially underground cellar or taikhana. Before I was born, my grandfather used to make wine from grapes he imported from Afghanistan in this permanently damp, cool place. 

The front, west-facing verandah looked over the gardens, which had incorporated the remnants of the old orchard and now included a winding drive to the front gate. The front and back verandahs ended with rooms at each corner of the house, the front ones shaped somewhat like turrets. The functions of these corner rooms changed over the years but one of them at the back, facing east and south, always remained my grandmother's - and the family's - chapel-like Pooja ka Kamra or prayer room. On the top of the house were two levels of flat roofs, the one in the centre being higher, both edged with a battlement-like balustrade. 

But the main house was not large enough to fit the only army Babaji was to see, a growing army of spirited grandchildren produced by his eight children. Some of these progeny lived at Number 7 all the time, while others came and went. Babaji firmly believed in the joint family system, with himself presiding as the head of his brood, a system that had been followed by his father and grandfather and, indeed, by all his ancestors. 

So, in addition to the main house and gardens, across two vast brick courtyards to the north and south of the main house were two long, train-like annexes. One-room wide and made of brick, they had a more casual, country feel. The one to the north started at the river end with the dining room and then went on to pantries, storage rooms and the kitchen. Beyond it, across another bit of courtyard on the same north side, was the boiler, industrial in size and used for making extra hot water for our winter baths, and an annexe of bathrooms. The annexe to the south, known simply as 'the rooms' (Kamras), also started at the river end. It contained my middle uncle's bedroom and offices, my grandfather's offices and then extra rooms for guests. Besides all this there was a shed for cows and horses plus a servants' annexe and two sets of large garages. 

It was in my grandfather's southern annexe office that I one day discovered, by complete chance, a book bound in red that was the family's history. (I must have been thirteen at the time.) 

There were actually two types of family history. There was the documented version that sat properly in my grandfather's office. But there was also the undocumented version consisting of fables, family customs and hearsay passed along by my grandmother, Bari Bauwa, and the other women of the house. This version had begun seeping into us since birth, very subtly, with the honey on our tongues. And, to start with, this was the only one I knew. 

Every year, at the religious festival of Dussehra in autumn, Bari Bauwa would demand that we bring all our writing implements to the prayer room. The men would be asked to bring their guns as well. She would arrange these in the altar-like temple she had set up: Parker pens, bottles of blue-black Quink, pencils, hunting rifles, all mixed in with gods, sacred threads and marigolds. The women and children would gather inside the prayer room, with the men always hovering, unconvinced, by the doors. We would begin praying and sprinkling these rather ordinary implements with yellow turmeric powder, red roli powder, grains of rice, holy water and flower petals. I thought then that all of India was doing what we were doing: asking blessings for pens and pencils and guns. 

What I did not realize was that on that day, most Hindus were asking God to bless the implements they worked with. Farmers wanted blessings for their bulls and ploughs, and traders for their weights, measures and coins. 

But who were we and why was my bottle of Quink in the prayer room? According to the women's oral history - and this was never taught to us, just deduced slowly over time - we were a sub-caste of Hindus known as Kayasthas,Mathur Kayasthas to get the sub-, subcaste right. Even as a child, I saw it so clearly in my imagination . . . Roll the film: Ancient India. Day. A vast meeting of notables is being held on a mountainside to finalize the caste system. At the top of the heap, it is announced, are to be the self-satisfied priests, the Brahmins, who will be the only ones allowed the privilege of reading, writing and making laws. There is much cheering from their quarter. Below them are to be the warriors, Kshatriyas, who will fight and rule kingdoms. This lot seems overjoyed too. Lower on the totem pole will be the traders and farmers, Vaishyas, whose eyes glint at the thought of making money; and even further down, the menial workers or Shudras, who stand glum and silent. 

The camera shifts. Next day. Night. A small hall lit with oil lamps. A smaller meeting of agitated intellectuals. They are overwrought because they are viscerally against all these categories. In any case, they do not fit neatly into any of them. Reading, writing and making laws are what gives them the most satisfaction but religious orthodoxy scares them and they want none of it. They have no fear at all of ruling any part of the world but they will not give up their precious books. They lack both the sort of entrepreneurial spirit that makes successful traders (in fact, hush, they look down on traders), and the physical strength and desperation that sustains farmers. So they vote rather boldly to form a union of their own, a separate sub-caste of free-thinking writer-warriors to be known as Kayasthas. The End. 

That is my version of events. There is actually a real legend, if legends can be real, that goes something like this. Just after Brahma, the God of the Universe, had created the caste system with, in descending order, the Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras, a worried Yama, God and Chief Justice of the Underworld, approached him saying, 'I need an assistant who has the ability to record the deeds of man, both good and evil, and to administer justice.' Brahma went into a trance. When he opened his eyes he saw before him a glorious figure of a man holding a pen in one hand, an ink-pot in another and a sword tied around his waist. Brahma spoke, 'Thou hast been created from my body (kaya), therefore thy progeny shall be known as Kayasthas. Thy work will be to dispense justice and punish those that violate Divine laws.' Brahma gave him the special caste of Dwij-Kshatriya, twice-born warrior. 

***

Another such 'history' lesson came directly from my grandmother. I will never forget the day. 

It was one of those sunny but crisp, cold winter Sundays that Delhi loves. Winter lasted only two months and our family turned quite British for this season, at least in our clothing. All the tweed coats and jackets (British fabrics, Indian tailors) and cardigans (British wool and patterns, family women knitters) came out of mothballed trunks. 
