THE HEAVY, HEAVY MONSTER SOUND;
 IT'S BIG, BRASH AND IT'S COMING THIS WAY

The 7300 International CXT weighs in at seven tonnes unloaded and guzzles its way through a gallon of diesel every seven-to-ten miles

A NEW breed of monster truck that makes the Hummer look like a Smart car is taking America by storm, and rumbling ominously toward Britain. At a towering nine feet high and eight feet wide, the 7300 International CXT - short for commercial extreme truck - weighs about seven tonnes unloaded. That's equal to about five Mini Coopers. 
While celebrities like Stella McCartney extol the virtues of riding her bike around town to save the environment, the CXT and other pick-ups from International Truck and Engine company in Illinois appeal to drivers at the other end of the energy spectrum by being big, bad, and thirsty.


Actor Ashton Kutcher and MTV boy band star Nick Lachey are already driving theirs. Now a spokesman for CXT says he would not be surprised if British SUV enthusiasts like David Beckham, Kate Moss, Richard Branson and Wayne Rooney followed suit. 
"We have had lots of people interested in placing orders from the United Kingdom," he says. "The truck appeals to Hollywood types and sports icons because they want something that makes a big, bold statement". But who would really need a truck the size of Godzilla? "We mainly market them for commercial use and sell to entrepreneurs and professionals who want to use them to brand their business because they can haul anything - boats, cars, and horse trailers."
He adds, "Celebrities are business people too". The company says that the truck is perfect for construction, lawn care and commercial boating businesses - or, presumably, movie stars and footballers with egos to match the truck's gargantuan size.
Born out of a 20-tonne hauler and built on the same platform as dump trucks and snowploughs, the CXT is the creation of International and its parent company Navistar. International's estimate for sales in 2005 was 150, but because of the truck's massive success, they had an excess of 200 orders for January alone.
The company now plans to crank out up to 1,000 more this year. There are not yet any dealers in Britain. So for now, UK customers will have their trucks built in Garland, Texas, where the mayor of the city Bob Day has proudly said that the CXT "brings new meaning to everything big in Texas'."
But the gargantuan truck has a price tag to match: A standard model with cab space for five people starts at around $ 90,000 (£48,000), but fully- loaded models equipped with as much leather as a dominatrix's den can cost as much as $ 120,000 (pounds 64,000). Other options for the ultimate ride' include an automatically tiltable truck-bed, drop-down DVD, satellite- radio players, flat-screen TV and walnut trim. Because the CXT is powered by a 220-horsepower diesel engine, it can tow a boat AND carry another six tonnes of cargo in the truck-bed. The truck hauls three times the payload of standard pick-up trucks, is all-wheel drive, uses air brakes - and can tow and dump almost anything.
Despite its mammoth size, the company's director of marketing Rob Swim says that the CXT is a smooth ride. He also says the truck gets "great visibility" - no surprise since the driver is riding at the height of an 18-wheeler.
And the CXT is certainly not environmentally friendly, at a time when urban protests mean that driving an SUV can carry the same social stigma as wearing a floor-length mink in the mid-1990s. Despite the truck's diesel engine that requires less fuel than a regular gas engine, the CXT is thirstier than George Best at his local, consuming an awesome seven-to 10-miles to the gallon.
With demonstrators calling for increased congestion charges for 4x4s in cities, higher road tax for SUVs causing the most pollution and a ban on 4x4 advertising, one wonders what London Mayor Ken Livingstone would make of it.
Despite the controversy, International insists that the CXT is only the beginning - because the appetite for customised, fuel-swilling big trucks shows no sign of abating. General Motors sells a pick-up truck version of its Cadillac Escalade, and the Ford Motor Company's F-Series trucks have luxury versions featuring stitched leather on heated seats.
Riding high after the truck's smashing debut, International plans to show another smaller and less expensive MXT model later this month at the Chicago Auto Show. With commercial buyers snapping them up, can Chelsea mums on the school run be far behind?


DRIVING THE DOLCE VITA;
 EVERYTHING ABOUT THE ALFA GT SCREAMS ITALIAN STYLE.

Alexei Sayle with the Alfa GT on the set of his new film The Thief Lord', a 2005 Warner Brothers release

MANY SAY that cars are becoming more homogeneous and identical, but the bright red Alfa GT 3.2 V6, though it is no beauty, could only be Italian. There is a particular grace about the long tapering nose and elegantly sculpted grille that could only come from that country. 
The side view is less harmonious - the extended bubble of the passenger compartment, the consequence of providing room for four usable seats and a hatchback with a spacious load area. I helped a friend move house with it and I can't imagine there's another sports car that would contain a fifth of the stuff I got into the GT.


There are national characteristics on display inside as well as out; Italian cars seem much more relaxed than say German ones about whether you're wearing your seatbelt or not. If I'd unbuckled myself as I did in the Channel Tunnel terminal while driving one of the BMW's or VW's I've had lately I would have been greeted by a selection of flashing warning lights, howling claxons and ringing bells. In the Alfa a small red graphic of a man shrugging his shoulders and making "whatever" hand gestures came on and left it at that, it's none of their business if you want to undo yourself. 
I was undoing myself in the Tunnel terminal on the way to Luxembourg. If you see a movie set in the UK, Germany, space or almost anywhere else chances were it was made in Luxembourg. I've been working on a film called The Thief Lord, based on a novel by a woman called Cornelia Funke - "The German JK Rowling". The story is set in Venice and has partly been filmed on a gigantic permanent set, complete with canals, bridges and palaces built on the site of a disused steel mill in the small Luxembourgish town of Esch. It seemed a good idea for my last block of filming that I drive myself to the set in the new Alfa GT - a true Italian driving to a fake Italy.
Through Northern France the roads were veiled in thin fog so I kept the car at a steady 65, a speed at which it didn't feel particularly happy. The highway surfaces are extremely poor in places and a roar filled the cabin from time to time when we hit an especially rough patch.
The Alfa GT is good value for money for a car with its looks and performance, but the fussy fascia, lifted I think from the 147, is not entirely to my taste, there are too many rotary buttons, knobs, crude visual displays and cheap, hard plastics coming both in black and silver. The restrained, minimalist dash of my five year old 166 is much more graceful.
Only when I turned onto the E111/A25 down to Arlon and Luxembourg did the fog lift to be replaced with bright, cold sunlight and I was able to let that lovely V6 out of its box. At speed the GT was transformed, though putting so much power through the front wheels occasionally had my heart going into V-fib ( I don't know what that means either, but when it happens to a patient on ER its not good). There was a long-legged loping quality to the ride and I never felt that I came near to running out of the power that was available.
Crossing down through Belgium the weather again closed in, within a 100km the temperature had dropped six degrees, the trees were rimed with white frost and the car's computer was warning of possible ice on the road. I came off the motorway into the freezing countryside and drove to the studio in the darkness, the excellent headlights, much more powerful than my Alfa's which are styled for slender looks rather than illumination, cutting through the fog and sleet with ease. When I got to the studio in the late afternoon, because it was nearly the last day of shooting it resembled a little a World War One battlefield with bodies lying about asleep, there was one crew member stretched out on the floor with a cardboard box on his head. Funnily enough next to the Venice set there is actually a World War One battlefield built for the Hallmark movie The Lost Battalion. Nine and a Half Weeks 3 was also shot in Luxembourg, but I don't think that set is still standing. It was an odd sensation having my own car parked outside the studio, usually on a film you rapidly become infantilised, driven to and from work, in strange clothes with no money in your pockets, staying in a remote hotel miles from anywhere and because the project depends on your health and happiness everybody is inclined to treat you as if you are a particularly sickly kind of pedigree dog.
That I had a powerful sports car crouched outside gave me a feeling of liberation - I knew that if I wished to I could jump into it and hurtle off with a roar of V6 power all around the Low Countries. Of course, I didn't do that because it was cold outside and I didn't want my nose to look red for my close-ups.
The next day on the way back to Britain I wanted to do some shopping but rather than choose a coastal hypermarket swarming with Brits I stopped at a smaller Auchan on the edge of Dunkerque.
Amongst the sombre dark green French hatchbacks the bright red Alfa had the air of a louche old roue hanging around outside a girls school. The shopping mall also reminded me of one of the slight problems I'd had with the GT. Because the accelerator and brake pedal are set so close together for a sporty driving style I'd found myself doing what some US driver had done in the 1980's crying out that their Audis and Volvos had been possessed by the "Dayville" and calling for "Jaysus!" to protect them as they hurtled through parapets and off the edges of parking garages - accidentally pressing the accelerator while trying to brake. I also had a bit of trouble with the metal pedals themselves. I know they look nice, but when a fellow's wearing leather soled shoes they tend to slip around on metal, so that with the inadvertent braking/speeding up and the unexpected double de-clutching my progress was at times not as smooth as it might be.
Nevertheless I found the Alfa a much more stylish, useable and likeable machine than for example the Mazda RX 8 with which it directly competes and if they did an automatic gearbox with the 1.9JTD Diesel version I'd think about buying one.

