Work is a step away; 
FEATURE LIVING AND WORKING IN ESSEX Top designer David Pocknel hasn't missed out on family life thanks to living in a home that's also his office. Christopher Middleton reports

He lives in the middle of the countryside, gets up every day at sunrise, and puts in two or three hours of honest toil before breakfast.
But David Pocknell isn't a farmer, he's a designer, running an international studio employing up to 14 people at any one time. And whereas most firms like his are based in central London, his headquarters are out in the wilds of Essex and have been for the past 30 years.
Try to find them, down narrow lanes from the nearest village, Blackmore End, and you may get lost. But the minute you're there, you know you are in design country. One glance at the elegant glass and clapperboard frontage of Readings Farm, and you know this isn't the residence of some muddy-booted pig breeder.
Inside, pointed white ceilings soar upwards, supported by ancient wooden crossbeams that look like ploughshares' below, furrow-browed designers work quietly in front of plasma screens. Carry on to a snooker and darts room, then to a meeting room with chairs like seashells.
At which point you come up against a blue porthole door that marks the boundary between the Pocknell Design Studio (clients include Nat West, the National Railway Museum, the Flying Scotsman and Seattle Coffee Company) and move into the Pocknell family home.
"It's quite a gentle reminder, don't you think?" asks the boss, fixing a moustache and a pair of mild-mannered specs upon you. "It makes it clear you're at a junction, but hopefully it doesn't tell you too loudly.
"When people first come to work here, I think they find it a little hard to grasp, but after they've been here a while, they get the hang of how it works."
And the way it does work is that if staff want to go into the domestic part of the building, they knock. Here they're likely to find David's wife Sally who, as well as cooking lunch for visiting overseas clients (Stansted is only 10 miles away), boasts an encyclopaedic knowledge of post office opening times in the area (she's in charge of mail despatch).
"I was 31 when we came to Readings Farm, and in the early days, it was just me, Sally and one assistant," recalls David. "During the Eighties, we went up to 30 staff, but in recent years it's been 12-14 maximum. There are pros and cons to running a business out of the same building you live in' in the beginning, I used to feel very guilty about sloping off home early when some of my staff were still working. That was when I had to walk across a courtyard to get to the house' today, I only have to walk through a swing door and it doesn't feel so bad.
"Sometimes if people are working late, I'll take a bottle of wine out to them' however, beyond a certain point in the evening, I get a bit irritated if they're still here. I mean, there's impressing the boss - and there's overdoing it!"
Another big bonus of working from home is that David got to see his three sons growing up. "Unlike other dads working long hours running their businesses, I had breakfast every day with the family, and was usually able to pop over for tea.
"I realise how lucky I've been when I have to go to London to my office at the Conran Organisation (where he's executive creative director). I leave home at 7am and get back at 10pm, and can imagine only too well what it would be like having to do that five times a week."
So happy has the job-home juxtaposition proved that two of David's sons, Harry and Will, still work on projects for their dad (one doing IT, the other doing copywriting, or "tone of voice" work). But doesn't it all get a bit claustrophobic, this proximity of work and play?
"Physically, there's very little spillage over from the studio into the house", says David. "As you can see from my filing cabinets (and geometrically dug vegetable patch), I'm an obsessively neat person by nature.
"As for mental crossover, as a designer you're always thinking about your work' it makes no difference if you live next door or an hour's train ride away.
"We couldn't afford the house without the studio, and we couldn't afford the studio without the house. The two make each other financially feasible. That said, we have to keep separate tax accounts for the home and the office. We've got one boiler for the house and one for the studio' the same for electricity."
A well-oiled system. Which makes it the more surprising that after three decades, the Pocknells are about to go and start all over again, just a few miles down the road at Great Sailing.
"I've found a Grade II-star listed, galleried barn, dated 1385," says David, excitedly. "Yes, it will be a wrench leaving, but I'm always looking for a new challenge."
The Pocknells will have another work-live situation, though this time David plans a more self-contained studio - a glass house a la German architect Mies van der Rohe. As for Readings Farm, he's selling it to a property developer who wants to use it as both home and office. "He's not got much choice," says David . "Under the terms of the deeds, the building has to be workplace and residence' that's how we got planning permission."
Will he have made money on the deal? David gulps.
"When we came here, these barns were in ruins. We bought this place for about 1 per cent of what we're selling it for.
"Today, everyone wants to move out of town, and office space like this [3,000sq ft] is going for around pounds 40 per square foot in this part of the world.
"Yes, it's all very busy and buzzy to work in a big metropolis like London or Leeds, but provided you've got access to a big city, you can be just as creative out here as at the urban hub."
Pocknel Design, www.pocknel studio.com, 01787 463206
'WE COULDN'T AFFORD THE HOUSE WITHOUT THE STUDIO, AND WE COULDN'T AFFORD THE STUDIO WITHOUT THE HOUSE'


Wish you were here...; 
With its fishermen and Fifties milk bars, not to mention its picture-postcard seaside vistas, Scarborough has undeniable charm. And it's still pretty affordable, even if you're not Sir Jimmy Seville, says CREAM OF THE COUNTRY SCARBOROUGH

It was at the Young Conservatives conference of 1989 that Margaret Thatcher gazed out from Scarborough's Esplanade and proclaimed: "That must be the best view in my country."
It may be an apocryphal story, but it has passed into local folklore and the proprietorial "my" has ascertain ring of truth about it. Seventeen years on, and many more of these imposing Georgian and Victorian buildings, cresting the South Cliff, have been converted into apartments and maisonettes. One of Lady T's old Chequers chums, Sir Jimmy Seville, owns one of them. His view takes in the great sweep of the South Bay, its beige sands fringed by the froth of an ever-lively North Sea. On fine days, those churning waves provide good sport for increasing numbers of surfers. Scarborough's dwindling crew of fishermen have to venture out in all weathers, passing the lighthouse that guards the entrance to a particularly picturesque harbour. Part of the catch of the day is sold from a harbourside shop run on a co-operative basis, with shellfish a speciality. This time-honoured trade takes place just across the road from what might be termed Scarborough's Golden Three-quar-ters-of-a-Mile - the amusement arcades and cheap cafZs that pull in the holidaymakers and day-trippers. Even here, there are a couple of gems, such as Alonzi's ice-cream parlour with its Fifties milk-bar feel, and the Golden Grid Waterfront Eating House, its gilded bow windows proclaiming a pedigree dating back to 1883, and battered haddock a speciality.
Not that you could smell it, or even see the Golden Grid from the more rarefied environs of the Esplanade. The sociologist-turned-broadcaster Laurie Taylor had a flat just across the bridge from the South Cliff during his days as a professor at York University, and says he was only dimly aware of Scarborough's tackier side. "I chose to live there because York was becoming overwhelmed with tourists," he recalls. "I know it seems odd to move to a seaside town to escape from visitors, but they didn't seem to interfere with the lifeblood of the town as they did in York.
"Scarborough is extremely beautiful, yet the town doesn't know how good it is. That's why it goes on being so. It's antithetical to metropolitan self-consciousness," he adds, slipping back into sociological lingo.
Professor Taylor's enthusiasm for being beside the seaside in North Yorkshire may well have spread around the corridors of power at the BBC. A very senior executive is among the metropolitan types who have snapped up second homes in Scarborough.
"She came in about five years ago, bought a mid-terraced house in the Old Town for pounds 65,000 and then came back to ask if we had left a nought off the price," says David Chapman, a partner at CPH Property Services. "We're currently selling an end-of-terrace house in the same street for pounds 194,950."
The Old Town stands at the opposite end of the South Bay from the Esplanade, and its roofs seem to tumble away down the cliffside Fishermen, known as "Bottom Enders", traditionally lived closest to the sea. Some still do.
Grander properties tend to be towards the top of these steep streets. The playwright Alan Ayckbourn, who is also the artistic director of Scarborough's vibrant Stephen Joseph Theatre, has at least two Georgian houses knocked into one.
Just around the corner is a superb period town-house, with five bedrooms, a cellar and even a garage, that recently sold for pounds 415,000. And just over the brow of the hill is Scarborough Castle - one of the ruins that Cromwell knocked about a bit and the German navy tried to finish off in 1914. Luckily, they didn't quite succeed.
Beyond the ruins lies the North Bay, which is less developed. So far, at least. Plans have just been accepted for a new development to be called The Sands, which will include more hotels and more swish apartments.
Meanwhile, artists and musicians are beginning to make their presence felt in the Old Town. Most nights they can be found mingling with the fishermen and the occasional estate agent in the Leeds Arms, a fine, low-ceilinged pub at the Bottom End. Two of the local artists have taken over some redundant bait sheds in the harbour.
So, is the rumour true that Scarborough is setting itself up as the St Ives of the North?
"That would be great, but we've got a bit of work to do yet," says Nick Taylor, the manager of an initiative called Urban Renaissance, which is charged with enhancing the quality of life in the town - everything from environmental improvements on the harbour and the squares in the town centre, to raising standards in the many restaurants and hotels.
A former hotelier himself, Taylor is keen to ensure that Scarborough remains attractive not only to holidaymakers but also to eminent broadcasters, and even to the odd visiting prime minister.
The lowdown
Scarborough
Cost of living: One-bedroom apartments start at around pounds 60,000, or pounds 10,000 more for one with a sea view. Town centre terraces are from pounds 80,000 to pounds 100,000. A two-bedroom maisonette on the esplanade with sea view: around pounds 240,000. Old Town prices vary from pounds 150,000 to pounds 415,000 for five/six bedrooms.
Attractions: Stunning views, fine beaches, good surfing.
Ayckbourn premieres at stylish theatre. Highly regarded jazz festival. Good schools. Fresh fish. Moors and Wolds nearby.

