Opera time capsules to be revealed in Paris
100-year-old urns containing recordings on display 
18/12/2007 

Two urns containing opera recordings buried for 100 years under Paris's Palais Garnier opera house are to be put on display for the first time. On Christmas Eve the two sealed urns will go on display in the French Bibliothèque Nationale (National Library). Inside are 12 discs chosen in 1907 to preserve the best French and Italian opera of the time.

Buried on 24 December 1907 in the opera house basement, the discs were donated by Alfred Clark, the head of the Gramophone Company in France. Clark wanted the discs to be opened a century later ‘so that men of that epoch can hear what the leading voices of our time sounded like'. The voices of singers such as superstar soprano Dame Nellie Melba and Italian lyric tenor Enrico Caruso were captured for posterity, singing a range of music including Bizet, Rossini and Verdi.

Following the display, the urns will be opened next year. As the recordings were sealed with asbestos in 1907, they must now be unsealed in special conditions. Since 1989, when they were dug up from their opera house home, the urns have been kept in the Paris National Library but have never before seen the light of day. EMI, the present-day incarnation of the Gramophone Company, plans to bring out a CD of the urn recordings and to create another recording time capsule ‘to preserve recordings representative of contemporary music'.

Judith Weir awarded Queen's Medal
Composer wins national award 
17/12/2007 

Leading composer Judith Weir has been awarded the Queen's Medal for Music. Awarded annually, the medal is given by the Queen to an individual or group of musicians who have had a major influence on the UK's musical life. Weir's achievement comes amid preparations for a weekend-long celebration of her music by the BBC Symphony Orchestra.

The Scottish composer is the third award winner since the medal was introduced in 2005, joining fellow recipients conductor Sir Charles Mackerras and singer Bryn Terfel. A committee chaired by the Master of the Queen's Music – composer Sir Peter Maxwell Davies – oversaw this year's judging process. Weir received her medal at a ceremony in the Royal Academy of Music in London.

Born in 1954, Weir made her name with the dramatic pieces A Night at the Chinese Opera and Blond Eckbert. As composer-in-residence with the City of Birmingham Synphony Orchestra, artistic director of the Spitalfields Festival in London, and through teaching at Glasgow University, Weir has made her mark on Britain's musical landscape. The BBC Symphony Orchestra's upcoming weekend, Telling the Tale, provides an overview of her work, and includes the world premiere of a large-scale orchestral and choral work CONCRETE.
	 
New solution to Elgar's Enigma?
Theme based on popular hymn 
14/12/2007 

A popular 19th-century hymn was the inspiration for Elgar's Enigma Variations, an academic from Leeds University has claimed. Dr Clive McClelland believes he has solved a long-standing conundrum by pinning down the source of the famous orchestral work's theme. He says that Elgar drew inspiration from the hymn ‘Now the day is over', which was written by an Anglican priest, Rev. Sabine Baring-Gould.

Elgar's piece – a set of 14 variations based on an original theme – has been shrouded in mystery since its premiere in 1899. In a programme note for the first performance the composer set off years of speculation and debate about the work's inspiration by writing, ‘The enigma I will not explain – its “dark saying” must be left unguessed.'

McClelland's answer joins a varied selection of suggestions, including ‘Auld Lang Syne', ‘Home, Sweet Home', the National Anthem, and Mozart's ‘Prague' Symphony. He says his solution to the puzzle is the most plausible because it contains all 24 of the notes heard in Elgar's theme, whereas previous efforts left some notes unexplained, or contained dissonances.

‘I suddenly came up with the first few notes of a promising tune in bed at 4am. It was a genuine “Eureka!” moment! By 5.30 I had it all worked out,' says McClelland. ‘The ‘Enigma' theme is a very strange tune – it has the feel of something that has been worked out rather than composed in a moment of inspiration.'

New York Philharmonic Orchestra to play in North Korea
Landmark concert to include Star Spangled Banner 
12/12/2007 

The New York Philharmonic Orchestra is to perform in North Korea next February, after accepting an official invitation made in August. The event, to take place on 26 February in Pyongyang, will be the first time an American orchestra has performed in the communist state. Both the Star-Spangled Banner and the North Korean anthem ‘Let Morning Shine' are to be included in the programme, alongside Gershwin's An American in Paris.

The NYPO has insisted on several conditions for the performance, including the presence of foreign journalists, special guarantees for the nine orchestral members of Korean origin, and a nationwide TV deal to ensure the concert is seen across the state. Following the performance in North Korea, the 250-strong orchestra will play in Seoul, South Korea, completing their 14-day tour of the Far East.

‘I hope it will be looked back upon as an event that helped bring that country back into the world,' says Christopher Hill, American ambassador to North Korea, in The New York Times. Other reactions to the announcement have been mixed, with questions raised about the consequences of performing in a state notorious for its human rights record and nuclear ambitions. ‘It would be a mistake to hand Kim-Jong-il a propaganda coup,' says Richard Allen, former US national security advisor.

‘All I can say is one small symphony is a giant leap,' says Zarin Mehta, president of the NYPO. ‘We only play great music. We don't think about politics.'

Karlheinz Stockhausen 1928-2007
Leading avant-garde composer who inspired Boulez and the Beatles dies aged 79 
10/12/2007 

Stockhausen died last Wednesday in his home in Kürten-Kettenberg. Best-known for his pioneering electronic music, his breakthrough work was Gesang der Jünglinge (Song of the Youths), completed in 1956, which Paul McCartney still cites as one of the most influential works on his own music: it was this which earned Stockhausen his place in the collage of celebrities featured on the Beatles' album Sgt Peppers Lonely Hearts Club Band.

Stockhausen's importance for the development of music was in fact far-reaching: not only the Beatles but also Boulez were profoundly influenced by his creativity, and every composer in the 1960s had to at least come to terms with his work.

Born in 1928 in the village of Moedrath, near Cologne, Stockhausen grew up in Hitler's Germany; his mother – diagnosed as insane – was killed under the Nazi's euthanasia programme, and his father disappeared, presumed killed, on the Eastern front. Karlheinz developed a hatred of the repetitive rhythms of the marching songs he encountered as a member of the Hitler Youth, but retained an affection for the Catholic ritual of rural Germany, which he recalled over 40 years later in Act II of Montag, the second part of his final magnum opus Licht.

After the war, Stockhausen became part of a whole generation of composers – including Boulez, Xenakis, Ligeti, Berio and Nono – determined to re-create the art of composition, to do away with everything that had been prized by the Nazis who had suppressed the avant-garde. He attended Messiaen's classes in the early 1950s and inspired by the French composer made his earliest experiments in total serialism, composing several key works in the 1950s including his series of Klavierstücke. But it was his ventures into electronic music, started when he became an assistant at the newly established Electronic Music Studio of NWDR in Cologne, which both enabled him to find his own ‘voice' and which inspired many musicians. British composer, Jonathan Harvey, was one who was profoundly influenced by Stockhausen's work and once summarised his achievement: ‘He was, in a sense, a kind of scientist in music, making analysis of the atomic structure of the sounds – he could begin to rebuild a new musical universe.' 

Winner Harrison Birtwistle makes plea at British Composer Awards
Birtwistle and Knussen prove that small is beautiful in the composing business 
06/12/2007 

Last night, top British composers Oliver Knussen and Harrison Birtwistle were winners in this year's British Composer Awards (BCA), both of them awarded for relatively intimate works. The Awards, presented by former BCA winner Errollyn Wallen (BBC Radio 3 Listeners Award, 2005) and hosted by Sara Mohr-Pietsch and Andrew McGregor, were held at Glaziers Hall on London's south bank.

Harrison Birtwistle won the Instrumental Solo category with Crowd for solo harp, beating off competition from George Benjamin and Jonathan Harvey. Though nattily dressed with a cream silk cravat, he was his usual combination of awkwardness and blunt directness when receiving his award: ‘Music is in crisis,' he told his audience; ‘And the whole question of education in music is there are thousands of children out there who simply don't know what music is: there is nearly 2000 years of history, and [for them] only music that has a drum mechanism with it is music. I just like to make a plea that we have to do something about music and education. Within two hours you can get children singing in two parts and [so open for them] 2000 years of history.'

Oliver Knussen won the Vocal category with his Requiem – Songs for Sue, a 12-minute song cycle written in memory of his wife who died in 2003. Receiving his award, he told the assembled audience: ‘This is big honour – it's a very personal piece and I thought twice about bringing it out in public at all.' He thanked Augusta Read Thomas, present in the audience who as composer-in-residence of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra had commissioned the work, and soprano Claire Booth ‘who sang it unbelievably well [at its premiere] having received one of the movements 36 hours before the concert, but we won't go into that!'

The BBC Radio 3 Listeners Award, for which there were 12 candidates performed in October and then made available for on-line listening by members of the public, was won by Welsh composer Guto Puw with his Oboe Concerto. And the winner of the hotly contested Orchestral category was Thomas Adès with his colourful score Tevot.

Elsewhere in the news:

A sketch for the cadenza of Mozart's Sinfonia Concertante for violin and viola has sold at auction for £110,900. Bought by London dealers Maggs Brothers for a private client, the sketch set a new auction record for a single autograph leaf of Mozart. The previous record was £89,500, paid in 1998 for a page of Rondo K386 in A.

New composition to be sold for £10 a bar
Music in the Round scheme to fund new music 
05/12/2007 

Members of the public are being invited to buy a bar of music. Chamber music champion Music in the Round has come up with an innovative way to finance its latest commission by offering the public the chance to buy a bar's worth of notes and rests. For £10, buyers will become owners of a bar of Welsh composer Huw Watkin's latest commission. The piece is being written for Ensemble 360, a chamber group specialising in contemporary music.

Bar-buyers will have the chance to hear how their purchases fit together at the work's premiere in Sheffield on 10 May 2008. Ensemble 360 will also be bringing the work to the prestigious Wigmore Hall in London. Copies of the bars will be sent to their buyers to make sure owners can enjoy their slice of music history. Music in the Round hopes the scheme will add to and enliven the chamber music repertoire.

Although the final details of the piece have yet to be fixed, it will be written for all eleven players of Ensemble 360. ‘We look forward to Huw's manuscript landing on our doormats,' says Matt Hunt, clarinettist in Ensemble 360. Huw Watkins's previous commissions include pieces for the BBC National Orchestra of Wales, the London Symphony Orchestra and the Nash Ensemble. The innovative Ensemble 360 aims to refresh the image of chamber music by putting on informal concerts ‘in the round'.

