Barbara, who was born Barbara Ann Deeks in Shoreditch in August 1937, started tracing her ancestors with little knowledge of her family tree beyond her grandparents. A true EastEnder herself, she's always felt somehow cut off from it as her mother Rose was such a snob about it and early on moved the family away to Stoke Newington in North London. 
Barbara knows more about her mother's side of the family than her father's. Although her parents were second cousins, her mother (née Ellis) always looked down on the Deeks branch of the family though she did allow herself to be seduced by Barbara's dad's barrow-boy charm. However, the marriage didn't last; they were divorced when Barbara's father, John Deeks, began to use violence against Rose.
Barbara's maternal grandfather was Charlie Ellis, a docker who liked his drink – ‘and when he was tipsy, I always knew he was good for a few pennies for a jam doughnut' – but also entertained in the local pubs as a singer. ‘I loved Grandad Charlie. He was a real gent, always well turned out, he never swore, a bit of a local celebrity and I'm sure that's where I got my entertaining gene from.' 
Barbara didn't know exactly what Charlie's day job entailed, so she sought the advice of Chris Ellmers, an expert on the London Docks. It emerged that Charlie had started work as a casual labourer there in 1916 and became permanent staff ten years later, which constituted a move up the social ladder. But Barbara still wanted to know why her mum looked down so much on her dad's side of the family, the Deeks.
Her cousin Gerald told her that Barbara's grandmother, ‘Fat Nan', had been a chorus-line dancer – a ‘hoofer' – at the Britannia Theatre, Hoxton, just before the First World War when she was about 16. Her husband, Jack Deeks, was a costermonger, selling fruit and vegetables (costermongers were the precursors of the Pearly Kings and Queens and wore similar apparel; they had their own slang which prefigured Cockney rhyming slang). Intriguingly, Barbara discovered that there's a family myth that Fat Nan's mother didn't want her daughter to marry a Deeks either.
To follow that line of enquiry, Barbara went to meet Gloria, another first cousin once removed. Gloria and Barbara share a great-grandfather, John Deeks. It emerged that the Deeks men were very handsome and charming, but rather given to drinking which didn't go down well with parents who wanted their daughters to better themselves. From Gloria, Barbara learned that her great-great-grandfather, John Deeks, had a skilled job – he was a bricklayer. Why then did the family seem caught in a poverty trap? 
To find out more, Barbara visited the London Metropolitan Archive and talked to the economic historian Paul Johnson. Paul explained how the East End of London fell into decline in the course of the 19th century as burgeoning industry led to pollution and cramped living conditions, resulting in bad hygiene, poor health and high mortality. 
John Deeks (1834–1909) would have had to face fierce competition for work. By 1889, John was in the workhouse where he spent much of the last twenty years of his life. None of his ten children seemed able to help him. 
Was Barbara's mother's family as poor as her father's? Barbara found out that her great-grandmother, Mary Ann Ellis was a matchbox-maker, probably at the Bryant &amp; May factory in Bow in the early 1880s. She worked from home, on piecework, with her children helping out. Her home was in Old Nichol Street, in one of the worst slums in London and it was close to where the Deeks lived. The families probably knew each other. 
It's more than likely that Mary Ann was involved in one of the first significant strikes in English industrial history – the matchgirls' strike of 1888. Barbara also learned that 90 per cent of the workers were Irishwomen and finds out from her grandfather's birth certificate that her mother's maiden name was Collins. She then looked up the 1871 census online, which confirmed that her great-grandmother hailed from Cork.
Barbara went to Cork and found out that Mary Ann's parents emigrated from Ireland to the East End of London at some point between 1846 and 1850 – a period of mass emigration from Ireland on account of the notorious potato famine. Meanwhile news came from historian Paul Johnson of an even earlier relative, her great-great-great-grandfather Golding Deeks, a bricklayer born in Bures, Suffolk, in 1806. 
At Bury St Edmunds Record Office, Barbara found out from archivist Sheila Reid that she had found out something extraordinary about the name Golding. It turned out that Golding was Golding Deeks' mother's maiden name and that it was a family tradition to give a boy his mother's surname as his Christian name. The famous landscapist John Constable's father was called Golding Constable, also born in Bures. 
Sheila explained that Golding Deeks' mother, Elizabeth Deeks, was born in the same year as John Constable in 1776. They shared the same great-great grandparents, who were wealthy. So, it's probable that Barbara is a descendent of John Constable! However, to Barbara's amusement, the wealth went down the Constable line and not to the poor old Deeks. 
Introduction
by Matthew Woollard
The administration behind the sixth annual census of Britain was relatively unchanged from its predecessor in 1841. An Act of Parliament was passed in autumn 1850 to authorise the General Register Office to take a count of the population. 
The census was carried out by 30,610 enumerators who delivered a form to householders for them to complete. Then the enumerators copied the details into their enumerators' books. An innovation in 1851 was the introduction of schedules for the population living outside households and institutions on census night. 
Schedules for ships and institutions were introduced and travellers and night workers returning home after census night were now to be enumerated unlike in 1841. These changes improved the accuracy of the census. The original forms were destroyed in 1904, but the enumeration books survive providing valuable information for both personal family research and local and community studies.
The scope of the questions asked of the population was also extended in 1851. Apart from personal information including address, name, sex, occupation and place of birth, questions were asked about relationship to head of household, marital status and disability. Furthermore, precise age was requested, which had not been the case in 1841. An attempt also was made to collect more detailed information about people's occupations, providing more detail for the reports published after the census.
This year also saw two further separate ‘surveys' being carried out. Neither was really a census but both were in fact surveys of attendance - either at places of religious worship or of schools. Neither of these collected personal information, but the reports of both (and the unpublished returns of the religious “census” in TNA) provide valuable information on the state of religion and education in Britain at the time of the Great Exhibition.
Matthew Woollard is Project Director of histpop at the University of Essex. 

Local history with Alan Crosby 
Festive Indulgence
18 Dec 2007 
Christmas comes but once a year, so I'm doing some work on Christmas customs and the food that was eaten in the past on this most special of occasions. 
When the weather was cold, the days were short, the nights were long, and people focused on their families, there was always a sense that something hearty and warming was needed—hence our own Christmas dinner to this day. 
We could eat any manner of delicacies, refined little dishes with ingredients from all parts of the globe, but most of us still look to a traditional dinner with ingredients that typify the wintertime in our chilly offshore island. 
I'm reminded of what Samuel Bamford, the early nineteenth century radical from south Lancashire, wrote about the Christmas celebrations in Middleton near Manchester when he was a child in the 1790s: ‘in most families, a peck or a strike of malt would be brewed, a spiced bread or potato custard would be made, and probably an extra piece of beef, and some good old cheese would be laid in store, not to be touched until the work was done [that is, extra work before the holiday began] ... the house was cleaned, the furniture rubbed, and the holidays then commenced. The ale was tapped, the currant loaf was sliced out, and lads and lasses went to play as each liked best'. 
It's a lovely image—though potato custard (mashed potato mixed with eggs, milk, sugar, and spices, then baked to make a sort of cheesecake) has fallen off the menu for some reason! 
» respond to Alan's blog on our local history forum

Cheese's Comeback
12 Dec 2007 
Whilst in the supermarket, buying cheese, I was struck by how varied and how many cheeses are now on offer. Yes, I know I should patronise a specialist cheese shop, but it's a question of time and availability. Besides, the supermarket is a small local chain (only 27 branches across our region) and makes a major point of stocking locally produced foods, so my conscience can be perfectly clear.
Surely, years ago, there used to be only half a dozen varieties? 
Today, there are numerous lovely varieties — goat's cheese from Cumbria, sheep's cheese from Northumberland, delicious Shropshire Blue (by far the best visually, with that luminous orange-yellow shot through with greeny-blue patterns, and pretty good to eat too) and Somerset Brie (maybe wash it down with Somerset cider brandy after the meal?). 
Living in Preston, we have the benefit of at least six different Lancashire cheeses made on farms within five miles of the town — those who know their Lancashire, know not only the varieties (such as Crumbly or Tasty) but also favour particular farms. It is perhaps fortunate that we can no longer obtain Westmorland cheese, which was claimed to be so hard that they mended clogs with it. 
The local history of cheese was an integral part of British agriculture for thousands of years but in the ‘60s and ‘70s was seemingly dead, apart from the mass-produced stuff made in factories on industrial estates. Now, it is undergoing a welcome and highly successful revival and the research is very enjoyable (but I do absolutely draw the line at those horrible mucked-up travesties such as ‘stilton with mango and pickled onion'!). 
» respond to Alan's blog on our local history forum

Lovely Lacock
04 Dec 2007 
Cranford is full of celebrities, but perhaps the most famous (if unidentified) of them all is Lacock in Wiltshire, that perfect English village which has had a starring role in so many period dramas. We see it all the time, especially in the stories set between about 1750 and 1850. 
There's that great wide street lined with two-storeyed houses, and that broad roadway across which so many handsome horsemen have trotted and so many bonneted ladies have strolled and gossiped. There are those quaint shop fronts that have served for Jane Austen's Longbourne and many another ‘typical' country place of the Regency period. 
Reading the website coverage of Cranford (which I have to say was brilliant, even if it does mix'n'match no fewer than three of Elisabeth Gaskell's stories), I was fascinated to see just how much of a celebrity the village has become. I suppose it's everybody's idea of what England used to be like—and certainly a lot more convincing than those ‘budget' productions where careful bands of straw and mud all too obviously serve to conceal the double yellow lines. 
Needless to say, Lacock, as a former monastic village and one always under the strict control of its owners (the National Trust is only the latest in a long line of powerful landlords) is anything but typical—but what a beautiful image it presents!

