SLOW EMOTION
17:45:32  12/12/2007

Time slows down during scary situations


Extreme sports enthusiasts are living longer through a trick of the mind. Brains don't work faster during emotional events, but frightening situations are probably remembered better, making it seem like they last longer.

People often report that time moves more slowly when their life is threatened, say US neuroscientists. In these situations the ‘fight or flight' hormone adrenaline courses through the body, making it more responsive. If adrenaline also affects the brain, this could make it better at telling the time.

The researchers tested the theory by dropping volunteers from a high tower, providing 31 frightening metres of freefall (10 metres per second). Each wore a watch flashing digits just slow enough to read. During the fall, the random numbers were flashed six milliseconds quicker. Although volunteers couldn't read the slightly faster flashes, they still estimated that their falls lasted 36 per cent longer than those of others.

WHAT A TURN ON!
14:37:02  11/12/2007

‘Gay gene' switched on in flies 


Homosexuality can be ‘switched on and off' by mutating just one gene. Research at the University of Illinois shows that male fruit flies with a mutation in the ‘genderblind', or GB, gene can't smell the difference between males and females.

The bisexual flies get over-stimulated by pheromones released by other males, who they then attempt to court and copulate with. Genderblind mutants have a malfunctioning nervous system: glial cells normally soak up excess neurotransmitter from around synapses, but in mutants their broken transporters don't allow enough uptake, so the neurones get over excited.

Numerous animals show homosexual behaviour. The researchers say that the genderblind gene is similar to xCT genes in mammals, adding to the debate on whether homosexuality is inherited and if humans possess a ‘gay gene'.


ENERGY VS ECOLOGY
13:30:51  07/12/2007

Red Sea dam damned?


The Middle East may be rich in crude oil, but it's now considering other sources to meet its growing energy demands. One proposal is to generate hydroelectric power by damming the Red Sea. The ambitious engineering project could generate 50 gigawatts, 15 times the output of the largest nuclear power plant in the US.

But a study led by Roelof Dirk Schuiling of Utrecht University in the Netherlands shows the dam would also harm local ecosystems. The World Wildlife Fund reports that this has already happened near major rivers such as the Danube, Ganges and Nile.

The inlet experiences an especially high rate of evaporation. Without an inflow of water from the Indian Ocean, the already salty Red Sea would get even saltier, seriously affecting marine life.

CRITICAL GAS
16:29:44  06/12/2007

Giant planets unstable when too close to stars

Why is the atmosphere of Jupiter thin and stable, while gas giants outside our Solar System are volatile and expanding? Planetary scientists from UCL think they've sussed it out: it depends how close the planet is to the nearest sun.

Jupiter orbits our Sun at 5 Astronomical Units (AU), in other words five times the distance between Earth and the Sun. If Jupiter were less than 0.15AU away, its atmosphere would boil and escape into space. This is what happens with extrasolar gas giants like HD209458b, which orbits its star 100 times closer than Jupiter does.

Just as our protective ozone layer is made up of oxygen, Jupiter produces H3+, a form of hydrogen that radiates sunlight back into space. If a gas giant gets too close to its star, the hydrogen becomes too unstable to become H3+ and the planetary atmosphere eventually evaporates.

HOLIDAY AT HOME
17:16:35  05/12/2007

Global warming widens tropical belt

A team of US climatologists warn that global warming is expanding the tropical belt towards the poles. Studying satellite data, they tracked several atmospheric markers, such as jet streams and storms. All markers point to a widening of the tropical belt and, worse, it's happening much faster than predicted by computer models.

The US is already being hit by frequent tropical storms, but this is just the tip of the (rapidly melting) iceberg. Poorer countries, many of which lie in the tropics, may not be able to adapt rapidly enough to combat the effects of climate change.

MEMORY CHIMP
14:38:05  04/12/2007

Humans beaten in memory test

We might like to think that our brain power is superior to other species. But tests comparing our memory ability to that of chimpanzees prove otherwise.

Tetsuro Matsuzawa, of Kyoto University in Japan, carried out a memory test on six chimps and nine university students. As in Nintendo's Brain Training game, the digits 1 to 9 were randomly scattered around a computer screen. Numbers were then replaced by blank boxes and test subjects had to touch them in the correct order. 

Seven-year-old chimp Ayumu performed the best. He correctly remembered number sequences 80 per cent of the time, while his human counterparts had only a 40 per cent success rate.

CROAK AND DAGGER
16:10:29  03/12/2007

Parasite could drive frogs to extinction

Tadpoles of freshwater frog populations across the US are being felled by a previously unknown parasite. Genetic tests by a team at the University of Georgia, US, have shown that the killer is related to Perkinsus, a mass murderer of marine shellfish. 

While little is known about the biology of the mysterious parasite, the effects on its hosts are evident. The single-celled organism infects every organ, causing severe damage to the liver in particular, by killing off virtually all liver cells. The tadpoles become heavy and sluggish – and more prone to predation.

Protecting the tadpoles from infection is virtually impossible, as parasites like these have clever ways of evading host immune systems. If these frogs become extinct, it will have a considerable impact on freshwater ecosystems.

CHILLI TRUNKS
13:07:59  22/11/2007

Red hot solution wards off wild elephants

Super-hot chillies could be the first defence against rampaging Indian elephants. Over the past 16 years the creatures have destroyed homes and crops and even killed over 600 people in Assam state in north-east India. 

To keep the marauding elephants at bay, conservationists from the Assam Haathi (Elephant) Project have put up jute fences covered in car grease and a substance called bhut jolokia – the world's hottest chilli. Chilli smoke bombs and torch-like chilli-filled straw nests on sticks are also being made to drive the elephants away. 

The project promises not to harm the animals, claiming that the chillies won't be eaten, their smell being enough of a deterrent.

STING FROM THE PAST
11:44:44  21/11/2007

Man-sized scorpion discovered

A huge fossilised sea scorpion claw, 46cm in length, has been found in south-west Germany by palaeontologist Markus Poschmann of Mainz Museum.

Judging by the size of its enormous claws, the giant creepy crawly (Jaekelopterus rhenaniae), would have been 2.5m(8ft)-long – larger than the average human. 

The creature existed about 390-million-years ago. As there were no vertebrate predators back then and oxygen levels were higher, arthropods could grow far larger than today's species. But this discovery suggests ancient arthropods were even bigger than previously thought.

SEEDING THE FUTURE
17:55:33  20/11/2007

Giant vault to preserve major food crops

The Svalbard Global Seed Vault in the Arctic is well on its way to storing all known varieties of crop seeds in a bid to protect species from worldly disasters. 

The construction of the vault, sponsored by the Norwegian government, promises to preserve 4.5 million seed samples at temperatures of around -18oC. The Global Diversity Trust, responsible for collecting and maintaining the samples, claims that crops at these temperatures can last for up to a 1000 years. 

The vault is 1000km in length and located inside a mountain on the Norwegian island of Spitsbergen. So, come rain or sunshine, asteroids or tsunamis, it looks like the giant freezer is here to serve our future dietary needs.


PRESCRIBING LONELINESS
14:56:30  14/11/2007

Genes hold key to feeling isolated

Whether you feel lonely or not may be down to how your genes express themselves, according to a recent study, led by Dr Steven Cole at the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA).

Of the 14 participants in the study, six scored in the top 15 per cent and eight scored in the bottom 15 per cent on the UCLA ‘loneliness scale'. DNA analysis of white blood cells showed that expression in over 200 genes varied between the two groups. 

Interestingly, those classified as ‘highly-lonely', over-expressed many genes linked to the immune system, but under-expressed key genes involved in antibody production and antiviral response.

The team are hoping to use this ‘bio-fingerprint' to find new ways to reduce the effect of social circumstances on health.


GREEN CITYSCAPES
14:42:12  13/11/2007

Urban rooftops go green

Grey, gravelled rooftops could soon be a thing of the past. Designers are looking at ways to convert these wastelands into gardens, which not only provide green spaces for city-dwellers, but also help the environment.

Studies have shown that green rooftops may cut heat loss from a building by 50 per cent, reduce air-conditioning costs by 25 per cent and decrease the urban-heat-island effect (the tendency for cities to retain heat) by 2oC. And these green spaces could encourage wildlife back to the city.

Various cities across the US, such as Chicago, have already developed these green cityscapes. Other cities going green include Washington and New York.

SUN SLOWS AGEING
12:28:13  09/11/2007

Sunshine vitamin linked to young cells

Research shows that vitamin D, made when sunlight hits the skin, may help to slow the ageing process.

The team, led by Dr Brent Richards of King's College London, measured vitamin D levels in 2160 women aged between 18 and 79. The scientists found that women with higher levels of vitamin D had longer telomeres (sections of DNA that shorten each time a cell reproduces). As normally telomeres shorten with age, the longer telomeres were a sign of biological youth.

Although the researchers found a link, they haven't yet shown that vitamin D is the actual cause of the slowing of the telomere shortening, and it's also not known whether telomere shortening is a consequence of or the cause of ageing. But Dr Richards says that the findings could help to explain how vitamin D has a protective effect on many ageing-related diseases, such as heart disease and cancer.

Most of the vitamin D in the body is made by the action of sunlight on the skin, but dietary sources, including fish, eggs, fortified milk and breakfast cereals, also contribute.

HAND OUTS
14:54:46  07/11/2007

Hormone key to generosity

New research reveals why we are so generous. A team led by Paul Zak of Claremont Graduate University in the US showed that the hormone oxytocin boosts our ability to empathise with others and makes us more generous.

The researchers gave volunteers a dose of either a placebo or oxytocin, a feel-good hormone released during sex, childbirth and breastfeeding. The volunteers were then paired up, with one of them (the donor) having to decide how to share $10 (£4.80) with the other, who might accept or reject the offer. If the recipient rejected the offer, neither of them received anything, so the donor had to consider the other's response – a sign of empathy – before deciding on the cut to give them. 

The researchers defined generosity as giving someone more than they expect or need. Donors taking oxytocin were on average 80 per cent more generous.

BREAST IS BEST
16:29:38  06/11/2007

Breastfeeding boosts IQ

Studies have found that breast-fed babies are brighter, but only if the infant has at least one copy of a particular form of a gene. 

The gene in question is FADS2. It is involved in the digestion of fatty acids found in breast milk, which are thought to play a role in the development of the brain.

Researchers at King's College London and Dunedin School of Medicine, New Zealand, studied two groups of babies in the UK and New Zealand. Breast-fed babies with at least one copy of the ‘C' form of the FADS2 gene had higher IQs than the others.

The researchers ruled out alternative explanations for the boosted IQ, such as the intelligence or social class of the mother or the nutritional content of her milk.
