GREEN GURU: INSULATING YOUR HOME
[16 November 2007] 
Time to wrap up for winter, says It's Not Easy Being Green's Dick Strawbridge
The days are getting shorter and heating bills are increasing, so it's time to apply the first principle of being green – reduce, reuse, recycle. Only after reducing your energy usage should you even consider moving on to the sexy green projects that allow you to generate your own power. When we moved to our derelict smallholding in Cornwall I knew I wanted waterwheels, wind turbines, solar panels, chickens, organic veg – the list was endless. 

However, we had to prioritise and common sense won through. Having fixed the holes in the roof, it was important to make sure we weren't losing heat. I must admit I had no problems grasping the principles – being bald on top I appreciate what it is to lose heat – insulating your roof is the same as a bald chap wearing a woolly hat on a cold day. Those people who have seldom ventured up into their loft tend to have a memory of some insulation being up there. Sorry, but if you have not insulated within the last couple of years, there is a very good chance you are woefully lacking in insulation. Chances are there are only a couple of inches of fibreglass or blown paper up there. 

Current regulations now equate to nearly a foot of insulation (as a minimum), while super insulated buildings have lots more. There are grants available – check what you have in your loft and bite the bullet. If you do it properly it could pay for itself before the spring and you can save hundreds of pounds every winter from now on. Insulation comes in lots of shapes and sizes, from hi-tech composite sheets to recycled materials. We went for recycled denim at one end of our house and sheep fleeces at the other. I have to say the fleece wins for me – it still has a faint smell of wool and if you pop your head through the hatch you could swear you hear a faint baaa up there. 

If the cap fits wear it, and if you're bald you'll know what a good idea that is!
REAL FOOD: SOMERSET SALAD RECIPE
[16 November 2007] 
This lovely Somerset recipe is provided by Richard Guest, chef at The Castle in Taunton
2 Edward plums or 3 Victoria's 
1 Pixford, Scrumptious or Cox's Pippin apple 
10 walnuts blanched in boiling water from the kettle and lightly toasted (this removes any bitter aftertaste) 
2 tablespoons walnut oil 
Exmoor blue cheese 
A good handful of washed young leaves 
Sherry vinegar, sea salt, black pepper 
Watercress, optional 

Cut the plums into thin wedges and the apple into the same and put into a salad bowl then sprinkle over the crumbled walnuts, the walnut oil, vinegar and seasoning. Gently toss together then arrange onto 2 plates. Crumble over some Exmoor blue. A few sprigs of watercress also add some iron and a peppery edge to the salad. 

This recipe goes fantastically with Gaymer's Orchard Reserve Stonesbrook, from the range of vintage single orchard ciders. Made only with apples from the Stonesbrook orchard in Somerset, this is a dry cider which has been made from a blend of Dabinett and Harry Masters Jersey cider apples. Its gentle refreshing taste and aromatic bouquet of fresh citrus and plum means it complements this dish perfectly.
CRAVEN'S COUNTRY - RED KITES
[16 November 2007] 
John Craven on the Red Kite's return to our skies


Every time I drive in daylight through that dramatic cut in the Chiltern Hills made by the M40 motorway, I glance skywards for proof of a truly successful wildlife project. Unless it's raining heavily or they are changing their feathers, dozens of red kites are overhead, riding the wind.

These magnificent raptors, with their distinctive forked tails, are so common that many drivers take them for granted. Yet right now, with moulting over, these kites provide one of the finest spectacles in nature as they glide, often close together, with hardly a flap of their mighty wings.

Less than 20 years ago they were extinct in the UK, apart from a few in mid-Wales. For centuries kites thrived as scavengers, feeding off dead animals in the countryside and from food waste thrown into the streets of towns and cities. What went wrong? Well, our streets got a little cleaner without their help, landowners persecuted them, often wrongly accusing these mainly carrion eaters of wholesale attacks on lambs and game birds, while taxidermists and egg collectors also took their toll. Britain's kites, once our most common bird of prey, disappeared from England in 1871 and from Scotland 30 years later. 

They joined a long list of animals we didn't want any more: wolves, beavers, bears, ospreys, sea eagles, great bustards, cranes and many more. Now, some are making a comeback, either on their own initiative or with a little human help. Bears and wolves will need some skilful spin-doctors if they are to convince the public they have a right to be back here, even in the remotest wilderness.

But I reckon it won't be too long before there are beavers along our riverbanks – indeed some have already been brought over from Eastern Europe and released into enclosed areas. At the Wildfowl &amp; Wetlands Trust centre at Slimbridge in Gloucestershire, cranes are making a comeback.

Success stories
Scientists and visitors at Slimbridge's Crane School have been actually been disguising themselves as adult cranes to get close to six chicks. Camouflaged from head to toe and holding plastic litter-pickers with crane heads painted on them, they teach the chicks how to forage. The first experiment this summer worked a treat – it means young birds are not humanised, so they should have fewer problems surviving, and there'll be more chicks going to school next year.

Until the red kites, perhaps the most successful reappearance was that of the osprey. The first story on the first ever edition of Newsround, back in April 1972, was about ospreys returning from winter migration in Africa to their nests at Loch Garten in Scotland; in those days numbers were extremely small. Since then, the population has thrived – there are now 160 breeding pairs in Scotland. To celebrate Newsround's 30th birthday, I returned to the programme for a one-off report on the first re-introduction of ospreys in England, on Rutland Water.

But they are not the only English ospreys. A pair has been nesting for several years, without human encouragement, on the shores of Bassenthwaite in the Lake District, and this season they hatched three chicks.

Such is public interest in these rare birds that the RSPB and the Forestry Commission worked together to create a special centre there, with closed-circuit television pictures from the nest. I had the honour of officially opening this brave venture, but so far so good – the centre recently welcomed its 500,000th visitor. 

Full circle
Back in the Chilterns, red kites have bred so successfully that numbers have soared from zero in 1990 to around 2,000 today. In fact, there's a danger that the hills and valleys of South Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire might become overcrowded with kites. Already, some have been taken to new areas to start fresh colonies. There are now red kites flying above Rockingham in the East Midlands, Harewood in Yorkshire, Gateshead, Aberdeen, the Black Isle, Sterling and Dumfries and Galloway along, of course, with those original survivors in mid-Wales. Who could have predicted that when the RSPB and English Nature decided in the early 90s to import a few birds from Sweden and Spain, to see how they would fare? I played a very minor role in their re-introduction. For Countryfile, I flew to Madrid to collect one of them, much to the surprise of fellow passengers when the large box next to me issued a noise somewhere between a mew and a whistle. An evocative sound, but you'd expect a fierce-looking bird like the kite to at least have a screech!

My kite, along with several others, was kept in quarantine for several weeks, then the lid of their holding pen was lifted in a clearing at Christmas Common, close to the M40 at Stokenchurch, and out they flew. They made straight for the tops of the nearest trees; they and their successors have stayed around those parts ever since. “It has been a remarkable success,” says Cathy Rose of the Chilterns Conservation Board. “There is a lot of debate about whether numbers will become too high for their own good, though we do have a strong breeding stock – a very healthy position to be in.”

But a word of warning to householders in red kite country. The birds are up to one of their old tricks, recorded among others by William Shakespeare: stealing ladies' underwear that is hanging out to dry, to line their nests. After a glorious return to our countryside, kites are once again nicking knickers.

REAL FOOD: EAT SOMERSET
[7 November 2007] 
To tie into Julian Temperley's regional recipe here's our run down of the best places to eat and buy food in Somerset


RESTAURANTS, GASTRO PUBS &amp; TEAROOMS

Castle Hotel, Taunton 01823 272671 
www.the-castle-hotel.com

Barley Wood walled garden and café, Wrington, N Somerset tel 01934 863713 
www.betterfood.co.uk

Truffles, Bruton 01749 812255
www.trufflesbruton.co.uk

East Lambrook Manor Gardens tearoom, South Petherton 01460 240328 
www.eastlambrook.com

Barrington Court (National Trust) tearoom, open Thurs-Tues April-Sept 11-5, Mar &amp; Oct 11-4.30, 1-15 Dec weekends 11-4. Tel 01460 241938 
http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk

Helyar Arms, East Coker 01935 862332 
www.helyar-arms.co.uk


SHOPS

Brown and Forrest smokery, Hambridge 01458 250875 
www.smokedeel.co.uk

Trading Post, Lopenhead, South Petherton 01460 241666

Organica, Cheddar 01934 741644. 

Rumwell Farm Shop, near Taunton 01823 461599 
www.rumwellfarmshop.com

Dom Jones fish shop, Wellington 01823 666714 www.donjonesfish.com

Granny Gothard's Ice Cream, The Old Dairy, Stoke St Gregory, Taunton 01823 491591






FABULOUS FOLLIES
[7 November 2007] 
We talk to Alan Terrill from The Folly Fellowship about these architectural oddities



What is the fascination with follies?
I think people love the thought that someone somewhere had the imagination, money and lack of planning authorities watching over them, to build something fantastic, weird, huge, beautiful or totally useless just because they could. It certainly cheers me up and makes me envious.

What is the definition of a folly? 
They're hard to define, and it's the ones that don't fit a pattern that are the most exciting. Generally they have to have shown folly in the builder - they are madly decorated, in the wrong place, or they wildly exceed what might be expected for a building for that purpose.

Why were they built?
To enhance the landscape, to provide a viewpoint, to make a political point, to celebrate a person or victory, or because the builder had a mania for constructions.

What does The Folly Fellowship love about them?
They show that building can rise above the functional, and show the human spirit of imagination, humour and non-conformity.

Why did the practice of building follies stop? Although there are a few new ones popping up again now…
Most of the surviving follies from past centuries were built by the rich, but the decline of the landed gentry and the big country house also meant the end of big follies, along with changing fashions in landscape gardening. Planning laws mean we're unlikely to see any big hilltop prospect towers, but the modern equivalents of these are things like the Spinnaker Tower at Portsmouth. However, follies are still being built: many are hidden on private estates and there's been quite a renaissance in folly building recently. They don't make the papers, as the owners are often reticent to publicise them, but there's a lot going on if you keep your eyes open.

Alan Terrill is a folly expert, he's been a member of the Folly Fellowship since it first began in 1988 and he's even built a few small follies himself.
