Horizon

Tuesday 15 January
9:00pm - 9:50pm
BBC2 London &amp; South East
1/9 - How to Kill a Human Being
This is a disturbing piece of television on several levels. It takes Michael Portillo on a search for a humane way of executing people. The waddling Tory watches as a dummy is hanged. He sees a pig carcass being electrocuted. He is exposed to CS gas and in one extraordinary scene becomes euphoric and nearly dies from hypoxia in a Dutch training lab. It's grimly fascinating, but what's the real agenda here? For a start, the UK doesn't execute people any more, so the science of pain-free state killing is only a live issue for Horizon's US viewers (at whom its programmes appear to be increasingly aimed). There's a sense that this is more about the grisly stunts we get to witness, along with some chilling archive clips. What it does very effectively is give the lie to the idea that execution, as it is currently practised, is anything like humane. 

RT reviewer - David Butcher
VIDEO Plus+: 159776
Subtitled, Widescreen, Audio-described
CSI: Crime Scene Investigation

Tuesday 15 January
9:00pm - 10:00pm
Five
2/24 - A La Cart
In a wonderful opening sequence, a grim pastiche of Stanley Kubrick's 2001: a Space Odyssey, we see a human head tumbling in graceful slow motion along a deserted road as The Blue Danube plays liltingly on the soundtrack. It's the start of one of those crazy stories that only CSI can get away with - the head belongs to an enthusiastic young go-karter. But where's the body? The night's second suspicious death involves the murder of a Hugh Hefner-type girly-magazine mogul, who dies as he dines in the dark with a couple of his bimbos. There isn't a power cut - dining in pitch blackness is quite the thing in certain Las Vegas circles. It's preposterous, of course, but at least it diverts attention away from soppy Sara, saved from death in the desert, who's now free to moon at leisure over Gil Grissom now that their secret love is no secret any more. 

RT reviewer - Alison Graham
Billie Piper shock for Doctor Who





Last night fans that live near Doctor Who's filming locations got photographs of what must be the biggest surprise return to the show: Billie Piper is back. 

After the fans' gossip was picked up this morning by UK newspapers, the BBC announced that it's true, adding that Billie "will star in three episodes of the drama, reprising her role as the Doctor's companion, Rose Tyler". 

So yes, there will be three companions next year and they are all expected to overlap: Billie Piper, Freema Agyeman and Catherine Tate. It'll be the first time the Doctor has travelled with three companions at the same time since 1983 when Peter Davison was in charge of the Tardis. 


BBC, ITV and Channel 4 team up online





Do you have to take three video players into the shower? BBC Worldwide plans to end the system whereby you need one player for BBC, one for Channel 4 and so on and has announced a partnership that should see its new iPlayer, codenamed Kangaroo, become a one-stop shop for online television. 

ITV, Channel 4 and the BBC have committed to create an on-demand video service that will bring "a single destination for over ten thousand hours of quality entertainment content". The plan is to launch the service in 2008 as a web-only system and later introduce downloads and rentals. 

The new service has to be approved by the BBC Trust and the boards of Channel 4 and ITV. 


Mel B tipped to win US Strictly Come Dancing





America has always run its version of Strictly Come Dancing in two parts: the main Dancing with the Stars on Monday night and the results show on Tuesdays. So today the remaining celebrities are on tenterhooks - and it looks like Mel B is poised to win. 

During last night's final dance, Melanie Brown and her professional dance partner Maksim Chmerkovskiy scored 55 out of a maximum 60 points for their cha cha cha and their freestyle dance. 

Chmerkovskiy said: "She went from somebody who just had rhythm...to having the guts to come out and do this. She was one of my prize students." 

Marie Osmond and partner Jonathan Roberts had been expected to win but last night earned 46 points. Nonetheless, judge Bruno Tonioli said her freestyle dance "defies criticism. It's like Baby Jane and the Bride of Chucky. It's unique." 


Striking Hollywood writers resume talks





The Hollywood writers' strike began three weeks ago but yesterday saw talks resume between the writers and the major film and TV studios. Officially the only progress from the first day was an agreement to continue discussions today. 

Reuters reports that representatives of the Writers' Guild of America and the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers met at "an undisclosed, neutral location in Los Angeles" and that "in a departure from the public rancour that has marked the labour talks since July, the two sides adhered to a strict media blackout." 

In the meantime, shows continue to be affected with the significant series finales of Scrubs, Battlestar Galactica and more endangered. The latest show to be affected is Journeyman, currently airing in the UK on Sky One, where an episode remains uncompleted. 

Doctor Who - in EastEnders 





Yesterday fans saw the Tardis, a Dalek and K9 being filmed in London at the famous Doctor Who location of St Paul's Cathedral. But it wasn't for everybody's favourite time-travelling drama: it was for a scene in a forthcoming episode of EastEnders. 

Walford's unlucky Bradley (Charlie Clements) is a Who fan and in the episode he and his wife Stacey (Lacey Turner) visit an exhibition called Doctor Who - the Time Lord Revisited at the cathedral. The exhibit features the Tardis, which along with the Dalek was made by a company that works on the real Doctor Who and Torchwood shows, and a life-size replica of K9 that belongs to a fan. 

The BBC is not commenting on the storyline or when we will see it air. 

EastEnders and Doctor Who go back a long way: recently Barbara Windsor filmed a vignette as Peggy for a scene in The Army of Ghosts story. And in 1993 there was a Doctor Who special for Children in Need set in Albert Square itself. It was unimaginably awful, but actually you don't need to imagine: you can see that two-part disaster now on YouTube

Galactica cast waiting to phone you 





It started with Aaron Douglas, who plays Chief Tyrol in Battlestar Galactica: he announced that he'll take a fan to a Canucks hockey game. Then Mary McDonnell, Tricia Helfer, Michael Hogan and Michael Trucco offered to phone a fan each. And you may feel that Jamie Bamber has trumped the lot - or thrown in the towel. 

For Captain Lee "Apollo" Adama is signing and donating three towels he's worn in the series - from scenes where he didn't wear anything but a towel. 

The cast are doing this to draw public attention to the Hollywood writers' strike - and that is despite all of them being suspended without pay while the dispute continues. So they're firmly on the writers' side and of course you are too. But whether you're a Battlestar fan or not, you can support the strike by joining the Pencils2MediaMoguls campaign. You're urged to send a box of pencils to people like Rupert Murdoch and the studio heads but, nicely, the campaign's buying in bulk in your name and shipping them by the lorry load. So it only costs you a single dollar and the studios get swamped with trucks. 

But if you choose to, you can state on your pencils that you're supporting a particular writer or show. So if you label yours "BSG Aaron Douglas" or "BSG Jamie Bamber", the objects of your affection will get to know about it, and you'll be entered into a prize draw too. 

Note that calls and the towels are unrestricted but the hockey game depends on you making your own way to Vancouver. Douglas says if you can't, he'll sign some memorabilia and call you too. 


Torchwood gets children's version 





Captain Jack is back - and is joined in the first episode by Captain John, played by Buffy's James Marsters. 

Torchwood season 2 begins on BBC2 in mid-January - and in another development, as well as Marsters's appearance, there'll be two versions of it. Right from the start of the show, it's been positioned as the adult version of Doctor Who and it aired on BBC3 with as much swearing as it could: Russell T Davies says he purposely added swearing to the first-ever scene so that it was clear this was not Doctor Who. 

Then, it was often said that the two shows would be kept separate so that children wouldn't want to watch Torchwood. But since then we've seen nods to Who in Torchwood, we've seen Captain Jack return to the Tardis, and this new season will see Doctor Who's Freema Agyeman guest-starring. 

Plus, take a walk by Cardiff's beautiful Millennium Centre and you cannot fail to hear young voices explaining to weary parents that there's a top-secret base underneath the fountain. 

So now, after BBC2 premieres each new episode of Torchwood, there will be a repeat especially edited for children, airing before the watershed. 


Brad Pitt plans New Orleans relief





Star Brad Pitt is launching a campaign to get new environmentally friendly houses built for New Orleans' families who lost their homes in the 2005 Hurricane Katrina storm. 

"A hundred and fifty homes is our goal," he said. "But there is no reason why we can't do 1,000 homes, why we can't do 10,000 homes, why we can't do 100,000 homes." 

Pitt and partner Angelina Jolie own a home in New Orleans' French Quarter and he's pledging to match up to $5m (£2.43m) in donations for his Make it Right project. Plans have been proposed for energy efficient homes that are also elevated to avoid flooding in the future. Each house is expected to cost an average of $150,000 (£72,770) and the first is hoped to be finished by next May. 


Win classic war film boxed sets!

Head over to our competition pages where we've got some classic war film boxed sets up for grabs, complete with three iconic films from the trenches on DVD, plus expanded boxed sets of Battle of Britain and The Longest Day...
Sports Personality of the Year gallery

As we get ready to crown the Sports Personality of the Year 2007 this Sunday, we take a look back at some of the talented men and women whose extraordinary achievements have earned them the prestigious title...

Tell us what you think

Is TV dumbing down? Which shows would you bring back? Who's the nicest person on TV? These are just a few of the debates going on in our forums. If you've got an opinion on TV, radio or film, want to ask a question or get something off your chest, why not get involved?
Subscribe to RT and get three issues for £1!

Enjoy three issues of Radio Times magazine delivered direct to your door for just £1 - risk free! If you decide to cancel your trial subscription you'll pay just £1 - simply let us know you wish to cancel after receipt of your second issue and that's all you'll pay.
