Miso broth with rice noodles and shiitake mushrooms

15 minutes
If you have miso paste in your cupboard, it will work just as well as the instant miso soup. Both are readily available from supermarkets. 

instant miso soup 3 x 8g sachets (Sanchi brand is good)
beansprouts 50g
shiitake mushrooms 4-6, thinly sliced
spring onions 2, thinly sliced
fine stir-fry noodles 50g
tofu or peeled prawns 100g
soy sauce 
sesame oil 

Put the miso soup mix in a bowl and add the beansprouts, shiitake mushrooms, spring onions and rice noodles.

Pour in 600ml boiling water, cover the bowl with clingfilm and set aside for about 4 minutes until the noodles are soft.

Ladle into 2 bowls. Top with the tofu or prawns and a splash of soy sauce and sesame oil. 

Serves 2

Winter warmer soup with goat's cheese toasties

30 minutes
Cabbage could replace the brussels sprouts, but won?t be as sweet. If you make ahead, add the sprouts just before eating, to keep their vibrant colour.

onions 2, finely chopped
garlic 2 cloves, peeled and chopped
bacon lardons 200g
olive oil 
parsnips 4, finely chopped
thyme sprigs 2
red chillies 2, finely chopped
vegetable stock fresh, cube or concentrate made up to 2 litres
brussels sprouts 500g, finely sliced
 TOASTIES
Aberdeen butteries or thick slices of toast 8
goat's cheese 8 slices cut from a log

Put the onions, garlic and lardons in a large saucepan, drizzle with a little oil and cook over a medium heat for 6 minutes, stirring.

Add the parsnips, thyme, chillies and stock. Bring to the boil, then simmer for 15 minutes.

Just before serving, add the sprouts, season and simmer for 5 minutes. 

Meanwhile make the toasties. Top each buttery or slice of toast with cheese. Toast under the grill until the cheese just melts. Serve with the soup.

Serves 8









Sweet potato and carrot soup with chilli oil

55 minutes


olive oil for frying
onion 1 large, chopped
sweet potatoes 750g, cut into pieces
carrots 250g, cut into pieces
vegetable or chicken stock fresh, cube or concentrate, made up to 1.5 litres
chilli oil to serve

Heat 4 tbsp olive oil in a large saucepan and gently fry the onion over a medium heat until softened but not browned. Add the sweet potato and carrots and cook, covered, for 10 minutes or so, until the vegetables are glistening and starting to soften. 

Pour in the stock, bring to the boil and then simmer, covered, for 30 minutes until the vegetables are tender.

Pour into a blender and whizz until smooth - do this in batches if you need to. Return to the pan and gently reheat; season and drizzle with chilli oil.

Serves 4-6

Mint and spinach soup with smoked haddock

45 minutes


olive oil 
onion 1, sliced
potato 1, chopped
vegetable stock fresh, cube or concentrate, made up to 1.5 litres
smoked haddock fillet 300g (use undyed, if you can)
mint leaves a large handful
young leaf spinach 300g, washed
half-fat crème fraîche optional

Heat 1 tbsp oil in a pan and cook the onion until soft. Add the potato along with 1 litre stock. Bring to the boil and simmer for about 15 minutes, until the potato is soft. 

Lay the haddock, fillet, skin-side up on, on top of the potato and simmer gently for about 6-8 minutes. Lift out of the pan with a slotted spoon and peel off the skin (if it doesn't come away easily, return the fish to the pan and cook for another minute or so). Add the mint to the pan along with the spinach. Stir together for 30 seconds then liquidise until smooth in a blender.

Return to the pan and add the rest of the stock gradually until it has the consistency of single cream. Flake the fish in large chunks and add to the soup, reserving some flakes for the top. Reheat gently and season. Pour into bowls, scatter with the remaining flakes of fish and serve with a dollop of crème fra?che, if you like. 

Serves 4

Cream of watercress soup

10 minutes
If you like, you can substitute the watercress for the same quantity of a supermarket rocket-spinach-watercress mix. And you can add some sorrel to give the soup a lemony tang. 

watercress 2 x 85g bags
spring onions 3, roughly chopped
beef consommé 1 can (about 400g)
milk 300ml
double cream 142ml carton
chives a few, snipped 

Remove any coarse watercress stems. Put the rest in a food processor or blender with the spring onion and whizz until as smooth as possible.

Add all the liquid ingredients and some seasoning. Process, taste and season again if necessary. Chill, and snip over some chives to serve. 

Serves 4

Chilled cucumber and mint soup

20 minutes
If you like, float ice cubes set with mint leaves in each bowl of soup.

cucumber|2 large, peeled 
butter|25g 
garlic|1 clove, crushed 
dry white wine|1 glass 
chicken stock|fresh, cube or concentrate, made up to 500ml 
mint|1 bunch leaves, to serve 
crème fraîche|to serve  

Cut the cucumbers in half lengthways and scoop out the seeds. Chop the flesh. Heat the butter in a saucepan over a medium heat and fry the cucumber (save a couple of spoonfuls to serve) until it starts to soften a little. Add the garlic and stir. Put a lid on the pan, reduce the heat and cook for 5 minutes until the cucumber is quite soft.

Increase the heat, add the white wine and bubble for a minute. Add the stock and bring to the boil. Throw in the mint and take the soup off the heat. Cool, then whizz in a blender and season to taste.

Chill the soup until completely cold. Serve with crème fraîche and minty ice cubes, if you like.

Serves 6

Pumpkin soup with chilli and sour cream

40 minutes


pumpkin 1kg, peeled and chopped
olive oil 
red chillies 1-2, deseeded and finely chopped
garlic 1 clove
milk 375ml
chicken or vegetable stock  fresh, cube or concentrate, made up to 750ml
coriander a handful, roughly chopped (optional)
sour cream to serve

Heat the oven to 200C/fan 180C/gas 6. Put the pumpkin in a roasting tin, drizzle with 4 tbsp oil and roast for 15-20 minutes, until tender and a little browned around the edges. 

Tip the pumpkin, chilli and garlic into a saucepan with the milk and stock and bring to the boil (don't worry if it splits). Reduce heat and simmer for 8 minutes. Cool a little then whizz in a blender until smooth and season well. Stir through the coriander, if using, and top each bowl with a dollop of sour cream.

Serves 4

Smoked salmon chowder

30 minutes


onion 1, finely diced 
butter 
potatoes 750g, diced
milk 500ml
chicken stock fresh, cube or concentrate, made up to 500ml
smoked salmon 350g, cut into ribbons
parsley a handful of leaves, finely chopped
lemon 1, halved

Fry the onion gently in a knob of butter, then add the potatoes, milk and stock and simmer until the potatoes are very tender. Add the smoked salmon and parsley and season well. Heat everything through and add a squeeze of lemon. 

Serves 4

Baked feta, bacon and avocado salad

20 minutes


feta two 200g packs, each cut into 2
red chilli 1, finely chopped 
mixed seasonal salad about 150g
avocados 2, sliced
pine nuts 2 tbsp, toasted
balsamic salad dressing  
bacon lardons 200g, pan-fried until crispy
 
 
 
 

Heat the oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4. Drizzle each piece of feta with olive oil, sprinkle with black pepper and chilli, and loosely wrap in foil. Bake for 8 minutes.

Mix the salad leaves, avocado, pine nuts and bacon together. Toss with some dressing and season. Pile onto 4 plates and top each with a piece of baked feta. 

Serves 4

Warm broad bean and lentil salad

30 minutes


Puy lentils|250g 
small red onions|1, sliced 
broad beans|300g (about 1kg of pods) 
olive oil 
red wine vinegar|1 tbsp 
mint|1 bunch, chopped 
soft goat's cheese|150g 

Put the lentils in a saucepan with the onion. Cover with water, bring to the boil and simmer for 20 minutes until tender - the water should be absorbed. Season.

Meanwhile, cook the broad beans for 5 minutes until just tender. Drain, then tip back into the pan, add 2 tbsp olive oil and warm for 2 minutes. Add to the lentils with the red wine vinegar and mint. Season again. Add more vinegar if necessary. Break up the goat's cheese and fold it into the salad.

Serves 4

Gazpacho salad with tomato-chilli ice

30 minutes
If you haven't time to make the fresh tomato dressing and ice, just thin 1 tsp of tomato purée with water and beat it into the oil and vinegar to make a dressing.

ciabatta|1/3 of a loaf 
cucumber|½, cubed 
grilled peppers|200g, cut into strips 
sunblush tomatoes|59g, halved 
small red onion|½, finely chopped 
black olives|6, pitted and torn into pieces 
plum tomatoes|6 
Tabasco sauce 
olive oil 
sherry or wine vinegar|2 tsp 
garlic|1 small clove, crushed 
basil|6-8 leaves, ripped 
green salad leaves|to serve 
 

Preheat the oven to 180C/fan 160C/gas 4. Thinly slice the crusts off 1/3 of the bread and then into small cubes. Cut the rest of the bread into slices, then put the slices and cubes on a baking sheet, sprinkle with salt and bake for 10-15 minutes until crisp and lightly browned. 

Put the cucumber in a bowl with the grilled peppers, sunblush tomatoes, onion, olives and croutons. Cut 4 of the plum tomatoes into cubes and add to the salad bowl. Cut the last 2 tomatoes into chunks and blitz to a purée in a food processor, then sieve into a bowl. Spoon half the purée into a freezer box, add a few drops of Tabasco and freeze.

Add 1 tbsp olive oil, vinegar and garlic to the rest of the purée, whisk together and season well. Pour over the salad, add the ripped basil leaves, toss together and chill for at least half an hour. Put the green salad leaves into a bowl, top with the salad, then break up the frozen tomato purée with a fork and scatter over the top. Eat with the ciabatta toast.

Serves 4 as a starter or 2 as a main

Beef, radish and pea salad

20 minutes


peas in the pod|500g (or 250g frozen peas) 
fillet steak|200g 
black peppercorns|1 tbsp, crushed 
radishes|150g 
half-fat crème fraîche;200ml 
cress|1 box 
lime|1, cut into wedges 

Shell the peas and cook them briefly until just tender, 1-2 minutes. Drain and cool under running cold water.

Roll the beef in the crushed peppercorns. Heat a frying pan until very hot and cook the beef for about 2 minutes on each side (less if the steak is thin). Rest for 5 minutes. 

Meanwhile, slice the radishes and pile on a serving plate. Scatter the peas over. Slice the beef thinly and arrange over the top. Thin the crème fraîche with 2-3 tsp water if necessary and drizzle over the top of the beef. Snip the cress over the top and serve with the lime wedges.

Serves 2 as a main, 4 as a starter

Salad Nicoise

30 minutes


runner beans 100g, sliced
eggs 4
new potatoes 4 medium, cooked and sliced
cherry tomatoes 8, halved
lettuce a handful of leaves
tuna in brine or spring water 400g, drained and kept in large chunks
anchovy fillets 4
olives 16
olive oil 
white wine vinegar 2 tbsp

Cook the beans for 1 minute in boiling water then refresh under cold running water. Turn down the heat, add the eggs to the pan and simmer for 5-6 minutes (or 3-4 minutes if you like the yolks really runny). Plunge into cold water until cool then shell and cut into quarters.

In a large bowl mix together the potatoes, tomatoes, beans, lettuce, tuna, anchovies, olives, 4 tbsp olive oil, vinegar and some seasoning and carefully toss. Serve topped with the egg. 

Serves 4


