Choosing a bouquet
Generally speaking, the shape of your bouquet will largely be determined by your dress style and shape. There are basically three styles of bouquet you can choose from: the round, posy bouquet: the long, trailing shower bouquet: and an over-arm bouquet. If you are tall you may need a longer stemmed look for an over-arm bouquet or extra length if you choose a trailing bouquet. If you are petite you may end up looking overwhelmed by a huge armful of flowers and a long shower bouquet may not suit your style of dress. Your florist should give you advice based on a number of factors: your stature, colouring and personality as well as your gown. She should steer you away from impractical ideas and guide you towards flowers that last well.
Long trailing shower bouquet 
This grand, white shower bouquet would suit an extravagant wedding and perfectly complement a full skirt and long train. The gardenia and stephanotis flowers have been wired into this trailing design. Because of the length of time required to create this style of bouquet and the number of perfect flower heads that have been used it is an expensive option to choose. This has a fabulous scent from both the stephanotis and gardenia, which are often chosen as the key scents for their perfume.
Round posy bouquet 
Recent trends for dinner party weddings have meant that some bridal gowns are more glitzy and can be decorated with beads, jewels and crystals. This beautiful Vera Wang dress has been complemented with rich pink garden roses encircled by faux diamnds, which pick up the jewelled theme of the gown. A round bouquet is perfectly suited to this straight skirt. Once you have decided on the shape and colour of your bouquet, ensure it co-ordinates perfectly with your gown by using the same fabric to wrap the stem.
Tear-drop shaped bouquet 
Full skirts and long trains suit longer and larger bouquets. Here, open 'Shirley Temple' peonies have been hand-tied into a tear-drop shape.
Simply does it 
These innocent-looking daisies (Gerbera 'Pinky Eye') perfectly complement the simplicity of this Jackie O-style dress. Massed flowers of one type have recently been very popular for weddings and are perhaps one of the most successful options because they photograph well.
From "Wedding Flowers" by Paula Pryke 
Choosing your wedding rings
When you try a ring on, a good fit will slide over your knuckle - with no danger of slipping off - to rest at the base of your finger: bear in mind how warm (and hence swollen) your fingers are on the shopping day. You should be able to get a small cocktail stick through the gap to allow for fluctuations. The engagement ring should complement your fingers and hands. You probably know what sizes of band and stone suit - larger hands can get away with chunkier, prominent designs that might overwhelm a smaller hand. Take natural skin and eye tones as a guide too; as with clothing, specifically toned gems and metals complement your colouring. And think ahead to the type of wedding band you would prefer. This should rest comfortably and look great alongside the engagement ring. On a practical note, give a thought to how easily the design will be worn: high, prong-set stones are prone to catching on fabrics. Bespoke jewellery makers can design a ring - engagement or wedding - of your exact choice if you fail to find your heart's desire in the shops. This service may be more costly, but worth it if you have a very specific look in mind. Some jewellery makers can co-ordinate this service over the phone and via email if you live far away, sending 3D images before the design is made. Magazines and the Internet open a huge range of innovative designer options. You may want to incorporate a stone from a family heirloom or model the design on a ring you have seen elsewhere and a bespoke service is an effective route to individual creations. Many high street jewellers and larger manufacturers also offer a bespoke service, happy to design a ring in their workshops. Ask local jewellers for information and discuss what can be achieved within your budget. Consider too that having the engagement and wedding rings designed together - perhaps interconnecting - will ensure a complementary fit. If you choose to purchase a wedding band separately, then the chosen jeweller should check that it fits well with the engagement ring: most offer a custom made service to guarantee a perfect fit. Above: from Orro 0141 552 7888.
Diamonds are an enduring symbol of romance and love, and there are various ways of determining a stone's quality. The 'carat' is a measure of the stone's weight while 'clarity' is a rating based on natural blemishes occurring externally and internally. Perfectly clear diamonds are very rare. The 'cut' refers to the shape: every diamond has flat, angled surfaces that reflect light and the cut determines its brilliance. 'Colour' is the other factor to consider and not all diamonds are colourless. Ratings from D to Z determine the value according to colour - D is the clearest and most expensive while Z contains more traces of yellow. However, the untrained eye is unlikely to spot a marked difference. Very rare diamonds have pure colours such as pink or blue but their comparative scarcity tends to mean large price tags. Round, princess cut, pear, oval, marquise, emerald, baguette (rectangle) or heart shaped... diamonds still speak of 'forever'. However birthstones are another option, including rubies for July, sapphires for September and emeralds for May. Or simply go for a stone you have always adored. Think about the metal in which the stones will be set. Many girls are used to wearing silver every day and find that platinum and white gold fit with this preference over more traditional yellow gold. It's a matter of personal taste and some girls have skin tones that are beautifully complemented by yellow gold. Your chosen ring may combine contrasting metals but most girls want a common element between engagement and wedding rings. There are a few other things to think about: 18 carat gold tends to be more resilient than 24 carat gold, while platinum is usually more expensive, but also more hard wearing.

Photography 
WHERE TO START
Unless you are lucky enough to know a professional photographer, the search starts with wedding magazines, web sites and word of mouth. It's a good idea to compare the work of a few photographers to help you get an impression of the range of styles on offer, but bear in mind that advertisements and web presentations usually show only the best of the photographer's work. You need to find out more. Narrow the choice to a few potentials and arrange meetings with them.
WHAT TO LOOK FOR
A good rapport with the photographer is essential. You'll be spending a significant amount of time together on the day and it's a huge advantage if you're at ease with them. If you simply don't take to the person, it's probably best to start looking elsewhere. And if you’re visiting a large company that employs many photographers, make sure you meet the one who will take your pictures on the day - not just the first photographer who's available to talk to you on the visit.
Above: Amanda Cruise 01436 677 786
What's your style?
CLASSIC &amp; FORMAL PRINTS 
Formal group images provide a good record of everyone there and ensure each guest is included in at least one shot. Consider a number of portraits as part of the album - older relatives tend to order these images in bulk, and where else but your wedding will you have the chance to photograph large groups of family and friends together? 
CANDID
A less formal approach, usually still including some formal shots, but also taking more unexpected images. The period of photography is often extended to include the speeches, the meal and the first dance, although you can discuss this with your photographer. Somes black &amp; white images are also usually included.
REPORTAGE
A journalistic approach to your wedding - the photographer will aim to 'tell a story' of the day. Pictures might be taken unobtrusively during actual events, rather than the scene being artificially reconstructed for the cameras later. Genuine emotions experienced, from nerves and tears to smiles and laughter, can be captured to document the spirit of the day.
ROMANTIC
These are images that make use of specific backdrops and lighting to create 'idyllic' depictions of the bride and groom. Sepia tints and soft focus can enhance this further and if you really want to have some shots that convey the romance of the occasion, this is a perfect choice.
ON LOCATION
You might have a special place in or near the venue where some dramatically styled, more lengthily prepared shots can be taken. Whether it's a windswept beach, a train station or a beautiful staircase, these theatrical shots can bring impact to an album.
TRICKS OF THE TRADE
There are all sorts of techniques available to enhance your images, such as hand tinting where you pick out areas of colour on a black &amp; white image . Another option is overall tinting - sepia will create an 'old-fashioned' look, while a blue tint might add energy to more contemporarily styled shots.
Best to know
Points to clarify on your visit to the photographer...
How many weddings have they done?
It's not necessarily a bad thing if they've come to this area recently, as along as you are happy with their creativity and general expertise. Ask to see complete wedding albums - it's important to see the full scope of their work, not just the best bits.
How long do you want their services for?
Would you be happy for them to start at the ceremony venue and stop before the meal, or would you prefer a record of the entire day, from getting ready to the last dance?
How many pictures do you want?
There may be special shots you want taken, such as groups of friends or relatives - make sure the photographer is briefed thoroughly because some things are bound to slip your mind on the day.
Does the photographer know the venue?
If your photographer is unfamiliar with the reception venue, ask whether he or she will consider meeting there in advance to identify good backdrops and settings as well as potential lighting problems.
What will it cost?
Many photographers market wedding 'packages', usually taken to cover the cost of the professional's services, films, albums and some enlargements. Some photographers quote on the basis of an hourly rate while others prefer a flat rate for an established period of the day. Find out what charges are included in the basic quote and what is additional - such as photographer's travel and use of assistants - and establish overall payment terms: usually a deposit and agreed schedule. Costs between photographers vary widely but as a rough guide, a basic package from an established professional will be upwards of £700.
What about extra prints?
Establish the cost of re-prints - most photographers retain negatives, ensuring future orders are placed with them, and it's often cheaper to order prints for relatives with the original order rather than placing separate ones months down the line.
†
BEST ADVICE
Schedule enough time for the photographer to do the job - too tight a schedule may restrict their creativity. Ask the best man or an usher to help round up the guests. Avoid directing the photographer yourself. You have employed this person for their creativity. Find out if flash photography is permitted in the church.

