Product Overview: Bachmann Farish 102t TEA tank Wagons. N gauge, 1:148 scale models.


The 102t bogie tank wagons were developed and introduced in the mid-'60s, spearheading BR's change towards block trains in conjunction with its customers. Bachmann's models utilise the original Farish tooling with improvements to the paint finish, lettering detail and new blackened fine-profile wheel sets.

Two of the original models represent wagons in Shell/BP (373-550) and Fina (373-551) liveries respectively. Of the upgraded models, a pair are presented in identical liveries but with new running numbers and are suffixed A, the Shell/BP tank renumbered from No.4001 to 4007 (373-500A) and the Fina tank from No.508 to 503 (373-551A).

Two new livery variations are also available, presented in the colours of British Petroleum (BP) branded Class B black livery including the solebar framing (373-552). Works plates and all lettering is finely printed and legible down to the overhead warning flashes next to the moulded plastic end ladder, with the familiar BP logo in the centre of the tank.

The other release is also a BP tank, but this time in the familiar Class A tank wagon colours of grey barrel and red solebar (373-553).

These models are considerably better finished compared to original Graham Farish items. They can be upgraded with etched ladder detail (part 1827) from Taylor Precision Models (TPM). It is hoped that Bachmann may take the opportunity to produce the lagged version of this wagon, although it is possible to use replacement cast resin ends (part 1826) from TPM to complete the job if Bachmann's new Class B tank (373-552) is used. Only minimal work to complete the model would be required with the benefit of being able to retain the excellent printing applied to this model.
Bachmann Farish Class 158 N gauge, 1:148 scale model. 


The slogan used in Bachmann's advertising ‘a train for all regions' seems most apt as the Class 158 - since their introduction - have spread far and wide to encompass the country from Penzance to Wick and Thurso and has borne many different liveries since its introduction in 1990.

Graham Farish were quick off the mark with a model of the Class 158 in 1992, although these models suffered problems with the spring drive arrangement, split gears in the drive train, and burnt out contact springs in the power bogies.

The Class 158 was one of the first Bachmann Farish re-releases with improved livery application together with improved gears and wheel sets. The latest releases now feature a completely new chassis to the same design as the widely acclaimed Class 170 ‘Turbostar' model. On testing the two review samples with a Gaugemaster controller, the benefits of this new chassis were immediately apparent. Control was silky smooth and quiet with excellent slow running - at long last with this new chassis we have the ‘silk purse' and not the original Farish ‘sow's ear'.

The first of two review samples is a two-car unit in ScotRail livery (371-554). The trailer car has interior detail but it is difficult to discern through the tinted windows. Bachmann has retained the standard coupling on the front of the unit enabling units to be coupled together. A BSI coupling (part 1620) together with the alternative snowplough casting (part 1621) is available from Taylor Precision Models.

Printing on the ScotRail model is excellent and with commendably crisp stripes and curves, whilst the extraction grilles for the air conditioning provide a nice touch. However, the cab fronts appear to be incorrect: the review sample's gangway door retains its window with the centre section blacked out while pictures of the model in Bachmann's advertisement show the gangway door with blanking plate in full yellow. Confusing?

Our second review sample was the two-car Wessex Alphaline unit (371-553). Bachmann have achieved a convincing finish, commendably crisp. Once again it falls down on the cab front. This time the review sample is more accurate. The gangway door is fitted with a yellow blanking plate and the second man's position window section above the light cluster should be black, not yellow as on the model. As an aside it may interest readers to know that this unit is fitted with snowploughs.

D&amp;E modellers interested in the contemporary scene will be delighted that Bachmann is re-issuing models with new liveries, especially to the high standard of finish that is being achieved. Some modellers may wish to close-couple these units depending on the radius curves in use on their layouts. The new chassis is welcome and does much to improve an already good model.
Bachmann Farish Deltic as 55 002 ‘The Kings Own Yorkshire Light Infantry' (Post 1980).
N gauge, 1:148 scale model. 


Bachmann released a nicely presented model of former Gateshead allocated Deltic No.55 002 ‘The Kings Own Yorkshire Light Infantry' (affectionately known as KOYLI), painted in BR green livery and now preserved by the National Railway Museum.

The plated headcode panels and TOPS number 55 002 dates this model from its December 1980 repaint. Although an original Farish moulding, the full yellow ends on this model faithfully capture the appearance of the prototype. The marker lights are quite superbly printed together with the BR totem complete with TOPS data panel. Of special note is the printing of the arms of the City of York above the numbers which were applied after transfer to York in 1979.

Moving further down the sides of the loco, the side windows are coloured black with the window frames neatly picked out in silver. The nameplate is clearly legible, not the easiest to choose due to the length of the name. The roof is in grey with the exhaust port and boiler exhaust picked out in black too. Particularly convincing is the fuel gauge on the fuel tanks. However, our review sample suffered from rough edges on the corner pillars of the white cab front screens where it joins the quarter lights (correctly plated over on this post 1980 version).

The model features a standard five-pole motor with two substantial flywheels, being shaft driven to the gear towers on the bogies. Performance of this model using a Gaugemaster controller was commendably smooth and quiet with good slow running and good control.

To summarise, this model makes an attractive addition to the previous ‘Deltic' releases in BR green and blue and, due to its celebrity status and attractive appearance, could well tempt modellers of the contemporary scene to add one to their fleet. Surprisingly, given the enthusiasm for the class, N gauge exhibition layouts featuring the ECML (in the vein of Stoke Summit in 4mm), seem thin on the ground. Maybe this model may deliver the final push into an early 1980s ECML project for many, who knows?

Bachmann Farish New Super BG's N gauge, 1:148 scale model. 

The word ‘super' is not inappropriate to these new models and at last British N gauge modellers can see the superior quality they have been waiting for with these new NPCCS vans. They feature completely new tooling for the superstructure and underframe. Starting at the top, the roofs feature finely moulded ridge dome ventilators. Moving onto the ends, these are nicely done with the corridor connections fitted with a floor, something noticeably absent from the previous Graham Farish tooling. Also present and correct are the built-in tail lights with which all Super BGs are equipped, together with exquisitely moulded jumper cables and sockets - even down to the conduit for the tail lights. This is complemented by fine printing of the data panels, while the orange cantrail stripe is commendably fine. Even the lighting sockets have been picked out in orange.

Moving onto the sides, the roller shutter doors are convincing, even down to the characteristic tuck in of the doors at cantrail level. The door moulding is now grooved and features the cut out at the bottom as opposed to the raised moulding used in the past to represent doors on Graham Farish models. All of this is topped off by some superbly executed flush-glazing. Turning our attention to the underframe, these coaches have a new solebar moulding featuring step boards under the doors. The buffers are now of the correct oval pattern, with a deeper head stock – correctly clipped at the corners. A real gem is the improved underframe trussing which is fully the equal of any etched

replacement items available, the underframe components being moulded separately, enabling Bachmann to change items to the correct configurations. I was fortunate enough to compare the underframe of the ‘Super BG' and the Mk.1 suburban coach, which utilises the same underframe correctly for the ‘Super BG'. The model is equipped with correct B4 pattern bogies and low profile blackened wheel sets. The bogies seem to be the only concession to existing tooling, those already fitted to existing Mk.2 coaching stock being used. Two versions of the ‘Super BGs' are available - in RES livery TOPS coded NIA (374-775), and RES livery with the addition of the Royal Mail cipher, TOPS coded NBA (374-776).

These models are a quantum leap forward for British N gauge modelling and they are sure to be popular with modellers. It is hoped that these superb underframes find their way onto existing 57' length stock within the existing range before too long.

Bachmann Farish New Super BG's N gauge, 1:148 scale model. 

Bachmann continue to exploit the potential of livery variations in its range of modern air-braked wagons. Back in the days of Graham Farish, it was an inspired choice to cater for the 1970 and 1980s scene with a range of wagons equipped with pedestal suspension in addition to traditional era vacuum braked stock with 9ft or 10ft chassis and leaf springs.

The first of two re-issued models is a bulk powder PCA in Tunnel Cement livery. The wagon features a weathered finish, replicating the dusty appearance after a period of time in use. The weathering nicely tones down the livery and highlights the chassis detail. They should prove popular with those modellers who may lack the confidence toweather their own models but desire the more realistic appearance of weathering.

The second re-issued PCA features the distinctive orange RMC livery, finished in pristine condition. The livery application and lettering is well defined on both modes. Both are equipped with blackened, low profile wheels which are now standard in the Bachmann Farish range.

Bachmann Farish re-issues the Graham Farish Freightliner wagons.
N gauge, 1:148 scale model.

Following on from the release of the original BR Freightliner FFA/FGA model which was reviewed in BRM, Bachmann is taking the opportunity to change the running numbers and fill in gaps with livery variations. Re-issued models are suffixed with the letter A in the catalogue to identify them from earlier releases.

Following on from the first BRM review, re-issued BR Freightliner models from Bachmann include a version loaded with a set of the original containers, finished in original Freightliner livery (373-451). These wagons entered service in the early to mid 1960s, with the wagons painted black. This livery predates the ‘Corporate' blue period. Model No.373-451A is identical in all respects except in the numbering of the wagon which is loaded with different containers too. Moving on to the ‘Corporate' rail blue period, model No. 373-453 consists of three original containers loaded on a ‘Corporate' rail blue painted flat wagon. There is a second version with different running number (373-480A) and loaded with ‘Freightliner' containers. One of the original Freightliner wagons examined in the original review was 373-450, which is re-issued as item 373-450A but remains much the same except for a different running number applied to the wagon. The two 30ft. containers remain much the same too, painted in white livery with red triangular flashes and different registration numbers. The last of the re-issued models in this batch is model No. 373-452 which features two 30ft. containers in the later red livery.

The more discerning modeller may wish to use the Taylor Plastic Models (TPM) detailing kits to model the outer wagons with draw gear. TPM offers two kits, one with smaller diameter wheels which are scale for Freightliner FFA and FGA wagons.

To add variety, look no further than the excellent range form C-Rail Intermodel which offers plastic container kits, authentic paint colours and waterslide transfers. The only thing missing now is a decent gantry crane model to enable the modelling of intermodal yards.

