This is our favourite picture of the year (thank you Becks!)
Blood. Ee. Hell. Just look at David Beckham! Just look at him! Just look! At him! In case you can't tell, we're feeling a little overwhelmed by this brand spanking new ad for Emporio Armani Underwear. David has very boldly stripped down to nothing but some rather skimpy pants for the campaign, which will – gulp – be coming to a billboard near you soon (well, if you live near London, New York, LA, Milan, Rome, Paris or Tokyo, anyway). Oh, and Becks doesn't just look hot – he speaks too! “I first met Mr Armani quite a few years ago while I was working with the England team  and he designed our World Cup suit,” he says. “I've been a big fan of his style for a long time and, through the years, my wife and I have become friends with him, so I'm happy to be working with him now. For me, Giorgio Armani is a man who has been at the top of his game for more than thirty years.” Oh, he's so polite, isn't he? Could he be more perfect? 
*Faints. Lets out trickle of unconscious wee*
Ooh! Who's this and what does it all mean?

Well, will you look at who's trying to send out messages using her clothes again? Yep, it's Britney in an oh-so-tasteful jacket. Britney (and her favourite pink wig, as if we wouldn't see her coming without it) and her new man, Adnan Ghalib, were, once again, cruising the gas stations of Beverly Hills when these new shots were taken. What is it with Britney and petrol stations? OK, so the 24-hour Esso garage down the road is always handy for some late-night Maltesers and, well, all of our petrol-based needs, but we don't go there seven times a day in different outfits. Maybe she just likes the smell or something. Anyhoo, what do you think Britney's trying to say with her statement outfit? Is it aimed at Adnan, K-Fed or the world in general?

Well, will you look at who's trying to send out messages using her clothes again? Yep, it's Britney in an oh-so-tasteful jacket. Britney (and her favourite pink wig, as if we wouldn't see her coming without it) and her new man, Adnan Ghalib, were, once again, cruising the gas stations of Beverly Hills when these new shots were taken. What is it with Britney and petrol stations? OK, so the 24-hour Esso garage down the road is always handy for some late-night Maltesers and, well, all of our petrol-based needs, but we don't go there seven times a day in different outfits. Maybe she just likes the smell or something. Anyhoo, what do you think Britney's trying to say with her statement outfit? Is it aimed at Adnan, K-Fed or the world in general?
When she's not making a career out of posing in nightclubs or mugshots, exposing her friends' pregnancies, or launching fragrances or cans of Champagne, it's easy to forget Paris Hilton is also trying to become an "actress." Check out this entertaining trailer for her flick The Hottie And The Nottie – due for release in the States next month. We can't decide if it's her wooden performance, inability to show any expression other than vacant and smug, or the ridiculous plot that's got us hooked. Whether or not it'll go straight to DVD in the UK hasn't been announced, but heatworld thinks it might have found its guilty pleasure flick for 2008 already. What do you think?

First look at the NEW Big Brother house

We wish we could fast forward through all the crap festive telly and get stuck into Big Brother: Celebrity Hijack right now. But sadly, even Sky+ doesn't yet have a time-travel function, so we've got to jolly well wait until the show actually starts in January. However, here's a sneaky peek at the new house, which is looking rather swanky – it's even got a gym. For more pictures and exciting info about the all-new BB, buy the new issue of heat, out today. Yes, today. As in Friday. Confusing eh? Yeah yeah, you've rumbled us – it's just so that we don't have to go to work on Christmas Eve. 
Problem?

The heartbreaking celeb blog everyone's talking about
Tennis ace Serena Williams isn't normally on the heatworld radar, but when we heard that she'd written an emotional account of a recent break-up on her official blog, suddenly she seemed like more than just a load of muscles attached to a tennis racquet. In a world of fiercely private celebrities, it's pretty shocking that someone as internationally famous and successful as Serena has been so candid about their feelings. Here's what she's written about the mystery man who recently broke her heart…
 
You just start dating a guy. He likes you, you like him. You guys want to spend every second together. When you are not with him you are talking to him on the phone. You have deep feelings for him. The feelings keep developing. They keep growing. You begin to think this could be it... He talks about he can't imagine not being with you. You think he's falling in love with you. But you can't be 100% sure. You guys have not said that sacred 4-letter word that starts with an "L". But you feel it deep, deep in you. Deeper than you have in a long time. 
Weeks turns into months and you slowly start to wean the other guys in your life out. And then it happens. No not the "L" word. But what you have been most afraid of. What deep in your heart you have been afraid to confront. What you always suspected would happen one day sooner or later. HE STOPS CALLING. You panic... Finally you hear from him. You want to rage you want to scream you want to cry. But you can't help you heart from feeling a tad bit happy.
As you begin to ask him what happened he stops you. He says "I need space". Tears finally come and they make you feel a little better, but the pain is piercing through your soul. The pain never hurts as bad as the first time. But all the same you can't help but feel hopeless, foolish. Your great chance to be with your soulmate has again somehow slipped and failed.
 
What do you think? Cathartic exercise or something Serena's going to regret in a few days time?
You'll never guess what Alex Curran's had Botoxed!

We didn't think the celebrity trend for cosmetic surgery could get any more out of control, until we saw this – a designer handbag that's been Botoxed! Alex Curran is the latest famous type to fork out £1,500 for the Zagliani python-skin bag, which a former dermatologist designed using Botox to make it stay soft and plump for longer. A bag made of poison? Er, just what we've always wanted…


Ooh! Is Coleen pregnant?
Speculation is mounting that Coleen McLoughlin is pregnant, after bookies noticed that dozens of punters were suddenly putting money on it. It's now believed that a baby announcement could be imminent – and odds have been slashed to 4/1 amid suspicions that people could be trying to make a quick buck out of their insider knowledge. “Coleen and Wayne are due to get married this summer so we presumed Coleen would want to keep her figure in shape for the ceremony and magazine deal,” says a spokesman for Paddy Power. “However, if money talks it looks like Wayne decided to give her a little prenuptial wedding surprise!” They also reckon Wayne and Coleen could name their offspring Thomas or Jeanette, after Mr and Mrs Rooney, but that sounds a little too tasteful to us…
Who wants to see Shipwrecked's Louis naked?!

Louis hasn't done much stripping since Shipwrecked finished, but we were missing that sexy bod of his so we asked him to do it again, just for us! Happy belated Christmas ladies!

OMG! Lewis Hamilton's lost his driving licence!
Sorry, but this is KIND of funny. Lewis Hamilton has lost his driving licence, for speeding on a French motorway. The Formula One star was doing a whopping 120mph near French town Laon on Sunday before he was pulled over by police and given a fine plus the ban, which is only for a month, luckily. "He was very polite and cooperative," said a police spokesman. We bet he was – HOW embarrassing??

Alex Curran comes face-to-face with masked raiders at her home

Poor Alex Curran must be feeling a bit shaken today – last night she was confronted by four masked burglars at her home. The wife of England footie ace Steven Gerrard was at home with friends while her fella was attending a match in France. Merseyside Police said that four men entered the property just before 9.30pm and proceeded to steal some jewellery. The robbers were described as “wearing dark clothing, hoods and balaclavas.” Scary. The WAG was upset by the incident but unhurt. This attack is the latest in a long line of raids on Liverpool footballers' homes.

The picture you've all been waiting for…

In tomorrow's bumper Christmas issue of heat, we lift the lid on Marc and Cerys' first night together away from the jungle, and bring you the cosy new photos that show just how in love they are.
 
And that's not all. For a few of your hard-earned pennies, you'll also get to see loads of famous folk looking very silly indeed for our annual Stars Dress Up feature and hear what celebs including posh old Vicky B herself made of 2007 – officially one of the most dramatic years in showbiz, especially if your name is Britney. In fact, the festive issue is so jam-packed full of excitement that you might need to limber up tonight to prepare yourself for it.
Gavin Henson charged over drunken antics

Gavin Henson has just learnt that he will face criminal charges over his drunken behaviour on a train last weekend. According to onlookers on the London to Cardiff train, Gavin and three friends terrorised the carriage by hurling abuse, soaking seats with beer and even making several passengers cry. The rugby star has now been charged with disorderly behaviour offences by British Transport Police.
Bless! Look what Brooklyn's got written on his T-shirt!
Posh keeps harping on about how chuffed she is that, thanks to the Spice reunion, her kids can now see her doing actual work – and here's the photographic evidence. Brooklyn went along to the girls' show in LA, with his mates Tom, Katie and Suri (incidentally, how pissed off would you be if you forked out a fortune for concert tickets and then had to sit near a squawking toddler? Even if they were A-list and super-cute?) – and proudly wore a Spice Boy T-shirt, bless 'im.
Can you tell which one is the mother?

One of these ladies is 62 and one is 39 — so why do they both look exactly the same age? Poor old Lisa-Marie Presley (yes, daughter of Elvis) – imagine having a mum like Priscilla (she's the one on the right, unbelievably), who looks both younger and sadly better than you. OK, so she's obviously got a loyalty card at her local plastic surgeons, but heatworld still can't quite believe that she looks younger now than she did when she was in Dallas back in the 80s!
Becks' sexy new phone advert

Any excuse to print a picture of David Beckham and we're there. Here is the man himself modelling a snake wrapped around his neck for the latest fashion phone from Motorola. The RAZR2 Luxury has just hit the shops and has 18K gold-plated trimming and a soft-touch back in sexy snakeskin. heatworld would like to see how it feels. And maybe the phone too...

