Wensum Throws Up Huge Barbel Brace 
The River Wensum continued its red-hot barbel form when Patrick Goffin banked a brace for 33lb 12oz – topped by a giant of 19lb 8oz (pictured).

Finding the venue in full flood, 42-year-old Patrick, from Caistor-on-Sea, Great Yarmouth, opted to roll a large piece of plain luncheon meat down a crease on the inside line, where he latched into both fish within an hour of each other.

Using 12lb line, a 25lb coated braid hooklength and a size 8 hook, Patrick first banked the 14lb 4oz fish, increasing his personal best by a 2oz in the process, before raising it by a further 5lb a short while later.
 
The catch comes just a week after Steve Hunt set a new barbel record on the Wensum with a massive fish of 20lb 8oz.

More Otters Found Dead In Traps 
Yet more crayfish traps have been discovered containing the carcasses of dead otters.
The continued use of illegal crayfish traps around the country has persuaded the EA to publish detailed information posters and fact sheets in an effort to raise awareness of the ongoing problem.
The campaign informs trappers of the need to fit the wire constructed cage traps with special otter guards in an effort to help protect otters which are a UK Biodiversity Action Plan species protected by European law.
The number of otters found dead in such traps has shown an alarming increase ove rthe last few months. Yet the numbers remain minimal compared to the numbers of the large predatory mammals that are killed by cars every year as they try to cross roads.
The sheets can be downloaded from the NAFAC website at Otter Sheets and Otter Awareness Poster.
Pike Bag Underlines Drain's Potential 
The North Level Drain in Cambridgeshire proved its potential during a recent pike match when the winner weighed in with four fish for 45lb 3oz.
Jamie Cooper tempted his pike on smelt deadbaits to beat runner-up Colin Bartram by just over 4lb in the North Level Championship held at French Drove, near Thorney.
Jamie's biggest pike went 19lb 2oz, a specimen that ensured he beat Colin's six fish bag. Third place went to Chris Longsdale with 32lb 5oz.
Fishing is on a day ticket available on the bank or on a Tydd Gote AC club book. Call Dave Partlett on 01945 463913 between 6pm and 9pm for further details.
Lifetime Achievement Award For World Champion 

Five times world champion Alan Scotthorne has been honoured with a Lifetime Achievement Award in recognition for his record-breaking success.

The Rotherham-based angler, who made history last September by becoming the first man in history to take five individual gold medals at world level, was presented with the prize by the National Federation of Anglers at a ceremony in Barnsley.

Richard Caborn, the MP for Sheffield, was joined by NFA chairman Terry Fell, former England manager Dick Clegg and Alan's wife, Sandra, to reward Alan for his phenomenal success.

After winning his first world title in 1996, he went to claim the individual crown in 1997, 1998, 2003 and then in 2007 on Lake Velence in Hungary.

"Coming from Sheffield, the city with possibly more anglers than any other, I have had a strong interest in fishing from an early age,” said Richard Caborn MP, who was presented with a 13ft Hardy and Greys Marksman rod in appreciation for his continued efforts on behalf of angling.

“Although I don't participate as much as I would like anymore it was a great honour to present local hero and five times World Champion Alan Scotthorne with his Lifetime Achievement Award.”

While Alan said: “I grew up at the side of a reservoir here in Yorkshire, and spent all of my time fishing, getting out there to practise whenever I could.

“Fishing has been my life and being able to fish for England is the pinnacle of the match fishing world.

“It's nice to think that I could be probably the most successful angler out there at the moment. However I am sure that someone will overtake me at some point,” he added.

Capture Of 54lb Common Carp Cures Obsession 
One of the year's biggest carp has been banked at a colossal 54lb.

The huge specimen, known as ‘Bill the Big Common' was taken by Shrewsbury-based angler Dave Haughton and came from Acton Burnell's bottom lake.

The 39-year-old architect was legering a Sonu Baits Tuna Wrap and a bag of chops tight to a dead weedbed during his latest fortnightly 48hr session when he hooked the new personal best.

The gigantic common beat his previous best set by his capture of ‘The Italian' last year at 51lb.

“I've been after the common for years but when you're fishing a tough venue for only 20 or so fish then it can be tough. When I saw its back break the surface 15 yards from the net and I recognised which fish I'd hooked my legs went to jelly,” admitted Dave.
 
*See the pictures of the superb common in next week's Angling Times.

Feeding Was Key To Big Bag 
Little and often was a feeding tactic that proved key for Drennan Team England star Des Shipp when he amassed an impressive 80lb 12oz of carp and F1s during a recent winter league match at Tunnel Barn Farm, Warwickshire.

Des' mammoth catch was not the only netful to drastically trouble the scales on the day, with 27 of the 80 peg field successfully managing to break the 50lb barrier.
	
The Preston Innovations-backed star managed to clinch top spot after opting to drip feed micro pellets into his swim, while pole-fishing 4mm expander pellet hookbaits from peg 5 on the Canal Pool.

That was just too good for former Fish ‘O' Mania champion Neil Machin who weighed in 79lb 10oz.

Getting into a consistent feeding rhythm was vital to Des' tactics as he told gofishing.co.uk: “When the rig went in, I cupped a tiny amount of the pellets in to try and provoke a response, leaving some in the pot.
 
“If nothing happened by the time the rig had settled I'd drop a few more in. If there were any left in the pot when the float disappeared they were emptied into the swim to keep fish rooting around,” added Des.

Trout Legend Turns To Pike 
Angling Times legend Bob Church joined his angling pal Mike Green for a session in pursuit of pike... and each ended up with cracking fish.

The pair, who both come from Northants, tackled a Midlands gravel pit, with Bob striking first with a 20lb predator that fell to a lure, while Mike was next in when he landed a 30lb 4oz – on the fly!

“I caught a 28lb 8oz River Nene pike on a fly two seasons ago but I never really thought I'd manage a ‘thirty' fishing the method,” admitted retired optometrist Mike.

“It was almost as satisfying at catching two Blithfield ‘thirties' on lures in a single morning eight years ago,” he added.

*To see pictures of the impressive brace, see next Tuesday's Angling Times.

The 'New' Terry Hearn Reveals All 
THE country's finest young carp angler is set to reveal the secrets behind his success in an exclusive interview with Angling Times.

Teenager Tom Maker has an incredible record with the species and this week took his 50th English ‘thirty' with the capture of a 32lb 6oz mirror.

At the tender age of just 16 it makes him the UK's most prolific junior – and puts him on course to emulate some of the country's finest carpers like Terry Hearn and Dave Lane.

“This lad is a hell of an angler with a list of big fish that would stand up against a lot of very successful adults,” said AT carp editor, James Furness.

“He's going to be the next big name in carp fishing and if he keeps it up at this rate we're bound to be hearing a lot more from him in the future.”


River Record Caught On Angling Times Feature 
Big fish man Gary Knowles has taken what is thought to be the River Dove's biggest-ever chub – and he did it while on an Angling Times feature!

The Cheshire-based angler banked the 6lb-plus specimen during a short afternoon session on the Staffordshire venue.

It fell to simple feeder-fished breadflake tactics.

“I've been fishing the Dove for years and this is the first 6lb fish that I've ever heard of coming from the water,” said Gary.

“I've done some research and no-one seems to know of anything bigger. To catch it while putting together an AT feature was the icing on the cake.”

The Big Perch Keep Coming 
The big perch keep on coming, with news of another record-shaking giant reaching Angling Times.

The huge 5lb-plus specimen comes just weeks after Robert Townsend took a fish of 6lb 2oz from the River Thames to break the British best by 3oz.

Details of this latest specimen are sketchy, but AT understands it is 100 per cent genuine and backed by good quality images.

“The last few years have been absolutely superb for big perch, with so many venues producing truly massive fish,” said AT big fish expert Greg Whitehead.

“When Les Brown (pictured) raised the bar to 5lb 15oz we thought that wouldn't be beaten for a while but the giants keep on coming.”

Britain's best-kept barbel secret 
Specimen hunter Duncan Charman has lifted the lid on Britain's best-kept big barbel secret – and Angling Times readers will be the first to find out where it is.
The Aldershot, Hants-based angler took AT's Steve Partner to a venue that, up until now, has been kept well under wraps – despite producing specimens to well over 19lb.
“The current barbel record stands at 21lb 1oz and the place in question could easily top that – but no-one seems to know about it,” said Duncan.
While Steve added: “This is exactly the kind of feature AT should be delivering. We'll be taking readers to a place where anybody can catch a fish that could put them in the history books. If you love barbel, you won't want to miss it.”
Chew Pike and Trout Dates 
After a spectacular end of season finale that saw sixteen 30lb-plus pike banked, as well as some superb dry fly fishing, Bristol Water's Chew Valley Reservoir has just announced details of next year's fishing.
Pike anglers will be itching to have another crack at Chew's huge specimens and they don't have long to wait... pike trials start up again for a week from January 19 and for another week from February 2.
But anglers shouldn't be caught napping - if you want to get booked in then you'll have to send an application by letter by January 1, 2008 if you're to be in with a chance of getting in.
The trout fishing kicks off once again on Chew and Barrows on March 13, followed closely by Blagdon on March 20. Then predator anglers will have to wait all summer until October 15 for the pike trials to start once again.
For details of prices for boat and bank fishing visit the Bristol Water website, or telephone Woodford Lodge. Pike anglers' applications should include name, address, daytime telephone number and booking requirements.
Telephone Woodford Lodge on 01275 332339, or visit www.bristolwater.co.uk
Fish O'Mania tickets delay 
The National Federation of Anglers has announced that the application for Fish O'Mania 2008 tickets will finally open on Monday, January 21 - one week after the intended opening date.
Applications were due to be accepted from January 14, but a technical issue left the body with no option but to delay people's attempts at entering Britain's biggest individual match fishing event, which has a whopping £25,000 prize for the winner of the final.
NFA Chief Executive Paul Baggaley told gofishing.co.uk: “We apologise for any inconvenience caused because of the delay which was down to error when the application system opened.”
Log onto www.nfadirect.com and click on the Fish O'Mania link to make your application.

