Talking poker
Blonde moments
Dave Colclough looks back to a legendary cash game in Birmingham when poker was a 'closed door' affair
Britain is awash with high- stakes poker tournaments at the moment and for the brief moments when you can't play live, there are hundreds of online sites waiting to relieve you of your cash. It's all your average poker addict could want. But it wasn't like that when I was making my name in the 1990s - that's for certain.

Poker was often only available two or three days a week, and casinos would have to put a stop to the poker games by 4am. When you consider that most cash games didn't start until midnight...well, it just wasn't enough. A Friday night poker player may have found himself £500 down at 4am on Saturday morning, having to wait until Sunday evening to get even.

Thankfully, wherever there is such a need, there is usually a local entrepreneur who will step up to meet it. And so it proved in Birmingham. Enter one Barry Hawkins: the founder of Barry's. This was the greatest game of all the 'private member' games in the 1990s, with a cast that included Mickey Wernick, John Shipley, Kevin Zyrandi, Derek Baxter and Lucy Rokach. 
MAN ABOUT TOWN
Barry himself was a real character. He had a wiry stature, unkempt hair, missing teeth and a dress sense to rival Leonard Rossiter. He had a story for every occasion and he seemed to know everyone and know everything that was worth knowing about in Birmingham.

Barry's club was nothing special to look at from the outside. It was just an everyday front door just off Bearwood High Street, apart from the fact it was steel-plated on the inside! There were some pokey old stairs that led you up to a steel gate, which was always kept locked. Beyond the gate, there was yet another door. When you finally managed to get inside, you felt a buzz that was akin to walking into Money on the table: we're not sure Barry's pool table was in such good nick a football stadium; the atmosphere in there was electric.

There was usually a thick haze of smoke above the table as an extractor fan failed dismally in coping with players like Colin Butcher. He would light the next cigarette with the previous one before putting it out. It's no surprise that he later died of cancer, god bless his soul. I shudder at the thought of how many years Barry's game may have chopped off the end of my life.

After the smoke, the first thing you were confronted with when you walked in was a particularly average-looking pub pool table that would see some not-so-average high-stakes confrontations. The most spectacular of these matches was won by a guy called Chris Randall. Chris was a hard-nosed hustler and a hell of a pool player. So good in fact, that he offered any of the regular poker players odds of 7/1 to beat him first to ten frames.

Eventually, Zyrandi stepped up to the mark and dropped £7,000 in fifties on the table. This meant Chris had to stump up £49,000. Just to be flash, he put down £50,000 in twenty sealed bags of crisp fifties (£2,500 in each bag).

But the game didn't start according to Chris' plan. Old 'Kitty Kat' played very well and caught a couple of breaks to take an early 4-3 lead. However, before the game had started, Chris had cunningly asked for a half hour break just before the pub's closing time. So at 10.30pm he ambled down the road to The Bear without a care in the world. 
He proceeded to stand at the bar watching some football highlights, surrounded by drunken chit-chat from the locals who probably couldn't muster up fifty quid if they emptied all their pockets together onto the table. 
TRICK SHOT!
Chris, however, wouldn't have looked too much out of place as he stood at the bar calmly savouring his two pints of Guinness. He certainly didn't waste any gambling money on his attire and has probably never spent £50 on a single item of clothing to this day. Forty minutes later he strolled back into Barry's with his nerves steadied. He oozed even more self- confidence than his usual arrogant demeanour and wasn't in any mood for messing around.

Kevin didn't win another frame as Chris ran out an easy 10-4 winner with an added swagger. Another £7,000 was then coolly added to the Randall bankroll. Just another night at Barry's.

Hendon Mob poker
Ram Vaswani
We take a look back at Ram's 2007 WSOP bracelet win
By InsidePoker

However, despite respect being garnered on both sides of the Atlantic for his fierce style of play, the Hendon Mobster was still searching for that elusive World Series bracelet win that would back up his status as perhaps the greatest talent to hail from home shores. But the $1,500 limit shootout at this year's WSOP finally proved to be the defining moment for 'Crazy Horse' to enter his name in the record books...

InsidePoker: So Ram, finally there's a bracelet on your wrist. You must be delighted?

Ram Vaswani: It's really nice to win the bracelet because it has now taken a little bit of pressure off me. As a poker player, that's the one thing you want [the bracelet]. It's nice to get it out of the way.

IP: What did you do to celebrate?

RV: I just went out for dinner the following evening with friends. The event finished about four in the morning and I was shattered. Don't forget I had the family out there and the little'un woke up from time to time. The night before the tournament I'd only had a few hours kip.

IP: Just how special does it feel?

RV: It's the ultimate thing for a poker player. I just felt something was missing from my CV. And, it now opens up the Grand Slam opportunity for me as well. I just need to get the WPT win out of the way before Roland [De Wolfe] wins a bracelet and then I'm home free. That's my mission in poker now.

IP: You claimed in an interview with InsidePoker recently that you were pretty bored with the game. Do you still feel that way now?

RV: I wouldn't go as far as to say I'm bored now. But I used to play in every single tournament and I really used to love it. It was a buzz. I guess that buzz had just gone out of it for me. Obviously, when you get into the deeper stages of a tournament, then it gets very exciting. But tournaments like the ones at the World Series don't have that buzz when you take into consideration the fact there are 700 guys in front of you and you need to get so many chips to win. It's not as easy as it used to be, you know. Tournament poker is more of a graft today because there are so many players.

IP: I'm guessing that buzz was back as you were on your charge towards winning the bracelet?

RV: Oh yeah, the buzz was really back. That's the ultimate situation for a poker player, being that deep in a tournament of that size. I was 100% focused to win the event. But there are tournaments today where I just don't have that focus.

IP: Did you always feel like you could win it?

RV: I got off to a good start, but I did have a bad session when it was down to four-handed; I went down to the low stack. I slowly got back into it. He [Andy Ward, who finished as runner-up] had me in chips when we were heads-up, but everything sort of clicked at that point; I found the hands, called his bluffs. Once I got so deep, I was desperate to win it.
 





IP: You had a disappointing main event with a quick exit. Does winning the bracelet help to heal that wound?

RV: Yeah, maybe, I'm not making excuses for the main event. I was trying my bollocks off, but I had an off day and the pain isn't so bad after winning my bracelet. There's no point getting upset about it. I lost a couple of early pots to Vince van Patten and did my money in about an hour after being crippled. But I got busted so early that it's not as much of a problem compared to if I had gone a lot further in the tournament.
IP: There's always going to be a lot of debate about who the best player in Britain is, but this win puts you on a par with 'Devilfish' as a bracelet winner...

RV: Yeah, but I don't think people will ever stop talking about Devilfish because he just won't let them. There's a bit of friendly banter between us. He's a bit of a looney, but I probably get on with him as well as anyone. He can be a bit naughty, but for me, Devilfish was probably the first proper player who I started to study playing. In fact, he was the only player I studied when I was young and coming into the game. He used to show his cards and tell people what he was doing. He's a character and can be hilarious at times. I get on well with him and I take him for what he is. He is also a great player. People forget that.

IP: So will you be wearing the bracelet much?

RV: [Laughs] I can safely say that I will never wear the bracelet. No chance. It will be hidden away in a cabinet somewhere, never to be seen again. But it's just nice to finally have it.
IP: You may get another one in September when the World Series arrives in London...

RV: Yeah, I'm looking forward to that. It's handy the World Series is coming over to us and it's on our front door without the heat and all the slot machines that you get over in Vegas. I think everyone is looking forward to it.

Poker cash game strategy
Exploiting weaknesses
Whether you're playing in low or high-stakes cash games, there are always chinks in your opponents' armour
By Phil Shaw
January 2008
Some of the best cash games players approach the game with a mix of exploitative strategies to be used against weak opponents with obvious flaws in their games, and optimal ones against tougher players whose skills are better honed. 
However, in reality you will not encounter many such opponents unless you rise to the bigger games. So it is useful to look at things from the opposite end of the scale and see how to exploit the bad players you will come across – particularly at the lower limits. After all, the aim of poker is to win the most money, not to play the most unexploitable game! 
LOW STAKES
In the lowest level games you can almost throw subtlety out of the window, and simply watch for the glaring weaknesses your opponents will exhibit – whether they are calling stations, rocks or maniacs – then react with simple strategies. 
Against calling stations you should aim to show down good hands and get maximum value for them, whilst avoiding making futile and expensive bluffs. 
Against rocks you should punish their tightness with aggression and bluffing to steal pots from them remorselessly. And against maniacs you should aim to trap, letting them bluff into your strong hands and trying to find the best moment to raise and get a lot of money in against them. 
MEDIUM STAKES
As you move up the levels, these players will become less plentiful and you will start to encounter more tight, predictable and solid players. These are the players you can hone your skills against, as by observing them you will develop a good idea of what ranges of hands they have at any given point as well as what they are likely to do with them based on the board and your actions. 





