DAKS ANNOUNCES SPLIT AFTER THREE SEASONS WITH GILES DEACON

British brand DAKS and London Fashion Week favourite Giles Deacon have announced, after only three seasons, that they're no longer going to be producing Giles' luxury women's wear collection. The seemingly amicable split sees Deacon agreeing that DAKS will be better off refocusing on their long-sustained reputation in the ready-to-wear domain. He explains, "I have thoroughly enjoyed working with the DAKS team and the opportunity that this collaboration gave me to work with such an established British brand. It has been a rewarding experience on both sides and I wish DAKS every success as they go forwards." 
FERRETTI LAUNCHES EYEWEAR

Come summer any girl worth her St Tropez holiday won't be stepping out without a pair of Alberta Ferretti glasses. May will see Ferretti present a luxury range of  glasses and sunglasses  - a welcome collaboration between the fashion house and Italian eyewear specialists Elite Group Spa, who've previously produced lines for Pollini. "Elite is the ideal partner for the production of our eyewear collection, because its way of working, which focuses towards an extreme care to details, a total attention to the whole product process and a deep passion for fashion, is the same strong method that characterises our company", states Massimo Ferretti, Chairman of Aeffe. The collection is thought to reflect the contemporary femininity and elegance consistent with Ferretti's girl-friendly fashion. Let's just hope Mother Nature deals us some sunshine...

POINTS MEAN PRIZES

If you shop in Topshop, or just want to stay ahead of the game, get yourself a new Style Advisor membership card. It means every time you buy something with the help of a Topshop Style Advisor you'll pick up points; which entitles you to gift cards issued twice a year. Your advisors will also keep you filled in on the latest industry news, complete with look books and unique birthday treats. And as a member you get to attend special preview events and gain priceless access into London Fashion Week. Proving once again it really is top of the high-street's shops.

Visit www.topshop.com/styleadvisor for further information on all services including the Style Advisor, Topshop To Go and Topshop Express services

NEW CREATIVE DIRECTORS AT GIANFRANCO FERRE

Gianfranco Ferré SpA have confirmed the rumours that 6267's creators, Tommaso Aquilano and Roberto Rimondi, are to replace recently departed Lars Nilsson as creative directors. Nilsson's swift departure - he left Ferré before the completion of his first collection for the house - opens the way for the duo to stamp their mark on the Ferré brand. In a statement released Tommaso and Roberto assert, "We have always drawn inspiration from the example of the eminent courtiers. Precisely Gianfranco Ferré has always had mythical status for us. His natural aptitude for the grandiose gesture, his sense of the dramatic in link with an architectonic severity, and his peerless knowledge of materials are now for us a great source of motivation. We would like to be worthy of him." They will debut their efforts in the Spring/Summer 2009 women's collection. 


CARRIERS WITH A CONSCIENCE

If your cocoa butter is ethical, your cleanser organic and your coffee fair-trade you're likely to love the new bags from French fashion house, Agnes B. In the past this sartorial eco-saint has done everything from building schools in Africa to monitoring global warming; and in a bid to become carbon neutral, they're now launching totally biodegradable carriers made from potato starch. So now you can transport your new outfit home and reduce the impact on the environment all at once. Let's hear it for multitasking. 
RACHEL LAUNCHES LINE WITH DKNY JEANS JUNIOR

Actress Rachel Bilson, famed for playing fashion forward Summer in the hit TV series The OC, is the latest in a string of Hollywood starlets to announce a new clothing collaboration. DKNY jeans junior plans to release the inspired range stateside this summer - which will include a mix of t-shirts, jeans, dresses, and knits - named Edie Rose (Edie after her grandmother and Rose after a family friend). 'I have been passionate about beginning my own collection for some time now,' chimes Bilson, 'Working with DKNY Jeans, a brand with similar demographics in terms of who I wanted to design for and similar aesthetics, has been really magical. They completely brought all my ideas and designs to life and have been so helpful and supportive with my vision.' Though there is no plan for the line to sell in the UK (it debuts in stores across America from September) watch this space as Rachel admits she hopes for a future solo debut. 
SPORTSWEAR, BUT NOT AS WE KNOW IT

The off-duty model look may be relaxed but it often seems utterly unachievable. Perhaps Hari's spring/summer line can bring us one step closer. Launched by fashion agent and yoga teacher, Lainey Sheridan Young, the label manages to combine high style with low maintenance and represents, at last, a look which is sports-centric without being cutesy. Stepping forward as the face of the collection is model and all-round cool kid Daisy Lowe, who apparently adores the bright hoodies and matching sweat pants. The colourful separates are subtly embellished with the label's recognisable lion and love heart logo and can be found in stores this week.
LIBERTY ANNOUNCES FIRST FLAGSHIP STORE

Liberty of London has just released information on a long awaited stand alone flagship store due to open this summer. The new store on London's Sloane Street will house the best of Liberty's leather, accessories, scarves, swimwear, jewellery and men's collections. The team behind the no-expense-spared shop design includes creative director Tamara Salman and Paris-based architects Pierre Beucler and Jean-Christophe Poggiolo, who were behind the designs of luxury fashion houses; Comme des Garcons, Dior Homme, and the recently launched Lavin stores worldwide.

ANDERSSON LEAVES CHLOÉ

Paulo Melim Andersson, Creative Director of the Chloé, has been given his marching orders, cutting his debut short at a questionable 17 months. Speculation over his appointment was widespread when the French fashion house - famed for its seventies-style, feminine chic style - hired the Swedish born Andersson to take the reigns, with much debate over whether he could mimic the huge success of Phoebe Philo. Andersson had previously spent seven years at Marni - itself a much-loved label - but his vision for Chloé has not fuelled the kind of label-mania that was seen under Philo's reign. Hannah MacGibbon, previously one third of the Philo team, set to take the helm of the Chloé powerhouse and lead the way for Spring 09. 
BID FOR CELEBRITY STYLE
 
Fancy owning the very gown that Amy Winehouse, Leona Lewis or Danni Minogue wore on the red carpet? Well now you can. They are just a few of the celebrities who are auctioning their dresses on eBay to raise funds for charity. If you admired the dramatic purple Roberto Cavalli gown that Leona wore at the Baftas, it could be yours at the click of a button. Bidding starts at £3,800 but you can salve your conscience with the thought that the money raised goes to Sport Relief. 
 
Similarly, to celebrate the release of new movie 27 Dresses, Twentieth Century Fox are offering the chance to snap up - yes, you guessed it -  27 celebrity dresses. Some lucky girl has already made off with Kylie's stunning white John Galliano dress for a fabulous £2,150. And since all proceeds benefit The Lavender Trust there's no excuse to hold back. Start bidding now... 
DKNY JEANS OPENS NEW LONDON STORE

Donna Karan International will launch its new DKNY Jeans flagship store on London's very own New Bond Street on the 1st of April; expect urban cool - the design notion for the 4400 square foot location was enthused by the art gallery district in New York. If you can't make it to Bond Street, DKNY Jeans have also newly opened stores in Manchester, Birmingham, Liverpool, and on Brompton Road London. 
 
124 New Bond Street
London
W1S 1DX
Tel: 0207 647 9810
BIRKENSTOCK TEAMS UP WITH BREAST CANCER CAMPAIGN

The Birkenstock shelves are sizzling hot this season with their new pink patent Madrid sandal.  Created exclusively with the Breast Cancer Campaign, they will be donating £3.50 from each pair sold to the charity.  The hot pink twosome is an exclusive design and will only be available for a limited period only.  They can be found at the London Birkenstock store branches of The Natural Shoe Store, selected branches of Office and Schuh.  They're also available online at www.birkenstock.co.uk or by calling 0800 132 194. 
'SEX AND THE CITY' INSPIRES COSABELLA

'What type are you?' asks lingerie label Cosabella as they release two capsule Sex and the City underwear ranges to coincide with the long awaited movie release this May.  Both collections are made up of four exclusive styles named after the girls: Samantha, Charlotte, Miranda and Carrie.  Whether you are feeling sexy and seductive like Samantha, or prim and proper like Charlotte, there will be something to suit you. Selfridges will house the first collection this April, and the second will be on sale with the DVD release, later this year.

ASTLEY CLARKE COUTURE COLLECTION

Sparkle with style this spring - the much loved jewellery boutique, Astley Clarke have launched their new couture collection.  This twenty-piece assembly of the finest moonstones, softly polished cabochon stones, rose quartz and faceted diamonds, all set in 18ct White Gold, just oozes timeless chic. Astley Clarke celebrated the launch last night at The Conaught, with guests Ben Fogle, Tom Aiken and Chloe and Poppy Delivinge, who happily sipped on Laurent Perrier while they admired the handcrafted collection. 

Exclusively available online at www.astleyclarke.com, 
or call 0870 850 5685 to make an appointment to visit the showroom, 6 Junction Mews, London, W2 1PN

DVF GOES VIRTUAL

Top designer Diane von Furstenberg has gone virtual - with her new online art gallery DVFprojects.com. Designed to unite the worlds of art, fashion and culture, this site shows footage from the making of her new fashion campaign. Premier model Natalia Vodianova is the face of the brand with artist and photographer François-Marie Banier behind the camera. Von Furstenberg followers can view the design progress and inspiration firing her project at www.DVFProjects.com

CHLOË SEVIGNY DESIGNS

Actress Chloë Sevigny - known for her enviable style - has joined forced with New York based boutique Opening Ceremony for spring/summer 2008. The collection was inspired by Connecticut and New York- where Chloë Sevigny grew up and includes slim fit trousers, floral prints and school-girl minis. Lucky Londoners can find the new season pieces in Selfridges this February.
EJF AT LONDON FASHION WEEK

We can no longer take cotton for granted, says the Environmental Justice Foundation (EJF).  Their new campaign - featured at London Fashion Week - invites the public to make a stand for fairly traded cotton. With celebrated designers Luella Bartley, Christian Lacroix, Katharine Hamnett and Betty Jackson as the print designers for the promotion t-shirts (made form organic and fairly traded fabic – of course!) the campaign is off to a fashionable start. Models Irina Lazareanu and Coco Rocha are also offering their support and KT Tunstall and Lily Cole have been spotted in the t-shirts.  The charity is pushing for an end to child labour and the use of dangerous pesticides – and with more than a million children around the world forced in to cotton production it's time to unite. 
LIBERTY DO LINGERIE

Romance is in the air - especially at Liberty, where a new lingerie boutique has been introduced in time for Valentine's Day. Launched with a ‘Kiss and tell' performance by cabaret performer Esme Bianco, the new boutique (situated up on the 4th floor) will stock seductive pieces from designers such as Kiki De Montparnasse and Stella McCartney – as well as sexy French knickers from Buttress and Snatch. And should you desire a handmade whip or seduction kit – you'll find them here too…
214-220 Regent Street 
Regent Street, London, W1B 5AH
Tel: 020 7734 1234

