Class In Pocket
Shut down your iPod for the evening, cue the Hovis advert and relax with a steaming cuppa. Cast your mind back to the days before hard drives an inch square existed, to a time when you couldn't carry a pointlessly large number of songs around in a sliver of plastic and silicon the size of a couple of credit cards.

The year was 1984, and the maestros of miniaturisation at Sony had just released the WM-DC2 Walkman. Seeing as it's a piece of portable hi-fi, the DC2 only cost a small arm and a leg, but this was the gizmo every self-respecting traveller wanted hanging off their belt clip. Whereas today's MP3 players represent the cold, clinical, cutting-edge results of computer-optimisation and technicians air-locked into dust-free clean rooms, the DC2's timeless design speaks more of long nights poring over blueprints, and hands-on craftsmanship. It might be the size of yesteryear's mobiles, but the DC2 has a reassuring weight and classy construction mirrored in its sound quality. The goodies list includes an amorphous head, quartz-lock disc-drive capstan and Dolby C noise reduction. The result was that the a recording of the Hovis ad on the cassette formulation of your choice had an unusually solid, stable sound and useful frequency extension a million miles away from the sort ‘underwater' warbling of lesser walkmans.

The DC2 may have burnt rather large holes in owners' pockets, but the smiles on their faces beneath those dodgy Eighties perms were well deserved.
Hi-Fi that Rocked the World

In May 2006, Hi-Fi Choice's reviewers sat round an email client program and between them came up with the 50 most important hi-fi components ever sold in the UK. The results were published in an award-winning supplement Hi-Fi that Rocked the World. If you missed it, here's the top ten:

1. Linn Sondek LP12 turntable
2. NAD 3020 integrated amplifier
3. Quad Electrostatic loudspeaker
4. Rega Planar 3 turntable
5. Pioneer A400 integrated amplifier
6. B&amp;W Nautilus 801 loudspeaker
7. BBC LS3/5a loudspeaker
8. Marantz CD-63 MkII KI Signature CD player
9. Garrard 301 turntable
10. Wharfedale Diamond loudspeaker

So... what would you choose?

Dylan's (not so) Modern Times
So Bob Dylan can't stand the sound of modern records. The audio quality of CDs is "atrocious", he says and today's recording techniques leave you merely with "static" instead of 'real' music.

He even thinks digital technology is ruining his own records. Of his new album, the wonderfully inaptly titled Modern Times, he notes: "These songs probably sounded ten times better in the studio when we recorded 'em. CDs are small. There's no stature to it." As for the downloading debate, he has no objection to people getting modern music for free. "Why not? It ain't worth nothing anyway,'" he mutters. Such a splendidly bad-tempered display of splenetic 'age rage' makes great copy, of course. But what exactly does he mean? And how does he think records should sound? 

Dylan, it seems, has never really gotten over the juke box age. When he recorded a live album with the Grateful Dead in the late 1980s, members of the band were astonished that he made the final track selection on the basis of a playback of the material not on state-of-the-art studio quality speakers but on a 30 dollar cassette player. Their conclusion was that he stills listens to music with the ears of the teenage boy who discovered the glory of rock'n'roll in mono in the L&amp;B Café back in Hibbing, Minnesota in the mid-1950s. I'm not sure the famous Dansette was ever marketed in America - but if it had been, Bob Dylan would have loved it.

His claim that his new songs sounded better in the studio than on disc is also revealing,  re-igniting an ancient argument that has raged since the invention of the first phonograph: can recorded sound ever be as good as live sound? Dylan clearly thinks not. Indeed, he seems to believe that digital recording has added to the barriers between the listener and the music. Perhaps that's why at 65, he's still on his Never Ending Tour, playing more than 100 live dates a year. Yet the odd thing is that although Modern Times has now been out for two weeks and he's performed live almost every night since its release, not a single one of the new songs has yet been played in concert, so that we can only know them by the recorded versions which he considers so inferior. 

Personally, I love the sound of Modern Times - as playing in my study now on a 5:1 Panasonic system. Dylan's production (under the pseudonym Jack Frost) is elegant, direct and unfussy with, so far as one can tell, virtually no overdubs. He ended up producing himself because he says he's never found a producer - not even Daniel Lanois - who really understood what he wanted.

Not that he's alone in thinking that modern sound is rubbish - I recall Ry Cooder telling me once that the golden age of recording ended when they threw out valve technology. There are recording facilities, such as Liam Watson's Toe Rag Studios in London, that specialise in recording with antique analogue gear. Among those who've used the facilities are the White Stripes. Perhaps for his next album Bob should check it out, too.

Keith Jarrett - The Carnegie Hall Concert

I don't get to review titles of a regular CD persuasion in HFC so I thought I'd mention Keith Jarrett's Carnegie Hall Concert two disc set that has just been released. This is one of the best sounding digital recordings I've heard, regardless of format. I've wondered why his label, ECM, which is renowned for the quality of its recordings, has not started to make SACD or DVD-A discs so far but now I know. If you can make a regular CD sound this real, atmospheric and strong you don't need a new format.
 
The music covers a broader range than I had expected, with some surprisingly challenging and dark pieces interspersing a selection of beautifully concise improvisations that contain moments of genius. He ends the set with five classic tunes including his own My Song from 1977. If you appreciate great piano playing and enjoy stunning sound get this album now.

What are you listening to?
A quick straw poll of the editorial team here at Hi-Fi Choice nets a very catholic list of musical influences. Everything from pre-modern madrigals to penned-last-week alt.country, from hardcore Chicago blues to even-harder-core German Techno. And almost everything in between, barring David Hasselhoff records.

But, what do you listen to? Do you have a core of recordings that you use to audition hi-fi, and do you ever listen to them for pure entertainment, too? Do you have any test discs that you've never heard past the first two minutes? Or is all this test disc stuff just a load of nonsense? So, what are your top five recordings?  
Make vroom for Meridian

Meridian Audio is one of those high end names that rubs shoulders with the rich and famous. It could be the Ferrari of hi-fi. Funny that... 'cos Meridian's latest product is the F80, which so impressed the motocenti of Maranello, this new product has the prancing horse on the front.

The F80 is a mighty departure for Meridian. It's a 2.1 channel portable mains-powered DVD-Video/CD/DAB/FM all in one unit, costing a cool £1,500. But - as you start to get the words "you're kidding" out - wait until you hear it. The cool Ferrari-coloured box, complete with fridge magnet remote on the outside and plenty of sophisticated DSP on the inside, sounds as serious as a race-tuned, fast-revving V12.

We had a brief listen a couple of hours ago and we are still reeling from the scale of sound a small box can deliver. Its 80 watt power delivery can fill surprisingly large rooms with stunning sound and even non-HFC people ran in, nodded approval and asked the golden question.

"Wow! Can I get one?"

Best of all, they asked that AFTER they heard how much it was. It's that good. 

We hope to be looking at one soon. Pity it doesn't come with a free 599 GTB Fiorano to go with it.

Small is beautiful

I love big speakers. Nothing else delivers the visceral quality of music like a full bandwidth speaker playing at high level, nothing else punches you in the sternum and resonates the furniture in such gripping fashion. However, fortunately, size has no bearing on the emotional communication skills or timing ability of a loudspeaker, in fact in the latter's case small is often an advantage. 

Listening to the attractive but unassuming and decidedly compact Ruark Sabre III I have re-discovered that a speaker like this can speak to the heart with considerable fluency and it leaves me thinking that music might just be more enjoyable overall as a result. The Sabre III concentrates on the elusive but critical quality of timing rather than attempting maximum transparency or bass crunch. High fidelity takes many forms but fidelity to the heart of the music is possibly the most important.

Victory!
People power really can work, folks!

On July 6 this year, malign forces working in dark places within the BBC's digital radio laboratory downgraded the bitrate of BBC Radio Three, from 192kbps to 160kbps. The reason for the cut in quality was 'bandwidth', although it seemed the bandwidth used in the sacrifice was rolling advertising for sport channels.

Radio Three is the BBC's flagship radio station, broadcasting live recordings of concerts (this against rivals often content with failing to correctly differentiate Bach from Gorecki when playing a two-minute snippet of a poorly mixed sampler). To knock the bitrate of its flagship down, the Beeb is effectively admitting to lowering quality across the whole of the network.

A tide of protest ensued. 

Recently, the BBC has recanted... sort of. Now, Radio Three has returned to 192kbps, with the proviso that the rate can and will be cut back to 160kbps when there is high demand for that extra bandwidth.  This may not be ideal, but it's better than the constant lower rate alternative.

The moral of this is this; keep it up! If we as a lobby can restore Radio Three to its vaulted 192kbps inside of six months, perhaps we can ask for even more. Who knows, instead of channels devoted to programming for Inca speakers, live coverage of crochet or a 24/7 rolling re-run of Worker's Playtime from 1942, we might get even better quality digital radio quality for the programmes people actually enjoy listening to.
Sweet Talking 
Some would claim that music is the international language, others that it is the Queen's English. But this would be to ignore the creative literary delights that are to be found in instruction manuals, adverts and on fabulous products everywhere. As well as the gems that frequently appear in Japanese hi-fi manuals, there are examples from all over the world.

These are the instructions for a little six-inch saw made in China, which probably left a trail of limbless DIYers in its wake: “It is not allowed to use this machine in fire, thunder, and wet environment. Prevent it from working in a corrosive and harmless surrounding. Adjusting angular of the fixing plier can be indicated by the angular adjuster for adjusting the angle. Caution: No personnel in a specific field can dismount the machine at will.”

Other examples, blissfully unrestricted by the rules of English grammar, are proudly displayed at the web site, www.engrish.com. A sticker on the side of a Zojirushi Tuff Mug thermos reads: “Live beautifully together with herbs.”; on a Park clothing cover: “A person who's brilliant is wonderful. Such a person should be the one who gives full rest and fresh stimulation to oneself. It's a high quality cover that presents tranquility of mind and freshness.”


