Editorial: The ad men cometh


Having online adverts tailored to your specific needs is little compensation for allowing faceless corporations access to your browsing history. 
How do you feel about having your every online move watched, recorded and neatly filed away?
On the face of it, moves from companies like Phorm to monitor our browsing habits and use these to serve us more relevant advertisements on participating sites should be a good thing. In my case, it should mean I no longer get served irrelevant ads expounding the joys of Windows Vista, the tastiness of certain cuts of meat, or the safety benefits of a gas guzzling 4x4. Why? Because my browsing history would show very clearly that none of these subjects is of the least interest to me. Neither they nor any related field would ever crop up in my browsing habits, and so the chance of an advert on one of those three subjects inducing me to spend would be slim to nil.
The trouble is, this kind of information is highly valuable, and relevant adverts are seen as inadequate compensation for data with such extraordinary financial potential. Combine that with the fact that we're largely wary of faceless corporations and you can see why the likelihood of us voluntarily signing up for such schemes en mass is on a par with Apple shipping another beige Mac.
Yet we give away far more information than this every day without a second thought. Whenever you use a loyalty card you tell your supermarket a little bit more about yourself, which it can then use to tailor the mailouts that litter your doormat.
These mailouts can range from the benign to the potentially scary. Buy a box of own-brand aspirin, for example, and the mailout could range from a money-off voucher for Nurofen, in the hope you might choose a more expensive remedy, to information on private health plans, because its automated systems assumed that you have a heart condition and are using the aspirin to thin your blood. Take this argument to its most logical conclusion and any supermarket that also owns an insurance firm could use that information as a factor in quoting for life cover.
The clamour over surveillance of our browsing habits seems hugely hypocritical when we would gladly sell enormous quantities of shopping data for a return of less than 1% on each trip to the tills. So don't draw a line between the virtual and actual worlds; cut up your loyalty card first, and only then join the campaign for privacy online.
Analysis: SDK touches the heart

Now that the news of the iPhone SDK for third parties has sunk in, the iPod touch could be the Apple product that realises its potential. 
Remarkably for a company which seems to attract as much criticism as it does praise these days, Apple seems to have pleased almost everyone with its announcement of iPhone 2.0. Much of the attention prior to the live event in Cupertino, at which Apple demonstrated the new software development kit (SDK), was focused on what would be missing and what kind of restrictions it would impose on would-be iPhone developers. As it turned out, the SDK is far more comprehensive than had been expected, and the restrictions far fewer.
Rather like Treasury Budget statements, however, Steve Jobs' announcements take several days of digestion before the details start to reveal themselves. Now that time has passed, however, and the general feeling is much the same - that Apple has done as much as it could have been expected to, and more than most thought it would, albeit a year late.
Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the announcement was the way Apple has chosen to implement support for enterprise services such as push email, and push calendaring. Unlike Rim, maker of the ubiquitous BlackBerry, a device which has done more than any other to popularise push email, Apple has licensed Microsoft's ActiveSync protocol in order to build support for Microsoft Exchange into the iPhone. Technologically that's a wise move. It allows Apple to integrate applications it already runs on the iPhone, like Mail and iCal, with Exchange and offer users the best of both worlds as well as




extra features like remote wipe - where a lost or stolen iPhone can have its data wiped over the air. 
Politically it's hugely significant. In recent years, Apple has been doing everything it can to distance itself from and reduce its reliance on Microsoft, from developing its own browser and office applications, to refusing to support Windows Media formats on the iPod. Now it's acknowledged that in order to realise the potential of the iPhone as a smartphone for business users, it must not only support a Microsoft platform, but license tools from Microsoft in order to do it. 
While users and potential users were delighted by the news of Exchange support, however, third-party developers were much more interested in what Apple had in store for them in the SDK. The news was, mostly, good. The SDK is free to download, though developers will need to pay Apple a one-time fee of $99 in order to develop applications for it. The tools and APIs themselves are, according to Apple, identical to those Apple itself uses to develop iPhone apps. And three of the four layers of the iPhone OS are the same as those on Mac OS X; Core OS, Core Services, and Media. The fourth layer, which replaces Cocoa, is Cocoa Touch, the user-interface application framework which supports elements of the iPhone, such as Multi-touch and the accelorometer, which differ from the Mac. 
Some developers were less keen on the news that all applications, whether sold or given away free, would have to be signed using a certificate supplied by Apple, and approved by the Cupertino company. It will distribute applications exclusively through the iTunes Store and take 30% of the revenue of those that are sold. The 30% charge seems reasonable, given that Apple will pay the cost of credit card processing, order processing, and marketing, as well as host the applications on its servers. And even the implementation of code signing is not necessarily negative. Support for code signing already exists in Leopard and is necessary for features like Leopard's Firewall and Parental Controls.
Some developers are, however, understandably troubled by the power which code signing grants Apple. It could use it to prevent any application from running on a platform, for example. On the iPhone it doesn't need to do that of course. Apple will just veto and refuse to distribute any application which does not meet its terms. Those terms are far from benign. There are a few obvious restrictions: Apple won't allow applications which are malicious or illegal, or those which invade privacy or hog bandwidth. So far, so reasonable. But there are another two classes of application Apple will ban: Porn and Unforeseen. 
Whatever your view of pornography, banning it from the iPhone makes little logical sense. It's not illegal in most countries and in those in which it is, it would be easy to block distribution through that country's iTunes Store. If Apple has taken a moral stance and decided to censor applications based on what it believes we should or should not be able to use iPhones for, what comes next? 
But if censoring porn is troubling, Unforeseen is much worse. What Apple is saying here is that it reserves the right to ban any application it chooses based on criteria it hasn't yet thought of. In other words, if you're a developer, beware. Regardless of how much time, effort, or money you've spent building an iPhone application, Apple can kill it stone dead, and there's not a thing you can do about it.
Censorship aside though, iPhone 2.0 looks promising for both developers and users. And the fact that it, and the applications developed for it, will run on the iPod touch means that Apple will very shortly have a handheld computer that will revolutionise that market in the way the original iPod shook up the portable music player market. It's not by accident that the new layer in the iPhone OS is called Cocoa Touch. The iPhone may be generating the headlines, but it's the touch that will realise the potential of the new platform Apple has created. For £200, you can have in your pocket the kind of computer that we've all been urging Apple to make for years.

The Works: The games printers play
When you buy a printer, you unknowingly take part in a game where you end up spending more than you had intended to. 
The Cold War had some singular benefits including of course Darpanet, the precursor of the Internet itself. But few today realise how it was mainly won - if anyone did come out of those bitter and twisted decades a victor.
It did not emerge through military might but by boffins playing games. Some of the most brilliant minds in the West were employed in think tanks to develop game theory and literally outplay the strategists of the Communist bloc.
Starting from simple games such as The Prisoner's Dilemma (plato.stanford.edu/entries/prisoner-dilemma), theoreticians worked out the strategies that prevented mutual nuclear annihilation. That same game theory has since been applied to economics, and the Internet itself.
Try as I might though, I have been unable to find any equivalent analysis of the Printer Game, alias The Uninterruptible Income. It currently runs something like this: you buy a printer with all the bells and whistles at what looks like less than the cost of manufacture only to find that replacement ink (or toner) cartridges are almost as expensive as the unit itself. Next, the software support is discontinued even though the printer is still relatively new and far from worn out. That means you have to buy a new one, which inevitably takes different and even more expensive cartridges, and so the process loops again.
This seems to work whether you bought an HP OfficeJet G55 a few years ago or are the proud new owner of an HP Color LaserJet 2840. Although these examples both come from HP, I have had similar emails complaining of problems with Epson and other major manufacturers. The G55, reviewed enthusiastically in MacUser (see 9 March 2001), originally cost £299 VAT included, but even now will set you back £38 or so to replace its two cartridges, the ink costing about £1000 per litre. Its drivers for Mac OS X were last updated in September 2005 to support Tiger but do not work under Leopard. Those who are trying to use their G55s under Leopard are being told by HP that there are no plans to support it.
The 2840 on the other hand is now about £320 including VAT - but a complete set of replacement cartridges costs more than £200, while a new imaging drum will set you back £90. Its drivers were last updated for Tiger in July 2006 and three months after the launch of Leopard, there is no sign of any update to enable scanning or faxing under Leopard.
The cheaper the printer, the more overt the Printer Game becomes. A typical modern inkjet printer at about £70 including VAT is likely to cost you £25 to replace its four cartridges - that is, more than 35% of the original printer cost.
You can, of course, buy third-party consumables - remanufactured cartridges and so on - and though some users I know have successfully economised, I have personal experience of, among other things, remanufactured cartridges that were complete duds and wasted hours trying to get them to work.
In the meantime there is another game waiting for a more innovative printer manufacturer - one with some concern over the carbon footprint of all these printers and their refills. In this, it will offer a range of printers based on open cartridge standards, encouraging third parties to supply competitively priced and high-performance consumables. Also, printer firmware will be standardised so that a single, common open-source driver will be portable between operating systems, and supported long term.

