Dear Readers...
With all my fingers crossed, I'm very happy to let you know that our computer problems seem to be sorted. The website is up and running again and my e-mail box is working properly. It's not been easy, but by the time you read this I should have replied to everyone. There's more than a slight possibility that some e-mails might have disappeared into the great blue yonder, so apologies if yours has gone astray.
As I write, we're getting into gear for Machine Knitting LIVE! at Bournemouth and you'll read on page 32 that there's going to be a great turnout with almost every available exhibitor coming along. The only disappointment so far is that Jane Woodward's husband has arranged a family holiday in Vietnam so we won't have Shades of Cashmere yam at the show. Jane tells me it's an escorted tour and they don't get back until 9th March. It promises to be quite an experience and I hope it's enjoyable. Jane also mentioned that she's now a proud grandmother for the first time. Joseph Charles was born on 20th October to their middle son Philip and Fiona. Jane's already volunteered for babysitting duty and was quite disappointed that the latest family member slept all night. As soon as we've finished with photography, her lovely cashmere cot blankets will be on their way to keep the little chap warm and snug, with our best wishes and congratulations to all the family.
There's been lots of interest in Nina Miklin's new hats and scarves and the special book offers. We've two more this time on page 25. Nina has made up lots of kits in assorted yarns and colours and she's taking them to Bournemouth. If you can't get to the show, please drop her a line and enclose your telephone number so that she can call you back to discuss your requirements. Don't forget her machine-knitting book offer on page 40 of the February issue runs to the end of May. The four hats and two scarves in Book 16 are excellent patterns for your library and ideal for using up oddments. It's one not to miss.
There's lots of Guild information to pass on this time and the welcome news is that the Scottish Machine Knitters' website has been revamped and is now up and running. If you have a computer, you'll find it at www.scottishmachineknitters.org.uk. Margaret Robbie has been updating it for the SMK and done a tremendous job. It's an excellent source of information for machine knitting activities in Scotland. The other news is from the Guild of Machine Knitters about this year's Creativity Cup. To encourage new entrants, the important change is that all four main categories are open to both GMK members and non-members alike. Most of us with only a little experience can make an adult garment or something for children or babies and we can all come up with ideas for cone ends using under lOOg of yam. If none of that appeals there's also an open category for absolutely anything machine knitted. You don't need to be a top-flight designer to take part. The competition is all about spreading ideas and enthusiasm for machine knitting and you're not being asked to re-invent the wheel. If you've a favourite pattern you can use that for size but just personalise it with a little something different such as a different stitch pattern, collar or button band. There are many wonderful knitters who can't work without a pattern and that's fine, a bit of adaptation goes a long way.
The only categories requiring some Guild involvement are the Creativity Cup and Sherbome Vase. You need to be a current GMK member but again, that's not much of a problem because you can enclose the annual £15 membership with your entry. The final category may be of interest to clubs, as entry for the Sherbome Vase needs at least three GMK members plus two others of a club or at least five individual GMK members working as a group to create a fibre art project. This year's theme is 'Something for The Table' to be interpreted however you wish. Forms are available by post, e-mail from Liz Holness or downloaded from Guild website at www.guild-mach-knit.org.uk. If there's not sufficient time, perhaps think about it as a club project for next year? There's more about SMK on page 11 and the GMK competition on page 34 so until next time, happy reading.
Anne
GO FOR GOLD
NOT ONE, NOT TWO BUT THREE GOLD MEDALS
Wow, what an experience for Beryl Jarvis. Thanks to the help from many readers of MKM and elsewhere, her son Jeffrey was able to take part in the World Summer Special Olympics held in Shanghai from 2nd to 11th October 2007.

There were almost 7500 athletes from more than 160 countries taking part in 25 sports. Ever since Jeffrey was aware of Special Olympics about ten years ago and that the world games in 2007 would be in China where table tennis is their national sport, he made it his ambition to get there. In June 2006 he was over the moon to hear that he'd been chosen as just one of four table tennis players from Great Britain. Since then he's been keeping fit, playing as much table tennis as possible and has filled four diaries with his fitness record.
TEAM SPIRIT
Team GB met at Heathrow on Tuesday 25 September and flew out to Shanghai the next day. They took part in a host town program where they are made welcome and experience the country they are in. Jeffrey had already been in Shanghai for four days before I arrived and the day after we landed a friend and I went to see the sights. We walked the Bund, went through the sightseeing tunnel and up to the top of the Pearl Tower. China was also celebrating China Day and literally millions of people were there as well. As we were going by a park, we saw athletes from the GB team so we flashed our ID tags at the security guys, who let us in. There we met up with the table tennis squad, including Jeffrey to discover that they had just been tea tasting.
On Tuesday 2nd October we were collected from our hotel to be taken to the opening ceremony. Well, what can I say? Even though our seats were right at the top of a full 70,000-seat stadium, the atmosphere and spectacle was electric. On every seat there was a bag of goodies and during the warm up we practiced banging the small drum, flashing the torches, holding up the silk square, waving banners and clapping with the clappers. We discovered that the audience was part of the display, with the sounds and colours not only being in the arena but also all around as well. There were fireworks, but we could not see them well from our seats.
SIGHT SEEING
We had one more free day and booked a day trip. The first stop was Suzhou, a small city on the out skirts of Shanghai, where we saw a Chinese garden with typical buildings, huge water lilies in the lakes and bonsai trees. Next we were taken to a Silk Mill and I'll admit that this was my choice from the list of day trips and was, of course, where I wanted to visit. It was very geared up to the tourist trade and the visit started with a talk about the life cycle of the silk worm. Then we went on to see and touch silk worms eating mulberry leaves and I shouldn't have been surprised that they felt silky. Next we passed along the production line where the silk was removed from the cocoons, the end found and seven ends twisted together to make a very fine thread.
At this mill they were making silk quilts by pulling and stretching the cocoons out to shape. We all had a go at this and then moved on to the saleroom. One couple with me invested in a quilt - a luxury I'm sure they will enjoy and most of the men bought silk shirts. I bought three small hanks of silk in red, blue and green and have already untwisted the blue and green and started to think about how I will use them. We then sat down to a Chinese meal with so many dishes to choose from that I lost count and this was followed by green tea.
WATERSIDE
Next we went on to ZhouZhuang water village. This was noisy, busy with the holiday, smelly in places but quite fascinating with tiny shops and stalls everywhere. The tour guide took us through alleyways and rough paths to go boating on the waterway. It was organised chaos, with five people employed to control the crowd, but once we were on the boat it was very peaceful. The boat was a bit like the punts at Cambridge and a lady in traditional Chinese dress sang as she steered the boat, rocking it from side to side. The same evening we were booked to see Chinese acrobats, so they rushed us back to Shanghai and directly to the theatre with no time to change for the evening! How do they twist and turn their bodies like that?

GO FOR IT
The next day the table tennis started and to get there we had a ten-minute walk to the subway. This was up the main Nanjing Road at 7.15 am and we saw people of all ages in the street doing Tai Chi, ballroom dancing, line dancing, playing badminton or just doing stretching exercises. They certainly seem to be a very healthy nation and I saw hardly any overweight Chinese. I did not see crisps and chocolate for sale everywhere! Next came a 20 minute subway ride and on one day this was so busy that when the doors opened people just fell out on to the platform, so we waited for the next one that day.
The subway ride took us to the hub where Special Olympics were running buses from and to several sports. Table tennis was a 35-minute ride away and the venue was absolutely fantastic with 20 tables. On the other hand, the toilets were another story to be avoided unless really needed! Ladies, we had to climb up three steps and squat over. They did flush and were being cleaned continuously, however paper should not be flushed away but put in a bin - Yuk. I did not see one disabled toilet and there were steps everywhere so I do hope Beijing will be better prepared for the Paralympics next year.
MADE TO MEASURE
In all Special Olympics competitions, they start by assessing the athlete's ability so that they can compete against others with similar abilities within the sport. The first three days were spent doing this and Sunday was a free day before the main competition started. A friend and I decided to set off and see as much as we could of the other sports. Many of them were much further away than table tennis and, with buses going out from two hubs it took a bit of planning. We filled the day, leaving the hotel at 8.30 am and returning at 5.15 pm. During the day we found out that the subway was free to family supporters, so we went to Bocce (a type of short mat bowling), ten pin bowling, the Olympic Town, swimming and gymnastics. We learned that our toilets were not the worst and that we had the best choice of snacks.

