Introduction 

Facing the facts 

If you follow the advice in this book you will be giving your children the best possible start in life. We know that children who are well nourished have improved levels of concentration and so perform better at school. We also know that children who are overweight have lower levels of self-esteem and confidence and higher levels of depression than healthy-weight children. So this book is aimed at all parents out there with children over the age of five years who want to transform their kid into a superkid. 

Aim 

The aim of this book is to improve your family's health using the latest advances in nutrition, exercise and behavioural modification, integrating them into a simple, yet effective, lifestyle programme that will serve as a foundation for healthy living for their entire lives. This book will help you to prevent your children becoming a part of the obesity statistics and will also help those who already have overweight or obese children. This book will help you to understand what it's like for overweight children, what goes on in their minds and how what you may think is the best way to help your children could be doing more harm than good. 

How to use this book 

This book contains a wealth of information aimed at improving your children's diet and making sure that the foods they eat set them up for good health for their entire life. It is not about putting your children on a special diet. Rather it is about improving the foods that your entire family eats. It contains great ideas and tips to get your kids off the couch and inspire them to be more physically active and to enjoy being active. You will also learn to identify if your children are depressed and how to improve their self-esteem and confidence. 

Unlike other diet and lifestyle books, this book will explain not only how to follow the healthiest of eating plans but also how to get your children to change their unhealthy habits and behaviour. I will explain the SMART way of encouraging healthy habits and behaviour using simple techniques such as goals and rewards and how to avoid factors in your children's everyday lives that trigger unhealthy behaviour. 

Learn about low-GI eating, reducing unhealthy fats, sugar and salt in your children's diet, ways to get them more active and the tools to transform them from kids into superkids. 

Background 

Obesity is all around us - in newspapers and magazines, on the radio, television, the Internet - and on the high street. Why the fuss? Surely a bit of fat - apart from maybe not looking very attractive on the beach - won't do us any harm? Wrong. Excessive fat is damaging to health and obesity is on the increase. In fact, obesity is fast becoming the number one killer. Sadly obesity not only affects adults but has begun to affect increasing numbers of children too. Worldwide we are seeing many more young people becoming overweight and even obese, more so than ever before in history. However, besides the health risks, being an overweight kid is not easy - trust me, I have been there. 

Being overweight as a child caused me health problems and led to problems at school, feelings of inadequacy and isolation, and damaged my relationships with my parents and teachers. Unfortunately, Western society treats overweight people differently. We are conditioned from birth that fat is bad. In one study, published in 1995, children as young as four years old said they regarded overweight children as being mean, ugly, less intelligent, lazy, selfish, dishonest and a poor choice of friends. In the same study, healthy-weight children were rated as clever, attractive, healthy, kind, happy and popular. 

Obesity is a high-profile subject. It is frequently on the television news and in the newspapers. It is the topic of reality shows and political discussions and is the subject of much scientific research. In fact, obesity is all around us at the moment; one just has to look around when walking down the street. Never has the human race faced such a potentially serious health problem. The issue is not about fatness itself, but the consequences of lugging this extra weight around and the effects it has on our poor bodies that have to adapt to the heavy load. This additional baggage comes at a serious cost to our health. 

All parents want what's best for their kids and watching their children following an unhealthy diet and being physically inactive can be heart-breaking. Many parents struggle to teach their youngsters to be healthy because children only worry about the here and now - the newest, coolest video game; the next set of exams; the upcoming holiday - not the state of their health in the distant future. Being unhealthy does not necessarily affect children straight away but often causes problems later on in life. Therefore, it is important for parents to lead the way and make sure their children are leading healthy lifestyles from the start - rather than trying to change them later on. This can be very difficult - especially as many parents do not follow a healthy lifestyle themselves. It is far harder to tell a child to do something if you don't do it yourself. 'Do as I say and not as I do' is an approach that few children respond to positively. Children learn by example, and so how you choose to live your life as a parent is one of the most important factors in determining how they will live theirs. 

This may all sound like a 'no win' situation but there are many ways to improve health and overcome obesity, which I will guide you towards in this book. No advice in this book is beyond the reach of anybody. It is simple and practical. The advice is intended for the whole family - the only way to raise a superkid is to be a superfamily. Try to read the entire book, even if you think you know a lot about a particular subject discussed. You will be surprised how many common misperceptions there are about nutrition and exercise. Because eating is a daily occurrence, many people think they are experts on nutrition. However, with an abundance of fad diets and confusing nutritional information in most of the mainstream magazines and on the television, a lot of people have some very strange ideas about what is healthy and what is not. You do not have to be a vegetarian, organic-eating, soya-milk drinking, wheat-grass growing, supplement-popping junkie to be healthy - in fact, quite the opposite. Good nutrition is not only simple and easy, it is also cheaper than eating unhealthily - something that will come as a surprise to many people. 

Children learn so much at school today, but where do they go to learn the basic skills needed to follow a healthy lifestyle? The answer is not a simple one. It is not one person's, or one establishment's, responsibility to teach children to be healthy. It is the responsibility of society as a whole to make sure that being healthy is the easiest option for all of us. Healthy lifestyle education starts at home and continues throughout our lives in the wider world. 

The advice in this book will help you to raise your children in the healthiest possible way. No matter what state their health is in at present, there is always room for improvement. 

Is your problem unique? 

The answer is a definite no! Worldwide there are now approximately 155 million overweight or obese school-age children. According to the World Health Organization, childhood obesity has reached epidemic proportions. The most recent Health Survey for England (2002) showed that in children aged 2-15, 16 per cent were obese and almost a third (30 per cent) were either overweight or obese. Applied throughout the UK, it means that around 2.4 million children are affected by overweight, including 700,000 who are obese. In the UK, almost half of men (47 per cent) and one-third of women (33 per cent) are overweight. Approximately one-fifth (21 per cent) of men and one-quarter (24 per cent) of women are obese. 

The current childhood obesity problem is worst in the Americas, followed by Europe, Near/Middle East, Asia-Pacific and then, last but not least, sub-Saharan Africa. Another important factor is the rapid rate at which the number of obese kids has increased. Over the last decade the problem of childhood obesity has doubled, and if this trend continues for the next decade we are going to see huge numbers of obese children. That is why the time is right to do something about the problem now. 

If this is not a diet book, what is it? 

If you are looking for a healthy rapid-weight-loss diet, or some other type of healthy quick-fix solution for your children or yourself, the bad news is that it does not exist - not in this book, nor anywhere else for that matter. In order to correct bad habits and improve health you have to change your behaviour - the types of food you eat and the amount of physical activity you do. This is a lifestyle approach, aimed at correcting years of unhealthy behaviour and keeping you and your children healthy for the rest of your lives. 

Weight-loss diets do not work in the long term, and can do a lot more harm than good. It is not hard to lose weight in the short term; we have all done it many times. The hard part is keeping the weight off. With children, losing weight rapidly is not recommended for health reasons. Children are not 'mini-adults', they are still growing and so restricting their intake of nutrients or food could have a serious effect on their health. For example, many teenage girls restrict dairy products in the belief that these foods are fattening. This can lead to low calcium intake at a time when bones are growing extremely fast, and can result in brittle bones later on in life when it is much too late to reverse the condition. Never forget - children need balanced diets, and so restricting their intake by putting them on a rapid weight loss diet is dangerous to their health. 

So, if weight-loss diets don't work, what does? Well, we know that for children to grow healthily they need a good, balanced, varied diet that includes foods from all the different food groups. This will supply their growing bodies with all the building blocks needed for life. We also know that to be healthy and to stay healthy it is very important for children and adults to be physically active. So really, it's about learning how to eat healthier and to include physical activity in your daily routine. This book is filled with ideas to improve diet and to increase physical activity. These changes are required for life and so this is called 'a lifestyle programme'. 

Worried you may not be able to follow all the advice in this book? If you were able to practise every recommendation in this book, you would most certainly be a superparent. All that I hope is that you make some small changes to your family's lifestyle in order to improve their health - while ensuring that nobody feels like they are on a diet, or that your home has changed into a 'boot camp' overnight. A section of this book deals with helping you to change your children's behaviour so that they are more likely to listen to your suggestions to improve their health.
