

The problem for Armstrong, as with all people who participate in sports that require their bodies to be horizontal, is the way that the human head is attached to the spine. Human heads uniquely attach to the spine by means of a joint in the base of the skull, just behind the lower jaw. When Armstrong walks upright along the road this is fine, since his skull balances neatly on the top of his spine which allows his face to point forwards. However, when his body is horizontal, as it is when he is pedalling at breakneck speed across the French countryside, it means that his face naturally points downwards and so he has to strain his neck far back to look ahead. For an adult chimpanzee, on the other hand, the racing cycling position is perfect, since its head articulates with its spine bone by means of a joint at the back of the skull. This means that when achimpanzee's body is horizontal - as it is when standing on all fours - its face points directly forwards. As a matter of fact, all other primates- from spider monkeys to mountain gorillas - would find the cycling position more comfortable than humans, because we are the only species whose skull has undergone this ninety degree rotation that allows us to stand upright and yet still look forward- rather than up into the sky. So why did it happen? Why did our skulls rotate? Why did all the other anatomical changes occur that favour an upright walking posture- such as a rotated hip, and a big toe that is alongside the other toes rather than underneath the foot where it can be used to grip branches?

If asked to describe a scene that summed up everything they knew about our earliest ancestors, the vast majority of people would almost certainly come up with variations on a well-worn image that involves half-stooping, hairy, chimpanzee-like apemen shuffling across the East African savannah, perhaps along a lake edge. Some people might even go so far as to describe how our earliest ancestors first stood upright as a response to the drying up of EastAfrica's rainforests, and that standing on two legs rather than four was an essential adaptation to surviving on the open plains. Not only could our upright ancestors stride effortlessly across the plains, but they could also use their freed hands to make and use tools. The whole story sounds so very neat and logical. A massive change in the climate- in this case the drying out of Africa - led to a shift from forest to open plains, which in turn led to the emergence of a brand new species of ape complete with its own unique adaptations, including walking upright. But there is one fatal flaw in this scenario. It is that standing on two legs did not appear when our distant ancestors first found themselves out in the open.

In truth, by the time that grassy plains were widespread across East Africa, our distant ancestors had already been standing upright for millions of years. Over the past century, as more bones have been discovered, the date at which our ancestors are thought to have first stood up has gone further and further back. The most recent archaeological evidence, in the form of leg bones of an East African skeleton dubbed Millennium Man because of his discovery in the year 2000, has provided good evidence that our earliest ancestors started walking about on their two back legs as long ago as six million years ago- that is, while they were still living in thick forest or woodland. As for the oldest apeman skulls, at about four million years old, these leave us in little doubt at all that our ancestors were standing up very early in our evolution. Just like Lance Armstrong today, theseancestors' heads were attached to their spines by means of a joint at the base of the skull, rather than at the back- indicating that their heads were perched on top of vertical spines.

Clearly, this creates a major problem for theories that link upright walking with living in an open habitat. It confutes, for example, the theory that suggests that upright walking evolved as a way of reducing the amount of the body that is exposed to thesun's rays on the open plains. Moreover, if this body position was so important to the survival of our ancestors, why is it that savannah baboons manage quite well on all fours despite living in exactly the same habitat? As regards the idea that our ancestors walked upright to allow them to transport tools from place to place, walking upright actually pre-dates the earliest tools by at least two million years.

Now for the biggest problem of all for those who attempt to justify our upright posture in terms of its advantages when living on the ground. Standing upright is a particularly bizarre way of adapting to a terrestrial lifestyle- in fact, no other mammal has ever chosen to walk on two legs, despite a huge number of them living on terra firma. The reason for this rarity is hardly surprising given the facts. Firstly, it saves little if any energy. Experiments that involved strapping an oxygen-measuring device to a chimpanzee when it was walking on all fours and then on two legs, found that there was no difference whatsoever in the energy consumption of these two modes of locomotion. Secondly, it makes life downright dangerous, since two-legged animals are considerably slower at running away from predators. Chimpanzees and baboons can not only run 40 per cent faster than us, they are also far more agile. Even the fastest, anabolic-steroid-pumped Ben Johnsons of the world can manage a mere thirty-seven kilometres per hour, which is roughly half the speed that the larger African carnivores can reach. Against carnivorous predators, which chase at speeds of over sixty kilometres per hour, humans are doomed. In the words of the scientists John Gribbin and Jeremy Cherfas,'a running man moves at about the same pace as a startled chicken'. Combine this with the fact that our early two-legged ancestors would have been surrounded by close relatives of lions, as well as carnivorous bears and sabre-toothed cats, and walking upright starts to look downright ludicrous.

The problems associated with standing upright do not even end there. It also makes animals more conspicuous to predators, as well as far more vulnerable should they get injured. Losing the use of a leg is considerably more serious for a two-legged than a four-legged animal which can invariably run fast on only three legs. Even with two fully functional legs, it is impossible for a human to keep up with, say, a three-legged cat or dog. Compare this with the risible image of an ill-fated ancestor attempting to hop away from an oncoming lion. To compound the issue, two-legged animals are also at far greater risk of getting injured in the first place because of the enormous strain that they put their feet and lower legs . When humans run, the forces applied to their feet exceed three times the body weight, with the result that they are at far greater risk of twisting or tearing important muscles and tendons than if their weight was spread across four limbs. Add to this the increased likelihood of suffering from lower back problems, hernias, haemorrhoids and other circulatory problems, and upright walking seems to be something to be avoided at all costs. As the revolutionary chant of GeorgeOrwell's Animal Farm inhabitants declared, 'four legs good, two legs bad'.

For our earliest upright ancestors, the situation would have been particularly bad. Whereas their predecessors could shin up trees with consummate ease, using their four gripping feet, the new two-legged apes, with their flat feet, would have found it considerably more difficult to escape up trees when being stalked or pursued by a predator. With regards feeding on the ground, as anyone who has collected strawberries for an afternoon will appreciate, standing upright makes life extremely uncomfortable as it forces us to spend much of our time getting up, sitting down and bending over. Four-legged primates, on the other hand, can easily move along the ground while simultaneously grabbing plants and feeding at the same time. Since seeds, grasses and roots are thought to have formed the basic diet of our early ancestors- something that is strongly suggested by the structure of their teeth - yet again standing up seems to have made life considerably harder than it would have been if we had remained on all fours.

So what was going on? Standing upright seems to cause nothing but problems and confer no obvious life-transforming advantages at all. Of the plethora of suggestions that have been made to explain our upright posture, not one has managed either to win the support of the majority of scientists or come anywhere near to outweighing the huge disadvantages. It is a conundrum that caused Chris Stringer, one of theworld's most eminent anthropologists, to admit bluntly, 'we don't know why it [bipedalism]evolved'.

'Curiouser and curiouser!'
As if it was not bad enough losing much of their speed by standing upright, our ancestors simultaneously lost their most effective weapons. In place of the massive canine teeth of their ancestors, which we know were used for fighting rather than feeding because of their wear patterns, the early upright apes possessed relatively small canines. Their jaws were also much shorter and considerably less powerful than their predecessors. It was an extraordinary development, especially since these apes would have been far more vulnerable to predators thantoday's chimpanzees which have seriously large canines. Open-savannah baboons have anything but reduced teeth- a large male olive baboon has canines that measure nearly 6cm long that can be used to great effect against predators such as a leopards and lions. Nevertheless our ancestors, who were now faced with ground-dwelling predators like never before, were gradually losing theirbodies' only means of defence. Just like the evolution of our upright posture, the general opinion on our diminutive teeth can be summarised by the anthropologists Sherwood Washburn and Russell Ciochon:'At the present time no theory of the evolution of the canine complex is fullyadequate.'

Yet more equally strange features also started to emerge at this time. A fossil recently discovered in Kenya, belonging to a 3.5 million-year-old upright ape, had an almost flat-face. Despite jokes about the likelihood of just about anything having a flat face after being buried under rock for 3.5 million years, it does appear that this ancient upright species had indeed lost most of its chimpanzee-like muzzle. So if, as our teeth suggest, we were eating seeds and a variety of other vegetable matter, why were our faces becoming flat when all other seed-eating primates have heavy jaws and long muzzles? A further change that occurred involved ourancestors' upper arm bones that were becoming more delicate, especially where they joined the shoulder blade.

In conclusion, it seems that sometime around six million years ago, our distant ancestors diverged from apes that could run at great speed on all fours, were equipped with flesh-ripping teeth, and were capable of nimbly evading predators by climbing trees. Over the next couple of million years, it goes without saying that only the very best-adapted apes would have survived the hardships that resulted from the transformation of vast expanses of Africa from luxuriant jungle into dry woodland, scrub and open plains. So what was this magnificent species that evolution created? What outstanding product of natural selection was capable of out-surviving all the other fifty or so species of ape that existed in the jungle before the catastrophic drought? It was a relatively slow, small-toothed, weak-jawed, flat-footed ape that tottered about on two legs, with a flat face resembling that of a chimpanzee that had just collided with a brick wall, and which was significantly disadvantaged when it came to climbing. What an impressive debut for our ancestors. It was certainly brazen, unquestionably risky, but most importantly of all, it went against everything that one would expect of an ape that was moving out of the trees. In the words of LewisCarroll's Alice as her body began to change shape after she had eaten a magical cake in Wonderland, the evolution of the human body is most definitely becoming'Curiouser and curiouser!'
