Did the Romans have rakes?

WELL, YES - AND THEY grew turnips. When the Roman legions came, bringing their roads and amphitheatres, town plans and temples, baths and underfloor heating, they also brought their gardening lore. They created our first plant-filled spaces intended purely for enjoyment, adapting the patterns of the Mediterranean to the cold climate, just as they had in Germany and Gaul.

In 54 BC Julius Caesar described the land as thickly studded with homesteads. Tribes of Belgae, immigrants from the Continent two generations before, grew wheat and tended cattle in the valleys while the native British, the older Celtic peoples, lived on the uplands, ‘on milk and meat and wear skins'. Caesar saw no true gardens, nothing but clearings amid dense forests and swampy treacherous marshes.

Yet even the earliest nomadic peoples had cultivated the land, clearing the forests of birch, ash, hazel and holly with stone axes, grubbing up trees with scapula made from the shoulder-blades of oxen, tilling the earth with stone hoes and wooden digging-sticks. More settled ways of life began around 2000 BC and by 1200 BC the ancient wildwood had already diminished. Some long-lived settlements like Fengate and Flag Fen near Peterborough in Cambridgeshire, which lasted for nearly 2000 years, show Neolithic, Bronze Age and later Iron Age field patterns, a long record of tilling and toil. In winter the families stayed on the dry fen edge and in spring, when water levels fell, they moved out with their sheep and a few cows to the open fen pastures: among the treasures found here are beautiful bronze shears in a special wooden case. Were they gardeners?

When the Celtic tribes, spreading slowly west from the Danube, arrived around 700 BC they brought their own tradition of agriculture, tending flocks and using shallow ploughs, storing the grain in great underground granaries. Tall, blond, blue-eyed, the Celts lived in wellorganised tribes, their ranks descending from the high-ranking nobles and warriors and the priestly Druids to the virtual slaves who worked the soil. They loved bright colours, gold and jewels, and they knew the power of plants: in Welsh myth the legendary Doctors of Myddvai were the sons of Nelferch, a fairy woman who came out of a lake in the Black Mountains and instructed them in the healing arts of herbs.

The great hill forts, like Danebury or Maiden Castle, with round dwellings and grain storage pits clustered within the mighty earth walls, tell a long tale of tribal conflict. But there were lowland settlements, too, where a palisade or ditch encircled round houses of timber and thatch, or stone and turf, and webs of ditches marked out fields, with larger areas for cattle and cereals: the Celts became such skilled farmers that they were renowned for producing two crops in a year. Bones show that families kept sheep, cattle and pigs, and excavations turn up iron sickles and stone querns for grinding corn, while evidence from pollen reveals the plants they used: nuts and fruit, like crab apples, wild pears and strawberries and sloes; celery, carrots, beet, leafy brassicas and asparagus, black bindweed and the spinach-like Good King Henry and Fat Hen with its rich seeds.

This is farming and gathering more than gardening, but it does seem that they kept small plots closer to home, protected from animals by a sprouting hazel hedge, or belt of hawthorn set by striking winter hardwood cuttings. Some vegetables go back to the Iron Age, like the broad bean, the beet and the tall, celery-like alexanders (still grown in Victorian kitchen gardens), now more often found in roadside verges. The Britons also grew peas and the tubers of onion-couch, and herbs like mint and coriander and even the opium poppy, brought by traders from the East. They had domelike wickerwork beehives, covered with dung or clay. And they had sacred ‘gardens', too, groves where they worshipped their gods at a tree or spring – often marked by later Roman temples.

At the start of the first millennium Britain was far from isolated. The tribes exported their surplus grain and metals to the Continent, and took in refugees from Roman-dominated lands, who brought new knowledge of tools and farming techniques. But within the first decade of Roman conquest the landscape changed. The old upland tracks were replaced by a new web of roads; garrisons were housed in forts and old soldiers were granted settlements or ‘colonia'. When Agricola became governor in AD 78 he started to build towns, which pulled in the rural communities through their markets. Many farmers profited from the Roman stay and British tribal leaders became local princes.

The Romans brought the legacy of the ancient cultures of the Mediterranean and Middle East. Before 3000 BC the Sumerian tribes were irrigating the swampy land between the Tigris and Euphrates, and in Egypt the first gardeners were protecting their produce from the desert winds with high palisades. Lotus, daisies, roses, lilies, olives and date palms all appear in ancient architecture or jewellery, and the first garden picture, from an Egyptian tomb around 1475 BC, shows a funeral ceremony, with lotus flowering on a deep blue pool, fringed with date and sycamore. The rectangular lines, easier for irrigation, dictated the formal shape of gardens for generations. This is the small, enclosed courtyard garden. But in Assyria, as the centuries passed the kings also laid out great hunting grounds, and made the beautiful parks of Nineveh and the seventh-century hanging gardens of Babylon, while to the east the Persians created their own intimate garden, their ‘paradise'.

After Alexander the Great marched through Persia in 330 BC, the Greeks took to horticulture: Aristotle's students raised plants from seeds; Persian-style pleasure gardens were built; scholars made the first classification of plants and their medicinal uses. Later, in Rome, many such herbals were written and the most famous, the De Materia Medica of Dioscorides, remained a standard work for many centuries. Rome also had its agricultural authorities like Cato, Varro and Columella, a farmer from Gadez (Cadiz) in Spain who composed a down-to-earth manual, even providing a monthly calendar of tasks and writing a wonderfully energetic, plant-packed hymn to his own small garden, rejoicing in the good crumbly soil and bewailing ‘the bramble-bush to legs unkind'.

By the time the Romans were building their first towns in Britain, gardening was fashionable. Rome was full of plant hunters, outdoing each other in seeking exotic species from distant parts of the empire, or hunting down new forms of the ever popular rose. The city had nursery gardens and workshops to provide statuary and pots, and most houses, like those at Pompeii, had an inner courtyard garden with shrubs, pools, fountains and formal planting, and sometimes with statuary or stone dining couches and frescoes evoking the life of the country outside. The poets of the day celebrated the joys of retreating to the country life and wealthy landowners laid out lavish estates, practising ‘rural simplicity' in luxurious style. In his letters, Pliny the Younger (whose uncle was also a great horticulturalist) described his two country houses, one by the sea and one in the Tuscan hills, surrounded by wild-flower meadows and woods. At the seaside he had a court of ball games, walkways edged with box and rosemary, a banqueting house and a large kitchen garden. In the hills there were beds of acanthus, a sunlit yard full of roses, a courtyard with a fountain and box alleys trimmed into curious shapes. Pliny's ‘garden rooms' were always offset by outward-looking views, and the style he evokes would inspire the grand Renaissance gardens of Europe and the British landscape gardens of the eighteenth century.

Roman gardeners were also skilled plantsmen, knowledgeable about techniques of grafting and layering, and the use of manure. For vegetables they laid out raised beds, three to six feet wide, separated by narrow paths for easy weeding. They were experts at forcing: when the Emperor Tiberius developed a passion for cucumbers his gardeners kept a perpetual crop ready by raising them in wheeled basketwork beds full of dung, brought into the sun even on cool days with their heat intensified by thin sheets of mica – like portable cold frames. They knew about pesticides, applying tar and bitumen, ammonia and lime, and amurca – a poisonous byproduct of olive oil making. They fumigated their orchards with smoke from a sulphurous mixture brewed in copper cauldrons, and attacked mildew, gnats and cankers with smoke pellets made of dried dung and vinegar. This was the expertise that they brought to Britain.

Gardening flourished first here in the countryside, around the luxurious rural villas of the late first century. One of the greatest was at Fishbourne, near Chichester in Sussex. This is often linked with the British Cogidubnus, the king of the Artrebates, an educated ally of Rome, but all we know for sure is that it was an army depot until, in the AD 60s, a large house was built with mosaic floors, marble veneers and richly painted walls. There was a bath suite to the south, close to the sea, and a garden with colonnades, their columns topped with richly carved capitals.

Fishbourne was discovered by pure luck in 1961, when a workman digging a trench for a water main hacked through some tiles. Soon the mosaic floors were found and then the first traces of the formal garden, shown by differences in the soil, where the gardeners had filled trenches with loam to offset the acid and gravel. The large courtyard with its pool was enclosed like a cloister by colonnaded walkways, and divided by an avenue forty feet long, leading to the great audience chamber. The two halves, probably with grassy lawns, were marked out by topiary, with alternate square and semicircular niches, maybe for statues or urns or decorative shrubs. Gravel paths ran around the sides, between the small hedges (almost certainly of box, which the Romans loved), and beneath them ran a water pipe, feeding fountains and filling ornamental marble basins. The visitor, crunching across the gravel, would look back at a range of fruit trees, symmetrically planted in a framework of supporting timber, and behind them a mass of climbing plants. (One outside wall was even frescoed with roses and leaves, like the houses at Pompeii.)

Gardeners who knew about landscape design must have come here to work, bringing familiar elements like the great court and the intimate peristyle gardens, the clipped box and the fountains, the orchard and kitchen garden, the landscaped park with its distant views. At Fishbourne, as at Pliny's seaside villa, the view stretched down to the fields and the sea. The cost of levelling the land and bringing in trained men must have been huge, and all this would need a well-regulated, skilled workforce: perhaps Romans or freedmen from the northern provinces, directing local British labourers or slaves. The estate was run by an agent, with specialists in charge of the vegetables (the olitor), the trees (aborator), the clipped hedges and shrubs (topiarius). Each area had its own workers, both men and women, with their own tools: pruning hooks and special knives, wooden spades with metal ‘shoes' to give a good cutting blade; rakes with four or six teeth, hurdles and baskets and watering pots, hoes and shears and sickles. Boys would be out at first light raking the gravel, scything the grass to keep its velvet sheen, trimming the topiary – then vanishing, retreating to the work of the kitchen garden and remaining invisible when the family and guests emerged, leaving the garden as if nature alone had created the spectacle just for their delight. A pattern, in fact, very like that of a Victorian country house.

And what did they grow? After a long cold period at the start of the first millennium BC, the climate was mild and many Mediterranean species flourished here. Tacitus (who was married to the daughter of the governor, Agricola) reported that the weather was unpleasant, ‘with frequent rain and mist' but no severe cold, and that the soil was fertile and suitable for ‘all crops except the vine, olive and other plants requiring warmer climes'. The juniper and box for the decorative edges established themselves quickly. In the beds behind them there might be lilies, acanthus and rosemary, native violets and periwinkles, new flowers like the crocus and pansy, and different species of roses. 

