CHAPTER 1 

OCEAN 

"But the most famous example of his courage was his expedition to Britain, for he was the first man to bring a navy into the western ocean, the first to sail into the Atlantic to wage war with his army, and then by invading a mysterious island which historians doubted even existed other than in name and fable, he coud be said to have pushed the Roman Empire beyond the limits of the known world." 

PLUTARCH WRITING ON CAESAR IN "LIVES" 

In the beginning, there was Ocean - the father of all waters and the mighty rivergod that encircled the flat earth.Within the firm reach of his arms lay the glorious Roman Empire, the one true civilisation divided into its rightful order of rulers, citizens, freemen and slaves. Also encircled within the great limbs of Ocean were the lands of the barbarians - strange, primitive peoples lacking in both culture and vision who must one day fall to their superior Roman neighbours until the mighty Empire pushed against Ocean's shores from north to south and east to west.These shores of Europe, Asia and Africa marked the edge of the world; beyond lay the unknown, a void in knowledge filled by fear and mystery, the entrance to the darkness of the other world. 

The origins of Ocean and its fundamental role in the beliefs of the classical world dated back at least to the earliest Greek geographies and mythologies and go a long way to explaining the dramatic hold that the Atlantic and especially Britain had in the ancient mindset.To their way of thinking, the Mediterranean Sea was the crucible of all the "civilisation" that bubbled out on to the surrounding coastal lands. For millennia, sea journeys would be made along these coastal fringes for trade and exploration, but in their small boats in the era before maps or charts, sailors would hug the land searching for the well-known reference points of headlands, bays and rivers. But the limits of this safe, civilised world ended at the Pillars of Hercules: these marked a physical and emotional gateway, beyond which lay what the fifth-century BC Greek poet, Pindar, called the "dark west", a limitless stretch of dangerous water punctuated by petrifying Gorgons and sea monsters and legendary islands of dead heroes. Although Ocean encompassed the world, the so-called Atlantic or western section of the great water was named for Atlas who stood "at the limits of the earth", holding the broad heavens above his head.And sailors knew enough about those waters to know that they were best avoided... 

But for centuries, if not millennia, what lay beyond the Mediterranean lands was merely of interest to philosophers. Intellectuals and poets could spend their time pondering on Ocean with all its strange creatures and islands but for most of the classical world, within the Pillars of Hercules there were lands and riches aplenty. Inside this world were great cities and civilisations that surely could not be surpassed. If you wanted unimaginable wealth, you merely had to conquer one of your neighbours - and then use its treasures to feed an ever-hungry city that was growing fat on power. 

And to the Romans of what is now western Italy, the world was centred upon and radiated out from Rome. But Rome was much more than a city - it was concept, an ideal, a whole way of life. Of course, Roman civilisation was not the first major culture to try to dominate the Old World, though it was arguably the most successful.The Greeks, Egyptians, Etruscans and the Babylonians had all spawned major civilisations which had risen then fallen, giving way to internal stresses and external forces.The Romans had taken what they admired from earlier cultures and made it their own, dismissing the rest as "foreign" and therefore inferior. From the Etruscans they drew their religion, the trademark purple togas of high office and the infamous gladiatorial games; from the Greeks, the Romans took much of their arts and sciences - and even the foundation myth for Rome itself. 

Straddled between the thin dorsal fin of the Appenine mountain range and the warm waters of the young Tyrrhenian Sea lies the dry and rocky landscape that once formed the cradle of the Roman world. Humans have lived here for two hundred thousand years, though continuous habitation was interrupted by the last Ice Age.When this ended some ten thousand years ago, early humans flowed back into the lowlands and plains of the region.At first the population was sparse and patchy until the arrival of more settled Neolithic farmers around 5000 BC and the much later phase of population growth during the Iron Age. 

From prehistoric times, however, people have made their homes in the shadow of the highest peaks of the Appenines - the snow-covered Gran Sasso d'Italia; rising to almost three thousand metres, this "Great Rock" dominates the region. Early Neolithic hunters could roam the marshy river valleys or hunt the bears and wild boar that can sometimes still be found in the dense beech, oak and pine woods that flank the mountain slopes. 

By the Bronze Age, partially settled farmers worked the fertile soils that lie along the wide valley of the River Tiber and grazed their animals in the green valleys before moving up to higher pastures for the dry summer months.The climate for those early settlers was essentially the same as it is today: in summer, the flatter lands of the coast would bake in temperatures that can reach thirtyfive degrees celsius while the hot, dry winds desiccated the earth until it turned to dust; spring and autumn are still the rainy seasons while the winter brings the stormy tramontana winds, often accompanied by flurries of snow. 

By the dawn of the Iron Age in around 800 BC, the local population had grown both in numbers and in wealth through trade and agriculture - and this spawned more changes: people started to live in small, clustered settlements on the higher, more easily defended hills.These were not primitive people: they drained the marshes and developed political hierarchies, probably based around the paterfamilias or oldest male; they also developed religious cult-associations or federations, focusing on deities such as Diana, Jupiter and Venus. Evidence of their rectangular,wattle-and-daub huts containing hearths and charred cooking utensils have been found throughout the region; three such huts have even been uncovered on the Palatine Hill itself from where Rome would soon rise up as both a city and an idea. 

By around 650 BC, with the coming of the Etruscans from the north (and with Greek influences permeating up from the south), the region began to adopt some of the cultural and political structures which would become embedded in Roman culture for the next thousand years: aristocracies, ruling magistracies and a Senate, or Council of Elders. On the domestic level, the paterfamilias ruled with complete omnipotence: he was within his legal rights to put his wife to death or sell his children into slavery.However, the evolution of the region's society was not restricted to these "developments" - and the pace of the change is almost beyond belief: within just a hundred years, the settlements were transformed from clusters of traditional huts to whole urban townscapes, with planned streets of brick houses with more lavish homes for the wealthy. Grand public buildings and religious temples began to rise up, made of vast blocks of skilfully carved stone, sometimes decorated with coloured terracotta. It was also around this time that the higher-status inhabitants began to use the alphabet to write things down - and the lingua franca used was not Etruscan at all, but Latin. Though it may have faced periods of foreign domination, this was a confident society: it took what was useful, and discarded the rest. 

This was also a land that was rich in resources, both cultural and material: there were plentiful stocks of fish and easy transport in both the river and the sea, the brown alluvial soils supported abundant agriculture, while from the long mountain reaches came all the raw materials for building the great cities of the future: water, limestone, wood - and the famous Italian marbles. By 500 BC, the fifty or so communities in the region had been distilled into around a dozen powerful settlements which dominated the surrounding lands of the region - and the most powerful of all was Rome. 

There were many legends about the actual foundation of Rome; the most popular myth blended stories both from Rome and Greece, and ran as follows: around 1184 BC,Troy was destroyed by the Greeks after a ten-year siege that ended in the famous episode of the wooden horse; however, the Trojan hero Aeneas managed to escape the slaughter along with a band of men.While searching for a new home, a vivid dream instructed him to head west in search of a new land where the River Tiber flowed and after years of wandering around the Mediterranean, the group finally arrived at the Tiber where they were warmly received. The king of the region was a man called Latinus; he was impressed by the young man and soon offered Aeneas his daughter's hand in marriage. Despite some initial opposition from the locals who were less sure about the new arrivals, the Trojans settled, intermarried with the native women and then became the "Latins". Aeneas founded the city of Lavinium, named after his new wife, and located nineteen miles south of modern-day Rome. 

This foundation myth gained popularity during the years of the Republic from around the fifth century BC as it well suited the purposes of the budding civic leaders. Not only did it give the Romans an impressive classical pedigree; the Trojan angle fitted nicely with their desire to be seen as distinct from the Greeks. But the myth caused a problem for this new version of official "history": the dates simply didn't add up.The start-date for the Roman Republic relied upon records of its annual list of magistrates; from this, the republic appears to have originated around 509 BC; before that the Romans believed that the area was ruled by a series of seven kings, leading back to the creation of the actual city of Rome by Romulus in 753.That date was arrived upon by using Greek methods of genealogical reckoning: mathematicians worked out that the period of time taken for seven kings to rule would be somewhere in the region of two hundred and fifty years, meaning that the first of the seven kings - Romulus - must have ruled from the middle of the eighth century BC.The year of 753 was eventually agreed upon as the official start-date of the so-called "Regal Period". However, that meant some creative historiography was needed to breach the four hundred year gap from the fall of Troy in 1184 BC to the "official" foundation of Rome in 753 BC - and to make the "facts" fit the official version of history. 

The answer was to devise a series of twelve fictitious kings who ruled over the general area, all of whom descended from a royal line starting with Aeneas and ending with the arrival of the twin brothers, Romulus and Remus, who founded the actual city of Rome itself. Once again, the engineered solution fitted the bill both numerically and also in terms of a classical pedigree: Rome had grown up from a land of heroes who had fought bravely to overcome tyranny; who could ask for a more fitting, more auspicious start in life for the ancient world's most famous city? 

The legend ran as follows: good King Nutimor was the twelfth king after Aeneas and ruler of the area which would one day be called Rome.However, he was deposed by his wicked and megalomaniacal brother,Amulius. In a vain attempt to hold on to his ill-gotten power,Amulius then forced the former King's daughter, Rhea, to become a Vestal Virgin; in that way she had to remain celibate and so there would be no possibility of her continuing Numitor's royal line and threatening his brother's position. 

