It is inevitable that someone who claims to be in a position
to recognise the respect in which a Jane Austen novel is
superior to a Mills and Boon novel (they both have roughly
the same basic plot: boy meets girl, vicissitudes ensue,
vicissitudes are resolved, boy marries girl), or the respect
in which a Beethoven symphony is superior to a pop song,
is going to invite just such a challenge, and rightly so; for
one thing, the point is not only about the intrinsic merits
of what is being compared in each case, but also about the
value to those who encounter them. For some, a pint of beer
is more valuable, more interesting, more attractive than a
reading of Aeschylus. For some, a Mills and Boon novel is
more accessible, more assimilable, and more enjoyable than
the intricacies and ironies of Jane Austen and her delicate
prose. A Beethoven symphony might be an agony to someone
for whom the driving rhythms of a pop song, and its
lyrics addressing matters of immediate interest to his or her
youthful romances, are manna. Granting all this is to take
a wider view of what pleasure legitimately and necessarily
embraces.
For my money the complexity, depth, nuance, power, and
insight of Jane Austen, Beethoven and Aeschylus knock the
putative competitors into a cocked hat. But that's for my
money; and this is not the point in discussing the role of
pleasure in making life good. It would be a hideous distortion
of the endeavour to encourage good lives if things that
give pleasure were to be denied people on supposed elitist
grounds, or in the belief that Mill is right – though he is
– about ‘higher pleasures'. So what? The point is not about
the altitude of pleasure, but its existence; and that refocuses
the question from the supposed nature of the pleasure to
what it does. As adding to the good of an individual existence,
this is as it should be. If pleasure is actually an Epicurean
seed of pain, that raises a question about it that must be
discussed, for if we think, as we well might, that this makes
a future-pain-promising current pleasure intrinsically undesirable
(smoking, binge drinking, unprotected sex), it
abuts the question of the individual's freedom, another of
the essentials of the good life (see later). If it harms others,
it is definitely illegitimate – for the harm principle, which
states that it is never right to do what harms others, except
in clearly justified circumstances such as self-defence and
the prevention of greater harm, trumps everything. All these
points are surely obvious enough.
Pleasure has a twofold possibility: there is mental pleasure,
and there is pleasure both mental and physical. Consider the
second first. Pleasure as conscious enjoyment of the human
sensory endowment – the reflective ability to contemplate,
anticipate, remember, and heighten the experience of the
senses, in appreciation of music, the taste and effects of food
and drink, enjoyment of sex, the pleasure of dancing, swimming, lying in the sun, walking in the country, having a
massage, and so variously and multiply on – would doubtless
be pleasurable enough in the moment as a purely physical
thing (‘animal pleasure' we sometimes say), but it is obvious
that reflexive consciousness of the fact that pleasurable
stimulation of some combination of senses is occurring adds
greatly to their effect. Think of the opposite: the way that
pain or discomfort is heightened by anticipation and tension.
The key to understanding pleasure as a central good is
to see how it fits with a conception of humanity contrasted
to views describing the senses and their pleasures as traps
and snares, portals through which evil comes.
One of the foremost results of renewed interest in art,
literature and philosophy in the brilliant epoch we call the
Renaissance was its fostering of an intelligent interest in
human existence in the ordinary world, not for any instrumental
purpose of salvation or a posthumous destiny in
another
world, but for life in the here and now, in this world,
for its own sake. The chief mark of this was the appearance
of a number of dissertations and essays on the subject of ‘the
dignity of man', starting with that great obstetrician of the
Renaissance, Petrarch, and including Gianozzo Manetti's
On the Excellency and Dignity of Man (a direct reply to
Pope Innocent III's On the Misery of Man) and Pico Della
Mirandola's Oration on the Dignity of Man. Their principal
aim was to challenge the prevailing view of medieval
theology that human existence in this world is a dangerous,
temporary travail, a time of test and suffering, in which the
devil and his agents are constantly working to snatch away
immortal souls. By rigorous adherence to his duty and denial
of the flesh, which is Satan's entrance, a man could escape
and achieve heaven at last. In the gloomy and intentionally
minatory Christian contemptus mundi literature of the
medieval period, each stage of life was represented as a site
of tribulation, from the vulnerability of childhood to the
infirmity and decay of age. The agonies of the flesh, hunger
and desire, disease, accident and injury, fear and worry, poverty
and tyranny, were all depicted with macabre relish by
the propagandists of this desperate outlook, to scare people
into obedience to the Church and the temporal powers, an
unholy and mutually convenient combination.
The response of humanism was to celebrate man's reason,
and the possibility of beauty in the body. Man's reason
equated him to the gods, and gave him power over things in
the world. Animals are enslaved by their nature, condemned
to eat one kind of food just in those parts of nature that
supply it, and to follow blindly the cycle of their instincts.
A human being can choose where to live, and can take his
sustenance and provision from the variety of nature. He
might not have the teeth of the tiger, the strength of the
elephant, the pelt of the bear; but he can make spears as
sharp as the tiger's tooth, can organise himself into hunting
parties stronger in their combination than the elephant,
can clothe himself in the furs and skins of the creatures he
hunts. And add to this his power of speech, with its infinite
capacity to bring past and future into the present, and to
span the world and the heavens with the wings it gives to
his powers of imagination.
Perhaps the most marked departure from the Christian
writers of the period labelled by Petrarch ‘the middle ages'
(because, he said, they threw a shadow over the interval
between the brilliance of the classical past and the new
age which drew its reviving inspiration from it) was the
Renaissance's lively appreciation of the body itself. For
Christian moralists, the body was a betrayer, constantly
threatening to revolt against the soul's best interests, with
its appetites and urgencies, its temptations and scarcely containable
desires. Ascetes whipped and scourged themselves,
wore hair shirts and thorns, starved, even cut off their
genitals.
Origen, who famously ‘made himself a eunuch for
the Kingdom of Heaven', came to regret doing so; but he
was far from alone among those who took drastic measures
to subdue the flesh.
Humanists rejected these perversions. Instead they celebrated
physical beauty, in paintings and poems, in their
ethics
and lives. They deeply appreciated the point of
classical proportionings, in the spirit of Protagoras' view
that ‘man is the measure of all things', which implied that
houses, public buildings, townscapes, the very organisation
of daily life, should reflect the human scale. They especially
approved of the writings of Lactantius and Cicero that urged
these principles, and (as it happened incorrectly) praised the
fact that human beings were the only creatures with an upright
posture, enabling them to look at the heavens, which
they saw as a mark of his exalted nature and excellence.
Petrarch and his successors in the humanist tradition
were not, of course, secularists in the sense that the later
use of ‘humanism' has come to entail, so they expressed
themselves in a modified and refocused religious language,
concentrating on such things as God's assumption of human
form to transact his New Testament with mankind, and
on the teaching that God had made man in his own image
– hence man's beauty and fineness – and had even given
man a godlike mandate over the world of nature. But above
all, the fact that man was a concretion of body and soul
meant that he was the very lynchpin of creation, joining and
bridging
the world of matter, time and mortality to the eternal
world of truth and the spirit. This was in fact a revival of
Neoplatonist doctrine dating from a millennium earlier, but
it exactly suited humanist preoccupations. One of the most
enthusiastic revivers of this outlook was Marsilio Ficino. As
well as viewing humanity as the link point between earth
and heaven, Ficino saw man as emblematic of creation, as,
indeed, the microcosm, which is to say: the universe in little.
This idea came from Plato's Timaeus, one of the few works
of Plato known to all generations since it was written, so
its doctrines had been much cited, but in the Renaissance it
took on a revived and added significance. Much metaphysics
went into making out what it implied; one suggestion was
that man must be regarded as the microcosm because he
consists of the same elements – earth, air, fire and water – as
the macrocosm. Paracelsus taught that man was the knot
tying earth and heaven because he conjoined to these four a
fifth element, which was divine: the ‘quintessence'.
In his Oration on the Dignity of Man, Pico Della Mirandola
introduced an important shift into the developing picture of
what it is to be human. He said that human beings have
the capacity to make of themselves whatever they desired.
This took humanity out of the lynchpin position at the
centre of the Great Chain of Being, conceived as stretching
from the lowliest existing things on one side – worms
and insects – to the deity himself on the other side. Instead
it emphasised man's freedom, an agent in creation rather
than a placeholder in its structure. Pico backed this claim
by citing God's licence to Adam to act as he saw fit with
regard to what he had been given – namely, dominion over
the sublunary world.
Pico's view was influential in his own time, and has
remained
so ever since; indeed, it has grown in significance,
recapturing the concept of individual autonomy – central to
ethics – and even existential solitude, an idea that plays a
central role in most forms and periods of a broadly romantic
inspiration. In an extended application of the former
concept it has influenced all thinking about individuality,
involving in particular a growing appreciation of the place of
the individual in society, and the relations of power, wealth
and rights that determine it. When it was believed that
heaven has the first call on everything of value to human
existence, it was of relatively little importance to answer
questions about what human beings are and what they need
in order to flourish in the here and now. As soon as attention
is turned to this latter matter, a large number of deeply
significant considerations come suddenly into view, about
rights, justice,
education, the proper organisation of society
to serve the ends of human flourishing, and more – in the
ideal, all bent towards making the good human life possible
in the natural course of a human lifetime, in this world,
now.
Given this, it is not too much to say that Pico's reconfiguring
of our view of humanity is one of the most crucial
nodes in the more recent history of ethics, reviving as it
does the Greek conception that because the interest of the
individual in the embodied life is central, things of this life
such as pleasure and beauty are, along with the government
of reason, essentials of lives worth living.
