

From the heat of Negombo to the cooler, mist-shrouded tea plantations of the hill country, Jane Hewitt takes a cultural tour of Sri Lanka
I was familiar with Bizet's opera The Pearl Fishers but not with the island they call the Pearl of the Indian Ocean, on which it was based. Almost immediately, I became enchanted by the lush, green setting and after visiting its Dravidian temples and Portuguese baroque churches, huge statues of Buddha, towering rocks and tea plantations, I realised that this beautiful, teardrop-shaped tropical island, off the coast of India, will be forever imprinted on my memory. Even the stewardesses on SriLankan Airways represent an exotic world and surely have the most alluring uniforms in the airline business – Kandyan-style sarees in a peacock feather print with bare waist. 
Only about half the size of England, Ceylon (the name derived from the Portuguese ceilao), was changed to Sri Lanka, from the Sanskrit word meaning “resplendent land”, in 1972. It is certainly appropriate. There is an extraordinary variety of vegetation and I was not surprised to learn that there are 3,000 indigenous species of trees and flora compared to Britain's mere l,000. 
Sri Lanka was captured first by the Portuguese, then by the Dutch, but the island was ceded to Britain in 1802 under the Treaty of Amiens and, as the British was able to subdue the Kandyan kingdom, in 1815, the island was finally unified under a single rule. Happily the British abolished slavery and encouraged agriculture but it was not until 1948 that the island's long-awaited independence was finally achieved.
Of course, like Burma and Tibet, Sri Lanka has its troubles – not that we came into contact with any on the two-week tour, except the national parks closed causing a long bus journey. 
Throughout two decades of the civil war, fighting in the north and east has had little effect on the rest of the island though the nation has polarised, not surprisingly, into the haves and the have-nots. 
The Boxing Day tsunami of 2004 also took a heavy toll on Sri Lanka, leaving 35,000 dead, but, surprisingly, there seemed few physical signs of the devastation now, apart from roads being rebuilt, though, sadly, many families have to endure the emotional trauma of lost lives and livelihoods and communities have been decimated. 
Cultural tours with a lecturer and a local guide, are popular and a safe and easy way to have a “soft” adventure – especially if you travel alone. I enjoyed the experience of having Ace Cultural Tours provide an experienced local guide, Kamal, a very efficient tour manager, Frances, and an amiable course director, ex-BBC producer Denis Moriarty to talk about the culture and history. Our first stop was Negombo, the Catholic heartland, a fishing town just north of the capital, Colombo, where we pass large glass-covered shrines to the Virgin Mary – as well as shrines to Buddha, by the side of the road.
The people of Negombo are Karavas, Tamil fishermen who under the pressure of Portuguese missionaries, converted en masse to Catholicism during the mid 16th century. There are lots of churches in the area (Catholic, neo-Chartres, French Gothic, Portuguese Baroque, Dutch non-conformist). 
Now, the local Buddhist, Hindu and Muslim traditions have seeped into the Sri Lankan melting-pot and have even tacked themselves on to Christian customs. Worshippers may remove their shoes before entering a holy place and keep their feet pointed away from images; while bunting of white ribbons are strewn over trees and shrubs and across the roads to signify mourning. 
“You can be a Buddhist even though you are a Christian or Hindu,” says Kamal. 
Multi-ethnic and multireligious, Buddhism is the faith of about 70% of the island. 
The fish markets in Negombo have some extraordinary varieties on display and sardines for drying are laid out on huge mats. Many fishermen use a catamaran (derived from the Tamil ketti-maran) made of hollowed out tree trunks with huge sails known as oruwas. To quench our thirst, the choice is usually lime soda (never with local water) or EGB ginger beer (Elephant Ginger Beer is the most popular). For something more alcoholic, there is beer, and toddy made from the juice of the kitul palm or Palmyra tree. Fermented and refined, it becomes the firewater, arrack, but most of us stick to soft drinks. The food is delicious. 
At breakfast, a chef makes me a Hopper – a small bowlshaped pancake made from batter containing coconut milk, with an egg in the middle. String Hoppers are tangled balls of steamed rice noodles.
At the dinner buffet the choice is wide – all kinds of curries, of course, but less spicy dishes, too. The classic Sri Lankan dessert is curd – yoghurt made from buffalo milk, served with honey or kitul (a syrup from the kitul palm). 
On to Anuradhapura, the first of our temple visits, which was the capital city for 1,400 years until it was laid waste by Indian invaders. 
We have to take off our shoes (and hats) in all the temple areas which can be painful because of gritty, hot sand and pebbles. There are lots of stairs to climb in high humidity, but the carvings and Buddha statues are well worth seeing. Boys and young men offer to help us up the steep bits, and try to charge older women extra, because they think they can get away with it – but not with our guide Kamal around to negotiate the right price. 
Buddhist temples come in many shapes and sizes, ranging from the intimate cave temples of Dambulla and Mulkirigala to the enormous monastic foundations of Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa. They usually have an image house, which holds the temples' Buddha images, a bo tree enclosure and a dagoba or two. The stupa or dagoba is the world's most universal Buddhist architectural symbol. A dome-shaped structure made from bricks, coated in plaster and limewash, they are used to hold sacred relics, and venerated by Buddhists who walk clockwise around them. 
The bo tree enclosure is a unique Sri Lankan feature. The Buddha achieved enlightenment while meditating under a bo (or bodhi) tree, and many of the island's specimens were grown from cuttings taken from the great tree at Anuradhapura, which is believed to have been grown from a cutting taken from the very tree itself where Buddha sat in India. 
At Avukana, we saw a wonderfully carved fifth-century rock temple and enormous monolith Buddha, reputed to be the best in Sri Lanka. The statue has become one of the defining symbols of Sri Lankan Buddhism. 
Sigiriya, a walled and moated royal capital of the fifth century AD, is a palace complex on top of a large, steep-sided rock, lying between the former capitals of Anuradhapura and Polonnaruva. But alas, the vertiginous spiral staircase defeated me. Instead, I sat in the gardens and read the guidebook about the famous fragments of paintings of nubile women from the fifth century found in a depression on the rock face more than 328 feet (100m) above ground level.
I was glad I brought my binoculars for a dawn birdwatching trip to a huge reservoir or “tank” where we counted 23 different kinds of birds during an early morning visit including three sizes of egrets, grey herons, corvids (rooks), terns large and small, fruit bats, parakeets, bittern, open-bill storks, kingfishers and the Blue Tailed Bee Eaters, black-headed ibis, purple swamp hens, weaver birds and their nests. 
Everyone loves the Pinnewala Elephant Sanctuary, where we watch from the restaurant as the animals come down to enjoy their daily bathe in the river. The British colonialists killed thousands of Asian elephants and even now, as the human population expands, some say, the future looks bleak for Asia's largest terrestrial mammal. 
Denis Moriarty, our lecturer, gives a talk on the British connection to Sri Lanka before dinner one evening, as torrential rain lashes down outside – no wonder the island is so green. 
The Portuguese were the first Europeans to arrive in about 1500. The British brought the Civil Service with them – one of whom was the writer Leonard Woolf, a member of the Bloomsbury Group and the husband of Virginia Woolf. He started as a cadet, aged 24, the “lowest form of life”, but was in charge of a whole district and wrote books about his life on the island.
Sri Lanka has more than 20,000 Buddhist monks which we recognise in their brilliantly coloured robes almost everywhere. 
Monks, who are supposed to enter the calling for life, mostly live in small groups attached to their local village temple. But they are getting increasingly more aggressive, these days, which does not seem to fit with their peaceful religion. 
There are 15 hairpin bands climbing up to the tea plantations – Kamal calls them “elbow bends” – and the misty, cool damp climate in these hills is such a change from the heat of the temple areas. We see cloud-forest umberella-shaped keena trees, dwarf bamboo and tree ferns but the mountainous scenery forms a backcloth to miles of neatly trimmed green tea bushes, covering every available inch of space and following every undulation and hill. A bush can survive for 50 years and the tea is produced from the fresh bush tips, which are picked every seven days.
At the colonial Hill Club in Nuwara Eliya, a hill station 6,182 feet above sea level, the waiters wear white cotton gloves and white mess jackets. The women in our party all wear long dresses and the men have to wear jackets and ties. Colonial days are long past but standards are standards and the ethos of the Club carries on though now, of course, the board registers Sri Lankan names for presidents instead of British. 
The food is average but the setting is nostalgic because this is Sri Lanka's highest town in the heart of the southern hill country, established by the British in the 19th century. “Little England” has faux Tudor bungalows, colonial era hotels called Glendower, Alpine, Sunhill and Grosvenor, a golf course, race course and even a Victoria Park.
The coffee crop failed so local planters turned to tea, first planted in 1866, which proved a huge success. Tea needed year-round workers and large numbers of Tamil migrants from South India were brought in by planters and settled in the area. 
Guides do not like to tell visitors too many upsetting things so it is not until later that I learn that the tea-pickers are among the poorest people in the country, many living in squalid conditions in houses which often do not have any running water or electricity and little furniture. The women work long hours for, I am told, as little as about a $1 a day – which is paid to their husbands, who may drink. 
An average family income is about £20 a month and there is a serious problem of alcohol abuse because the men finish work at lunchtime whereas the women work on until 4.30 or 5pm, so the men have the opportunity to drink away family earnings. Now estates provide medical care and schools, we are told. 
However, I vow to buy only free trade tea in future.
HIGHLIGHTS OF SRI LANKA
* Visiting an immaculately kept war grave cemetery.
* Meeting Chandra Siri who runs the Turtle Conservation Centre at Kosgoda. He buys eggs from fishermen, to save them, hatches them and rears the baby turtles in tanks – releasing them into the sea at night when three days old. If he released them in daylight, most would be eaten by predators. The tanks have turtles at different ages to show visitors and you can buy souvenirs.
* Having a two-hour Elephant Safari from the hotel to a path by the water. The howdah kept slipping because the four of us were different weights. Our elephant, Monika, loved the bag of bananas I bought and discreetly backed into the vegetation at the side of the road when she had a call of nature. 
* Enjoying tea with home-baked cake, at our guide Kamal's home with his family: wife, son, daughter-in-law, their tiny baby and her parents. 

