I think it's fair to say that there's a wide perception in Stranraer that the town has been left behind and neglected over many years. You might think then that a plan to bring a massive private sector investment, potentially bringing with it many new jobs for local people and providing a huge boost to the local economy, would be unanimously welcomed with arms wide open. That is, of course, unless that plan involved a casino.
Stranraer, historically a harbour town, is undergoing considerable change. Stena, the ferry company which sails from Stranraer, hopes to move out of the town to a port a few miles further up Loch Ryan in the not-too-distant future. If Stena moves away it will provide an unmissable opportunity to redevelop Stranraer, particularly the area by the harbour known locally as the ‘Waterfront'. Plans have been in place for some time for a marina and leisure complex which are vital to the economic development of the whole area.
So when Stranraer was talked about as a location for one of several new casinos across the UK, largely because of its links to Ireland, there was some local support for the idea, particularly from those within the business community. It was, and still is, seen as key to the Waterfront development, which could kick-start further private investment and create local jobs.
Perhaps unsurprisingly with a potential development of this nature, the plan has also prompted considerable opposition. Many people fear that social problems associated with gambling will be brought to Stranraer – things like addiction, organised crime, drugs and prostitution. My own view is that many fears are exaggerated and they don't reflect the experiences of other parts of the UK which already have casinos. I am satisfied that the government has proposed tough new measures to prevent problem gambling, and a strict monitoring regime, so the situation is reviewed at the first sign of problems.
With all this in mind, and given that no other Waterfront centrepiece suggestion I'm aware of promises to bring in the same level of investment, I think it is a plan which could provide a huge boost to the area. But there is no question that local people must be allowed a greater say before a final decision is taken to allow a private company to develop a casino. 
high-dive into digital
Only by understanding and using digital technology will we defeat our fear of new media, says Don Foster
“The times they are a-changing.” And rapidly. This is especially true in media and communication. Recent technological developments are beyond the imaginings of even the most enthusiastic sci-fi fans 20 years ago. I'm sure I'm not alone in remembering mobile phones the size of bricks, or having to wait for the TV news to appear at set times. Now my mobile's not much bigger than a credit card – and I get most of my news, when I want it, online. 
New developments really are enriching people's lives and connecting us in ways very few of us previously envisaged. Community radio and local web-based TV are helping to re-establish communities; the internet now plays a key role in most of our working and social lives, and making friends has never been easier thanks to Facebook.
Freedom is at the heart of these new technologies. We can obtain what we want when we want it. The challenge for individuals and government is to make the most of these new opportunities, while keeping any risks at a minimum. It's all too easy for politicians, often with our greying hair, to be wary of technologies we don't understand, or to blame them for society's ills.
To do so would be looking at things the wrong way round. Google's vice president, Vint Cerf, summed it up very well when he said: “Most of the content on the network is contributed by the users of the internet. So what we're seeing on the net is a reflection of the society we live in… when you have a problem in the mirror you do not fix the mirror, you fix that which is reflected in the mirror.”
That's not to say there aren't areas of concern, or action that we can take. Children's access to internet content comes high on the list of many parents' worries. Of course we want to make sure children are not accessing unsuitable material. And there are already tools available to help us do this.
Many internet service providers offer parental controls; developments such as ‘walled gardens' can create online spaces in which children can safely browse; and mobile phones now come with privacy settings as standard. This approach can retain the democratic nature of new technologies, while protecting the vulnerable from accessing potentially harmful material. 
Of course, tools like these only work if people know how to use them effectively. And that's definitely a challenge when children often understand new technologies better than the generations above them.
Recently, the culture, media and sport select committee heard evidence suggesting that many parents believe that video games classifications relate to skill level rather than the age at which they are suitable for children to play. This demonstrates just how out-of-touch parents can be with new technologies. 
It's extremely important that parents are educated in how to make use of existing mechanisms to protect their children. Being afraid of new technologies or calling for them to be banned isn't an effective or proportionate way to approach these issues, and it simply won't work.
The best way is to encourage engagement with developing technologies, by increasing education and public awareness about how to use them. Participation and understanding lie 
at the heart of striking a balance between freedom and the prevention of harm. Legislation should be kept to a minimum.
The freedom new technologies provide can be of great benefit to everyone, but they must be accompanied by greater education and awareness. It's not a question of clamping down on new developments, being afraid of them, or treating the world with kid gloves. It's about learning how to use new technologies to best suit our needs and those of our children. We should embrace the change. 
Through watershed to firewall
Parliament can try and maintain a plurality of public service broadcasting, but in an increasingly fragmented media world it will fall to technology to protect children, explains Jeremy Hunt
Governments are notoriously slow at responding to technological change. This is particularly significant for the media industries. They are not just any other sector – the media is the heartbeat of modern society and shapes our culture and attitudes. How the government reacts to the pace of change affecting these sectors will decide whether citizens benefit or suffer from such advances.
The first thing is that governments need to realise that technology creates positive opportunities and not just dangers and threats. New technology is not simply a new thing to regulate. Whilst protections may well be needed, it is important that the regulatory system in which the media and communications sectors operate is sufficiently flexible to stimulate change rather than stifle it.
The broadcasting world is now readying itself for the seismic change of digital switchover. The larger number and variety of channels will produce obvious benefits. The resulting release of spectrum also presents an exciting one-off opportunity for new and emerging products and services. It is encouraging that Ofcom is pressing ahead with a market-led approach to the auction of this spectrum. Rather than second-guessing which technologies would benefit consumers, this method will let the market decide which advancements succeed.
This new post-switchover world will mean, however, increased commercial pressures for broadcasters as advertising shares dwindle. This has worrying implications for the amount of public service broadcasting that will be available. The future regulatory environment therefore needs to create a system that encourages plurality of public service broadcasting, but with a light touch rather than excessive intervention.
Before we even complete the digital switchover process, technology is changing the way we watch television. On-demand services such as Sky Plus, the BBC's iplayer and 4oD present new challenges to traditional views of regulating this sector.
With people now watching programmes as and when they like, the 9pm watershed is gradually becoming an outdated and crude method of protecting our children. Parents will rightly still expect their children to be shielded from violence, sexually explicit scenes and other inappropriate content. However, an artificial cut-off point is a tool from the analogue age. Greater media social responsibility to help parents will become even more important in the digital, on-demand world.
This type of service is a perfect example of how the internet is rapidly changing our media and communications industries. They also show how government and regulators need to adapt equally quickly. The pace of change in technology should be a wake-up call to politicians – regulatory systems need to change in order to adapt to technological change.
It will not be enough to use traditional methods of regulation. Instead we'll need a flexible system that allows new media and communication services to flourish whilst ensuring consumers are protected.
Above all we must recognise that the success of the internet, and therefore many of the new media and communication services we are likely to experience, lies in the fact that it is the antithesis of top-down statutory control. We should be very wary of governments trying to impede or control it.
For that reason the internet and new media services should not – indeed cannot – be regulated in the same way as traditional forms of media. The most effective control will come from users themselves rather than from regulators appointed through elected politicians. The challenge will be to use technology to help us as well as challenge us. 
downloadable debate
Internet-savvy youngsters will be key to a think-tank on digital convergence, says Andy Burnham
The media and communications environment is changing more quickly than any other area of society. That presents a particular challenge to government and Parliament to keep pace and decide when and how to intervene. Technology moves so fast that any legislation needs to set up frameworks that allow for future possibilities as well as current changes. The key is to talk to both experts in the field and the younger generation to whom the digital world is second nature.
To this end, in February I launched the first of a series of seminars as part of the Convergence Think Tank. This is a programme of work to encourage discussion and debate set up by my department and the Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform. It will call on expertise from industry and involve people from as wide a range of interests as possible. Of particular importance are the views of young people who take for granted instant, mobile and versatile access to all forms of media and communication.
The born-digital generation holds the key to ensuring that there is no digital divide in the future. For our young people, using digital technology is as normal as watching analogue TV was to our generation. The invention and fearlessness of youth is something we need to take full advantage of in the government-led examination of the implications of changing technology for all citizens, consumers and markets. The think tank will operate for about a year, reporting in early 2009, and will have a key contribution to make in shaping future communications policy.
I have reaffirmed the three overarching themes for the Convergence Think Tank to address, originally set by my predecessor, James Purnell. First is an open market to provide the best climate for innovation and creativity. Secondly, that consumers and citizens are empowered to make informed decisions for themselves and their children about the technology and services they use. Third is universal access to distinctive and original content of the very highest quality.
I would like a deeper understanding of the reasons why over a third of all households in this country do not have home access to the internet, let alone a broadband connection. 

