Labour MP Jon Trickett puts the case for a “listening” government, listing the policies which might win back Labour voters before it's too late
On May 1st, 2008 the Labour Government was given a stark and serious ultimatum – change or cease to exist.
The numbers by now are familiar: a Labour loss of 331 councillors, a Tory gain of 256, a 12-council gain for the Tories, a nine-council loss for Labour, the Cameron Conservatives now holding over three times as many councils as Brown's Labour.
Without doubt the big news stories have been the resurgence of the Conservative Party and the worst results for Labour in over 40 years. Across the country, in places where the Tories should not be winning, they have made progress. There are also now 893 “other” councillors sitting in town halls across England and Wales. This sweeping term can encompass everyone from the BNP to local socialists, a particular breed being the “Independent”.
Looking to areas like Barnsley and Wakefield in the North, as well as in Wales,  Independents have made inroads in areas where people still cannot bring themselves to vote overwhelmingly for the Tories – in this, there is hope that Labour can still lure back its core voters but, for this hope to become anything more, there has to be change.
In this last week the term “change” has been the overarching theme. Change in direction, change in policy, change in style – some going as far as to say change in leadership but such broad solutions that read well in the media won't fix the problem.
As my Compass colleagues have pointed out in the last few days – there must be change. The lapse of the Brown Government into a new form of Blairism did not satisfy the cries for change that echoed around the country. The change must be real: it must be change that people can see at work in their own communities.
To bring back our voters and appeal to other sections of the electorate that we might not traditionally call “ours”, we need to get back to why we all sought a Labour government in the first place. We need to narrow the gap between rich and poor, and address inequality where it exists.
There are practical policies that will instantly signal to our supporters we are serious. A progressive tax system is a start – a system that helps those on the lowest incomes while making sure those on the higher rungs pay their share, and a living wage to make sure those who go to work can support their families. If we need to fund these measures, we should be looking to the energy companies with their billions in profits per quarter, yet still squeezing people into fuel poverty. Or perhaps at the £76 billion of wasted money that will be channelled into renewing the Trident submarine system.
There is no option but to fix the tax credit system. It's not headline-grabbing or an uncomplicated story, but there are people caught up in it who do need help. Our ignoring them has caused resentment and disillusionment – and rightfully so. Overpayments have left thousands in debt with no discernible way out – tax credits are not targeted at those who have a few thousand pounds tucked away for a rainy day.
We have to give people somewhere to live. The lack of affordable housing for rent is the work of the Tory Government which introduced “right to buy” without replenishing housing stock. But we can't continue to blame the Tories for the lack of housing when we've had over a decade to sort it out. Every MP I know receives plenty of letters and phone calls each week from people desperate to move up the housing waiting list. There are some good proposals and promises of house-building programmes, but promises won't convince people – they will believe it and the Labour Government when those houses are built in their neighbourhoods.
The government has to stop placing young people who want to carry on in education in thousands of pounds of debt. I get letters from parents and students alike who are worried about how much it costs to go to university. “Middle England” is concerned about the debt at the end of the line and working class young people are considering whether that debt is worth it in the first place. There has to be equality of opportunity, and this will not happen when how much money your family has is a consideration in any way at all.
Finally, the Government needs to bring public sector workers back into the tent. Rows over pay and constant reform and privatisation have seen the drift elsewhere of our formerly staunch supporters. Striking teachers won't be inclined to stay with us on election day; neither are police officers who want a fair deal when it comes to their pay.
All in all, it's not good, but all is not yet lost. If Gordon Brown is serious about listening to what people want – and not only listening, but acting – then we can move to a Labour fourth term. But a continuation of “new” Labour policies that put us in this position in the first place will not be tolerated by the electorate. And the party at all levels from branch right through to the NEC, the PLP and the Cabinet must insist that our leadership acts – our future depends on it.

Ipsos-MORI's Roger Mortimore analyses what the results really mean and points to what may lie ahead
Chances are that if it had been a general election on 1 May, David Cameron would be Prime Minister,. with a working majority.
The Conservatives' share of the vote was 44 per cent, their best level since 1992. Labour slipped to third place on just 24 per cent, worse than at any of the elections under Tony Blair's leadership. (The party was steady on a 26 per cent share in 2004, 2006 and 2007.) Even allowing for the way that local elections always flatter the Conservatives because they benefit from the lower turnout, the LibDems always doing better in local elections than general elections, and even taking into account the advantage Labour currently derives from the vagaries of first-past-the-post, a lead of this scale would translate to a Tory General Election victory with plenty of room to spare.
As bleak a view for Labour is given by the roll-call of councils won and lost. Labour controls 9 fewer councils than it did before the elections, and made a net loss of more than 300 seats, which seems to have exceeded the leadership's worst nightmares; the Tories gained around 250 councillors and 12 councils. The Conservative gains speak of advances in the marginal-rich urban North (Bury) and in some of Labour's remaining footholds in the South (Southampton). Labour's losses show a party in deep trouble - even in its own heartlands (Blaenau Gwent, Torfaen, Caerphilly, Merthyr Tydfil, Hartlepool).
The Liberal Democrats' picture is more mixed. True, they pushed Labour into third place, but they made few net gains and their 25 per cent share is lower than the 27 per cent they were achieving at mid-term in the last Parliament. If at the next election the Tories rather than Lib Dems reap the benefit of Labour's unpopularity, they risk being squeezed, especially in “naturally” Tory areas. But this is a very early stage in Nick Clegg's leadership, and the jury is still out.
Boris Johnson's defeat of Ken Livingstone in London made headlines round the world. Certainly London is the sole local election capable of gaining even national attention in its own right.
Johnson's record as Mayor in the two years we must now assume remain until the next general election may have a significant impact on its result. He will be the highest profile Tory in office anywhere in Britain. His similarity of age and background to David Cameron make it inevitable that any success or failure will rub off on the public image of his leader. Johnson represents the Conservatives' greatest opportunity to establish their credentials for governing, though at the same time, their greatest risk should he prove not up the job.
The importance to Johnson's victory of the high turnout in Tory areas, with a bigger swing since 2004 than nationally, points towards the resurrection of an effective Conservative campaigning machine. The Tories, led by Lynton Crosby's firm hand, got their vote out so effectively that Johnson had as many first preference votes in 2008 as his predecessor Steven Norris had mustered in the previous two elections combined. Labour, which now has barely half as many council seats as when Tony Blair became Prime Minister, is suffering from weakness at the grass roots which will count against the party at the general election.
Labour can no longer rely on voters doubting Tory credibility; it must put forward a positive case for re-election. In April's Ipsos MORI Political Monitor poll, Gordon Brown recorded a lower personal satisfaction rating (23 per cent) than his government (26 per cent),  which has never previously happened, even to Margaret Thatcher. He still has two years, but he must turn things round, fast.
Rajiv Prabhakar, Karen Rowlingson and Stuart White put the case for adopting a progressive approach to unearned windfalls
THE global credit crunch, a downturn in the housing market and disputes over public sector pay do not spell happy economic times. And, given the recent controversy surrounding the Government over the abolition of the 10 pence rate for income tax, some people might wonder if there is any point raising the question of reforming inheritance tax right now.
However, it is precisely at such times that policies can be particularly vulnerable. Failure to argue for inheritance tax risks the case for it being lost.
The Conservative Party's fortunes have recently revived. Much of this appears due to Shadow Chancellor George Osborne's promise to raise the inheritance tax threshold to £1 million. Osborne sounded the “death knell for the death tax” during his conference speech late last year. This provoked a warm response from much of the media and helped deter Labour from calling a general election. Chancellor Alistair Darling was pushed into announcing changes to inheritance tax that related to the transfer of allowances between married couples and civil partners. The descendants of these couples now benefit from a larger combined allowance than their forebears. These political developments built upon a broader campaign against inheritance tax. Newspapers such as the Daily Express have led attacks against this tax.
It is against this background that we have written a report for the Fabian Society entitled How to Defend Inheritance Tax. We seek to add to efforts to rebalance the debate. Those supporting inheritance tax often do not get a fair hearing.
So, why have inheritance tax at all? Fundamentally, the argument is about whether we want to create a society based on equal life chances for everyone. Wealth is important for allowing people to have genuine opportunities. However, wealth is very unequally spread throughout our society. A Fabian Society Commission on Life Chances and Child Poverty records that the proportion of wealth held by the wealthiest 1 per cent of the population rose from 17 per cent in 1991 to 24 per cent in 2004.
Sometimes wealth inequality can be justified. Inequality might provide incentives for economic growth. But it is hard to justify present levels of inequality. Allowing people to transfer wealth unchecked means that the advantages of wealth cascade down the generations. A minority are privileged simply from the random and lucky circumstance of being born to rich parents. Of course, creating a free and equal society does not depend on inheritance tax alone. For example, there are strong arguments for spending on the education of the very young. But such policies are not alternatives to inheritance tax. Rather, they can work together to enhance freedom and reduce inequality.

