The poor harvest last year, coupled with a trend away from planting of traditional long-stemmed winter wheat for more profitable short-stemmed varieties, has led to a chronic shortage of thatching straw. The National Society of Master Thatchers (NSMT) have warned that there is not even enough stocks to repair existing thatched-roof homes, and prices for the raw materials have rocketed.
English Heritage, which insists on traditional long-stemmed straw being used on all listed buildings, suggests that thatchers should concentrate on repairing rather replacing whole roofs, using remaining supplies of traditional straw. Marjorie Sanders, chief executive of the NSMT, says: “Some councils are victimising thatchers. It is vital that conservation officers understand how serious the situation is and allow more flexibility in the variety of straw that can be used.”
Bob West, one of the country's biggest growers of thatch straw, warns: “It is entirely possible that in the next ten years, long-stemmed wheat will no longer be available because it is less profitable than other varieties. Then, straw thatching as we know it will disappear.” 
What a shame if this was to happen; our countryside heritage is at stake here and it seems incredible that some kind of comprimise solution can't be found.

It's the little things
The preservation of our rural heritage is also to the fore in Yorkshire where the Dales National Park Authority is taking steps to make sure some of the area's smaller buildings and agricultural constructions are being recorded for posterity.
Detailed records of nearly 29,000 bigger items – like old houses, barns and lime kilns – already exist in the shape of an Historic Environment Record (HER) that has been compiled by experts at the authority. But now, archaeology staff and volunteers have started logging all the less noticeable features so they can be added to the HER. And the first batch of additions has just been turned into a series of pages on the authority's website called Feature of the Season.
Miles Johnson, the authority's Countryside Archaeological Advisor, told me: “Many of the features were part of the everyday farming landscape but none has been recorded before. They all add to the special character of the National Park and the main reason for putting them on the website is to make them more accessible to people who may want to learn more about them and may be interested in understanding the Dales landscape in more detail.”
So far the Dales Volunteers have logged fifty stock underpasses – passages beneath walled roads and tracks that enabled cattle and sheep to pass from one field to another, normally to get to water – as well as nearly a hundred churn stands, hennery piggeries (combined henhouses and piggeries) and turbary stones that marked areas where people could cut peat. 
Stone water troughs, polegate posts, dovecotes and millstones will also be on a growing list of other features that will be put under the spotlight as the project continues. 
Miles added: “Revisiting some of the features already recorded has shown that there are serious threats facing some of them. For example, one of the churn stands recently disappeared when a farm track was widened and one of the buildings is threatened with demolition in the near future while others are showing sign of structural decay.”
The Feature of the Season project along with datasheets and images of the features can be seen online at www.yorkshiredales.org.uk/fos. Or telephone 08701 666333 for details.

Spying on the neighbours
The British Trust for Ornithology (BTO) is looking for people to spy on their neighbours… to provide intimate details of what blue tits and great tits across the UK are up to in the privacy of their own homes. Dave Leech of the BTO wants to know whether gardens have replaced woodlands as the best places to raise broods of young tits. Are city slickers out-competing their country cousins?
While these species, and the robin, are commonly referred to as ‘garden birds' , they are traditionally woodland species that have increasingly taken advantage of the green spaces in areas of human habitation, but just how successful are these city dwellers? As more of the British countryside is developed to meet human demands, this question is becoming increasingly important and the data collected by Nest Box Challenge will help to answer it.
Each participant in Nest Box Challenge is asked to record whether or not their nest box is used during the season and, where possible, the number of eggs and chicks that are produced by the birds nesting in it. For more details visit www.bto.org or write to: BTO, The Nunnery, Thetford, Norfolk IP24 2PU. Tel: 01842 750050.
April

An extremely rare leucistic white deer has been spotted by staff of the John Muir Trust on the west coast of Scotland. The last recorded wild, white stag in Britain was shot by poachers in October last year on the border of Devon and Cornwall. 
Fran Lockhart, Partnership Manager for the Trust, saw the beast while on a field trip. “It was amazing to crawl up so close to such a magnificent looking animal. He looked almost ghost like next to the group of young red stags that he was mixing with.”
White deer are potent figures in the mythology of many cultures. The Celts considered them to be messengers from the otherworld. They are closely identified with unicorns and their appearance is said to herald some profound change in the lives of those that encounter them. Fans of C S Lewis's Chronicles of Narnia will be very familiar with the white stag that the children in Narnia hunt deep into the forest only to find themselves back in their own world again.
White deer are often mistakenly thought to be albinos. In fact their unusual condition is caused by leucism, a rare genetic pattern that causes a reduction in the pigment in the animal's hair and skins. Unlike albinos who have characteristically red eyes, deer with leucism have normal colouring in their eyes. 
The John Muir Trust is keeping the details of the whereabouts of this animal secret after the last recorded white stag in the wild was shot by poachers for its trophy head. “I am thrilled to know that there is a white stag roaming free out there in the Scottish Highlands and that I was privileged enough to be able to spend an hour observing him,” said Fran. “We will be watching this animal with interest particularly as he will be reaching his full potential in the next couple of years.”
Visit www.wildlifeextra.com for more details.

Happy Ratty
Wildlife Trusts throughout the country are celebrating the news that the water vole has finally received full protection from the law under new proposals announced by Defra. The recommendation for full protection was made as part of the Review of the Wildlife and Countryside Act in 2002. However, it has taken six years to reach the Minister for the Environment and to be accepted by Defra.
It will now be against the law to intentionally kill a water vole or to intentionally, or recklessly, damage or disturb the places they use for shelter or protection.
The Berks, Bucks and Oxon Wildlife Trust coordinate a Water Vole Recovery Project for the three counties and members are delighted by the news. The project, funded by the Environment Agency and British Waterways, was launched in 1998 with the aim to conserve water voles in the area. Remaining strongholds include the Kennet and Avon Canal in Berkshire, the River Chess in Buckinghamshire and the Oxford Canal in Oxfordshire. 
Project officer Julia Armstrong said: “This additional protection for water voles is great news and the new legislation will be an extremely valuable tool in helping the Water Vole Recovery Project to protect water voles within Berks, Bucks and Oxon.”

Mink threat
In North Wales a major initiative to save water voles has been launched after experts warned that they could become extinct there in the next ten years. Workshops are being held for land managers, shooters, wardens and other conservationists in Gwynedd, Anglesey and Conwy to learn about trapping mink by using mink rafts, a sophisticated mink-trapping device. Mink are an introduced and highly predatory species which represents the main threat to water voles and other native wildlife where the habitat is suitable.
A scheme to eradicate mink on Anglesey, which has one of the most significant populations of water voles in Britain, is now being extended to the mainland to try and prevent mink from crossing the Menai Straits, before moving across North Wales.
In Conwy, existing water vole populations are being protected by maintaining their mink-free status through the use of mink rafts, supplied by Conwy Council through the Conwy Habitat Improvement Scheme. Mink rafts are floating platforms moored on rivers and still waters, which contain a clay ‘tracking cartridge'. Once mink tracks are detected, the cartridge is replaced with a live capture trap. Once mink are removed water vole tracks will appear on rafts which are a good indicator of successful mink removal.

Butterfly hopes
The Devon Wildlife Trust (DWT) is starting work on a £44,100 project spread over the next three years to help protect one of Britain's rarest butterflies. The money will be spent on habitat management work at the charity's Dunsford nature reserve to boost numbers of the high brown fritillary.
The site is the only colony of the butterfly left in the Teign Valley and one of only fifty sites in the country to support this rare insect. It has seen the greatest decline of any of the British butterfly species over the past few decades.
The work will focus on management of bracken to increase the numbers of violets, the food plant of the butterfly's larva, along with the cutting back of scrub and the opening up of the reserve's woodland glades. The money has been awarded by Biffa through its Biffaward fund, a multi-million pound fund which awards grants to community and environmental projects across the UK.

Hope they been washed
I should have known better than to challenge Countryman readers. Last month I asked, tongue in cheek if anyone still wore a sweater that was more than thirty years old… 
The record so far is 52 years old, worn by Ronald Locke of Haslemere. More from him and others in the next issue. Meanwhile, see also this month's letters pages.
Countryman Diary - March 2008

Hats off to the unpaid and hardworking wardens of our countryside
Volunteers never get the recognition they deserve but then they're not in it for the glory. I hope therefore that the Cotswold Voluntary Wardens won't mind me congratulating them on their 40th anniversary.
The organisation exists to conserve and enhance the Cotswolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) alongside the Cotswolds Conservation Board. Wardens carry out valuable conservation projects in the AONB and help to promote the area by encouraging the public to enjoy it. Back in 1968 Major Ray Clarke was employed by Gloucestershire County Council to help found the wardens group and by 1970 there were more than 200 members – there are now 340.
The current head warden, Colin Boulton, said: “It was no surprise that the number of wardens swelled so quickly. It is testament to Major Ray Clarke's hard work but also to the dedication of those who have been wardens over the years and those who now make up the service. It also illustrates the great sense of achievement and fulfillment there is to be had from working voluntarily to care for an area that is well loved by so many.”
The wardens will be celebrating with a week of activity in the early summer, including parish walks in the north Cotswolds, family focused walks across the area, a public conservation work party in the south and a special event to mark the anniversary at the Royal Agricultural College.
A series of fifteen short walks that are suitable for those using wheelchairs, power scooters and pushchairs has also been created.


