This, however, felt a little like answering our own research question without even entering a school! Moreover, it went against our understanding that at classroom level inclusion is a process, a series of choices made throughout the day, thus pre-ordained benchmarks could be misleading and detract from our focus on learning about these intricate choices. We could instead opt out of having to set our own criteria of inclusivity and instead use official criteria, leading us to schools deemed inclusive by the Office for Standards in Education (Ofsted) or the Local Education Authority (LEA). Or we could seek schools that self-identified as inclusive.
Ultimately we decided on a mixture of recommendation by others—senior advisory staff in LEAs, combined with self-identification—schools with an interest in further understanding their own inclusive practices. Nonetheless, finding schools was not easy. Our interest in Year 6 classrooms meant we were competing against the school's assessment agenda and largely loosing out. (English schools have national tests, routinely known as SATs, at four key points, one of which is the end of primary schooling in Year 6.) Our approaches to schools were also made in the context of a culture of surveillance created by the inspection regime (Rea &amp; Weiner, 1998; Morley &amp; Rassool, 1999), which may have added to their wariness. We found ourselves trying to sell the idea of the study to the schools, flattering the headteachers with comments about their recommended status, and promising a supportive process focused on the good things going on in the schools. (This had more impact on the study than we could have anticipated; we found later that we had not constructed an ideal context in which to constructively share the data about the processes of exclusion we found.) Eventually, though, potential partner schools were identified, and their participation confirmed following a visit in which the fieldworker made some subjective judgement about the schools' openness and responsiveness to the project.
Collecting and analysing data: How do we look? and How do we know? 
The next challenges concerned how we should look for inclusive cultures and practices and how we would recognize them. For Peters' (1995) research on inclusion, the decision to use ethnography and participant observation was an obvious choice, but as a disabled researcher she could avoid studying 'other' and make good use of her 'personal baggage' as a disabled person. Like her we wanted to look at the flow of behaviours and at the attitudes and emotions interacting with the behaviours. We wanted the 'holistic, thick description of the interaction process' (Lutz, 1981, p. 52) that ethnographic methods offer and we had the ethnographic desire to understand cultures on their own terms. But we recognized the tension of creating the culture by studying it and articulating it.
We faced the challenge of seeing through the layers of what we found in schools: the official culture, the school culture, classroom culture, playground culture, sub-cultures related to class, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, and so on. Moreover, we needed to see through the pressures upon the schools that shape their culture, such as the pressure of financial survival in the market-economy. Whilst needing to be aware of the bigger picture, we sought to examine the microcosm of school interactions. Corbett (2001, p. 400) argues that 'school culture can be felt in the general atmosphere of the building, in the way people speak to each other, what is visible and valued, where images and artefacts are placed and how the school projects its 'self' '. We were interested in these aspects and in Corbett's (1999, p.129) notion of deep culture as 'the intangible process whereby children are taught to see themselves as either valued or devalued group members'.
A way forward for researching inclusive school cultures must, it seems to us, address not only the shared language that helps to identify the culture (Zollers et al., 1999) but also the different levels of culture. For Schein (1984) these are visible artefacts (such as the built environment, dress code, public documentation), values (the espoused reasons and rationalizations for behaviour) and basic underlying assumptions (the beliefs that are taken for granted and which are difficult to question or to change). Unpicking the interconnective structure between assumptions, values and artefacts enables us to evaluate the extent to which they are in tune with each other and with inclusive principles. One might hope to find few contradictions between what is seen, what is stated and what is fundamentally believed, and to uncover artefacts, values and assumptions that benefit the development of all pupils (Rix &amp; Simmons, 2003). By observing in action the routines, rituals, stories, symbols, structures and systems (formal and informal) (Johnson, 1992) that testify to the cultures in schools that are inclusive, we can better understand inclusive educational processes and practices. The challenge, though, is to gain insight into the multitude of cultures that exist in schools as organizations (Kilmann et al., 1985; Deering, 1996; Dyson &amp; Millward, 2000) and not to assume that enhancing inclusive practice is a matter of altering just one set of underlying assumptions.
There is an attractive simplicity to the idea that we can study schools with an inclusive policy framework and examine the policies enacted in the classroom. As Clough (1995, p. 131) explains, 'we have come to see teachers as sorts of indifferently “black boxes” whose actions can be explained in terms of policies, and there is at work here an assumption that we can explain what teachers do in terms of the policy contexts in which they work'. But teachers and policies function in context and we need to understand these contexts which include the thoughts, experiences and policies of other times—the 'fossils'. As our two main teachers offered us such different classrooms to explore, we were drawn to consider what Clough (1995, p. 131) described as the 'the complexity of jointly implicated personal and professional life events' and the need to research the 'seam of subjective experience' that relates to attitudes in context. Like Dyson and Millward (2000) we were conscious of the complexities, competing imperatives and micropolitics we would need to understand.
How can we keep children and their experience at the centre of our research? 
Morrow and Richards (1996) contend that the problem of unequal power relationships between research and children is the biggest challenge for researchers working with children. Mauthner (1997, p. 20) argues that we can address this by 'foregrounding children's subjective experiences', letting the children lead in interviews, encouraging story-telling and anecdotes, and considering children's experiences of the research itself.
In aspiring to keep children and their experience at the centre of research on inclusion, as stressed by Corbett (2001), we sought to talk to the children, incidentally and in interview, so that we might build connections with them that could give us insights into their perspectives. We could see practices, such as George Holt's 'bottom six' going to literacy/numeracy with the deputy head/Special Educational Needs Coordinator, that we could judge as excluding, but we wanted to know if these were actually experienced as such by the children. We assumed, like Thomas and O'Kane (1998, p. 341) that 'children's own understandings of their situation may be as valid as any other'. Our reflections on the pilot study indicate that we may need more of this kind of 'participatory research' in the main study with more time and space to talk with children and more opportunities for them to control the agenda of our conversations. Pickett's (1994) comparison of an inclusive and traditional school used focus groups to elicit the views of students but in a more ethnographic study one would need to keep the conversation and the observation more tightly linked.
We asked the question of the data 'who is at risk of marginalization and exclusion in this classroom/school?' This allowed us to explore the processes at work for a broad community of learners: those who went unnoticed in class, loners, children who were assessed as having special educational needs, and all those children cast as 'other' to a 'normal' frame of reference. The methodological advantages of this approach, however, had to be balanced with the risk of pathologizing children, of joining in with and somehow condoning the problematizing of some while making others the normative group (Moore et al., 1998, p. 73). Mizra (1995) and Mauthner (1997) warn of the need to avoid objectifying children (and teachers) and this methodological challenge continues to test us.
Emancipatory research? How much do/should we change what we find? 
Clough and Barton (1995) make it painfully explicit that inevitably to research special educational needs is to construct special educational needs. The very act of using the concept brings it alive. We could not research processes of inclusion/exclusion without being a part of their construction. We would be a part of the understandings we developed not separate from them. Our very involvement as researchers in the schools meant that we changed them (Goodey, 1999); we could accept this passively or we could seek to make a difference.
If our research was to have an emancipatory dimension, then when we found processes of exclusion, we would need to seek 'some redress of the issues we describe, rather than just reproduce them' (Moore et al., 1998, p. 72). As Goodey (1999) contends, 'like it or not, research is participation in social change and in mutual reflexive exploration' and we needed to be responsible with our power. We had to decide not once, however, but over and over again, whether to answer the 'call for action' we felt from seeing exclusionary practice. Moreover, we had to think about how we might make taking action empowering rather than threatening for the teachers. Our desire to see school processes as they were had to be weighed against not only our desire to raise awareness, but our responsibilities to the participants within our study. We had responsibilities to the teachers who were placing trust in us and to the children who had the least power in the situation. These methodological tensions were not just rhetorical matters for philosophical debate, they were brought sharply into focus during the fieldwork. The researchers were faced with many day-to-day decisions about whether to intervene when, for example, the children called each other 'spastic' or there were playground incidents, or more frequently when there was an obvious need for helper work to be done in the classrooms. Should a researcher in the field observe while pupils struggle?
We dwell here on one such example from St Blythes where the fieldnotes record many instances of one pupil's lack of participation and the growing frustration about this for the researcher: 
Third visit:
Literacy
Miss P (classroom assistant) sits at the table closest to me and asks the 12 children seated at the table who had done their homework. It is striking that for the next hour Nita sits without her textbook, her homework or any access to the text that is being read. I am surprised how little attention is paid to her either by the classroom assistant or the other pupils.
Physical education (PE)
Nita has not got her kit and so was sent to another room with a book.
Science
Nita puts her hand up a couple of times but on both occasions just as Sonya [teacher] chooses someone else. Nita plays with her 'secret diary' as the two girl monitors give out the books. Nita says she will choose the pictures first but the girl sitting next to her suggests she needs to do the writing first. 'Do you just have to write all that?' asks Nita with incredulity. Nita writes the date and title in the same time as it takes others to write four or five sentences. By 3.03 p.m. Nita has finished copying the writing from the board but has not begun to copy or sort the images on the worksheet.

