Why is Scotland so Expensive?

Britain is frequently cited as the world's most expensive holiday destination and every year we hear of, or meet, visitors who cannot believe how much they have to pay for everything.
They also often cannot understand how we can afford to live here – a sentiment that's shared by the inhabitants of these islands, too! Now that most of us spend at least part of the year abroad, we can all too plainly see for ourselves that Britain in general, and Scotland in particular, is in many cases far, far dearer than most other countries.
Basic foodstuffs cost a fortune here; for instance there's a mock-French boulangerie near my Edinburgh home where I regularly hand over a fiver for a couple of croissants and a baguette, when the same things can be had for coppers in the land of their origin. Yes, I know what you're saying – what a fool I am to pay that much for such ordinary fare. I have no excuse, other than the stuff's good and the shop is convenient.
I've been keeping a close weather eye, too, on the prices charged by holiday home owners for renting out their properties and have been astonished at how much people are apparently prepared to pay to stay in some very ordinary wee houses. It's reasonably well known that to rent a holiday residence in places like Elie, in Fife – or Merchiston sur Mer, to give it its other name – will often take you well into four figures for a week in high summer.
Speciality shopping

So often these days, the parades of shops in cities, suburban high streets and out of town malls have an identikit look – the same old names serving up the same old products everywhere you go.
Even the coffee shop where you set down your bags mid-morning may give you a distinct sense of déjà vu: yet another outlet in an all too familiar chain. Fine, when you want to make a quick dash for school shoes or ten pairs of white briefs, but far from inspiring…
There are still places in Scotland, however, where originality thrives and shopping is a delight. These are the market towns or seaside resorts where you can still find an old-fashioned ironmonger or sweetie shop, where there's a chance to explore the studios of talented artists and craftspeople, and where you'll discover the sort of unique speciality shop – run by passionate and knowledgeable owners – that attracts eager customers from hundreds of miles away.
Quality of life is what brings artists and entrepreneurs to these thriving communities – lovely scenery, impressive architecture, fascinating history – and it's what makes them terrific places to visit. Not only is the shopping interesting (and the parking a doddle), but when you walk into a coffee shop or hotel, you're likely to find somewhere with real character and a menu you won't have seen a hundred times before. And when the boot's full of shopping and you have had an excellent tea, there will probably be a picturesque stroll along riverbank or shore to enjoy, or perhaps a cultural treat. There are active traders' associations in many towns who put out information to help you find your way around.
As a way of adding sparkle to an autumn weekend, and with Christmas around the corner, there's nothing to beat a good browse among lovely things to buy. Here is our guide to some of the best shopping hot spots in Scotland.
99.....PEEBLES
Easily reached from Edinburgh, it is big enough to have several of everything – jewellers, children's shops or shoe shops – offering lots of choice.
103.....KELSO
Handsome town with a racecourse nearby, so there is a traditional sporting edge to the shopping in its elegant market square.
105.....MELROSE
With an ancient abbey on its doorstep, Melrose is effortlessly beautiful and is especially strong on antiques and homewares.
107.....PERTH
A city with a heart, so you can find all the high street chain stores, as well as high quality speciality shops in its quainter streets.
110.....NORTH BERWICK
Trains from Edinburgh mean the resort has year round character, excellent attractions and serious shops as well as seaside frippery.
113.....AYR
Historic port and seaside resort with a sense of its grand past. Some shops have been in existence for a century or more.
115.....TROON
A home of golf, so this is the kind of place where wives enjoy the shops while their husbands are out on the links.
The father of time
In the late 1700s Scotland was basking in the rays of Enlightenment thought. In Edinburgh, which had previously been a dark, squalid and disease-ridden outpost on the edge of Europe, luminaries as diverse as Adam Smith, the founder of economics, Joseph Black, the scientist who discovered carbon dioxide, and David Hume, the great philosopher and historian, emerged.
Yet, despite this Pantheon of formidable thinkers, according to TC Smout: ‘In that great age of intellect none made a more original contribution…to our understanding of the planet' than a Berwickshire farmer by the name of James Hutton.
Considering the scientific and philosophical heavyweights who graced Edinburgh in this era this is praise indeed, and is made all the more emphatic as it comes from Scotland's Histographer Royal. Yet, despite Smout's assertions, few people have heard of Hutton today and it is only recently that his reputation has begun being restored.
When Hutton was born in Edinburgh in 1726, it was into a world that people believed had only been in existence for several millennia – an assumption based on the clergy's literal interpretation of the scriptures. In 1658, Archbishop James Ussher had calculated that ‘the beginning of time fell upon the entrance of the night preceding the 23rd day of October in the year 4004' and this remarkable figure was included in the English Bible.
Such a theory envisaged Earth and Man as being created at the same time, and this was taken as fact by society at large. Indeed, even the likes of William Shakespeare adhered to this belief – Rosalind in As You Like It exclaims that ‘the poor world is almost 6000 years old.'
Once this figure had been incorporated in established religion, to question it would have amounted to heresy. So, it seems unlikely that Hutton, born into a Christian family, would have doubted this received wisdom in his youth. However, on the death of his father, he abandoned medicine, which he had studied in Edinburgh, Paris and Leyden, and started to oversee work on the family's Berwickshire farm.
It was to prove a fateful decision, for the young Hutton began to devote his mental powers to questions concerning the soil, the rocks and the landscape – a fascination that was to eventually lead him to one of the 18th century's most important discoveries.
Saving the trees

Eight thousand tree species are threatened with extinction: Amazon hit by 40% rise in tree felling: 80% of the mahogany produced in Brazil is logged illegally: Forest area the size of Belgium destroyed last year.
Sensational newspaper headlines like these, and television pictures of ravaged tropical forests, all serve to worry us; if the present rate of clearance continues, there will be hardly any tropical forests left for our grandchildren to see. More important is the fact that forest destruction contributes to global warming.
But what can we do about it? There wasn't much we could do in the past – but there is now.
During 1990, growing public concern about forest degradation motivated a group of timber users and representatives of environmental and human rights organisations to meet in California to discuss how they could improve forest conservation. The consensus was that there was a need for a way to identify forests which were well managed and consequently acceptable sources of forest products. Three years later the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) was born, and by 1994 a set of Principles and Criteria had been approved by the Founding Members.
The buzz word is ‘sustainability', which, for generations of foresters until the 1980s meant managing forests to ensure that they provided a regular yield of wood in perpetuity. The FSC's concept of sustainability is much wider. It includes factors such as the health and safety of forest workers, the rights of indigenous people, the efficient use of non-timber forest products, conservation of biological diversity, protection of water resources and soils and enhancement of landscape.
The FSC's International Principles and Criteria are not always appropriate for every country but they can be adapted for regional conditions. In the United Kingdom, after a long process of negotiation involving representatives from social, environmental and economic sectors, the United Kingdom Woodland Assurance Scheme (UKWAS) was drawn up. This is accredited by the FSC and is the standard used to define best UK forestry practice. 
Going great guns
Despite its unassuming exterior, the green windowless building on 32 Hamilton Road, Bothwell, conceals a remarkable story within.
For, behind the plain façade, works one of Scotland's – and the world's – pre-eminent gunmakers, a man who, since 1957, has been the de facto guardian one of the country's great traditional skills.
The man in question, David McKay Brown, was sitting at his desk clad in an oily apron, watched over by the impressive presence of a mounted Cape buffalo bull. On the far wall was a cabinet containing a number of guns and rifles, and even from a distance it was clear that these were no ordinary firearms.
After a friendly introduction to his wife, Alexe – as administrative guru, an essential part of the business – and the buffalo, a thousand-pound monster McKay Brown shot in Zimbabwe, he began to tell me something about the gunmaker's art. But, before we started, he advised me of the need to speak up, as years of firing guns and rifles in pursuit of sporting quarry had left their mark on McKay Brown's hearing.
Scotland, he explained, has played an important role in the development of firearms, from the Reverend Alex Forsyth, the inventor of the percussion principle, to Alexander Henry, the man behind the famous breech-loading rifle, the Martini-Henry, which was used to such great effect by Britain's imperial troops.
As far as shotguns are concerned, he continued, our geographical detachment from London and Birmingham made us ‘an innovative island in gunmaking'. This isolation led to a new style of gun, the round action, which was first produced in 1887.
Stand fast, Craigellachie!
Who in Scotland today has heard of Donald Alexander Smith, ‘One of the outstanding figures of the Empire', according to his 1914 obituary in the Times? Above Loch Leven, on the slopes of the Pap of Glencoe, is a former mansion, now the local cottage hospital.
This house was built by Smith, who had made himself a multi-millionaire through his involvement with the construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway. Smith returned to his native Scotland, buying the estate of Glencoe and assuming the title Lord Strathcona.
Donald Smith was born in Forres, Morayshire, in 1820. He was an able pupil at the local school, the Anderson Institute. In 1838 Donald sailed from Aberdeen to London and thence to Canada, where he had a letter of introduction to Edward Ellice, head of the powerful Hudson's Bay Company. Donald's uncle John Stuart had been a trader in Canada, and had arranged his passage. Smith never forgot Forres, and in 1892 provided £9,000 for the building of Leanchoil Hospital in the town. He was given the freedom of the burgh in 1900.
Smith was appointed to Labrador, the bleakest of all the bleak Hudson's Bay Company outposts, with temperatures of minus 50 in winter and swarms of mosquitoes and black flies in summer. His work involved trading with native peoples and trappers for pelts and furs. Smith recorded that he was' apprenticed to counting rats' tails'. At each posting he collected savings from fellow workers, gave them three per cent guaranteed return, and invested their savings at a much higher rate. 

