Big Brother 7's self-styled ‘manhunter' and ‘sexual terrorist'
Famous for: The size of my biceps.
Originally from: Edmonton, Canada.
Jobs: Waiter, hosted Mr Gay UK, radio presenter.
Never seen without: My sidekick ‘Dolly' (fellow Big Brother housemate Lea).
Richard's sex god: The man from the Phones 4U ad and Jake Gyllenhaal.
It's the voice and eyes. Tall, dark and handsome always get my attention.
Most unusual place you've had sex: On a reclining seat in a Fiat during
a French thunderstorm. The gear stick kept getting in the way!
Why did you come to live in Britain?: My radio job
back home ended. I had access to a UK passport and
thought it was time to get out and see the world.
Ten years later I'm still here!'
What did Big Brother teach you?: I was impressed with
how I coped. The boredom and paranoia about who was
genuine or false destroyed a lot of my fellow housemates.
It's what happens once you leave through those doors that
you're not prepared for … the recognition, people pulling you
from every angle. I'm now more aware of people's motives.
G
The brain of Big Brother 8 (with 3 university degrees!)
Famous for: The size of my intellect.
Originally from: The island of Ithaca, Greece.
Jobs: Art gallery researcher.
Never seen without: Freddy, my toy monkey.
Gerry's sex god: Brad Pitt in Seven Years in Tibet. With the
floppy blond hair!
Most unusual place you've had sex: A roll in the hay
in a Scottish stable … with horses looking on.
Why did you come to live in Britain?: To study
History of Art back in 1994.
Most important thing Big Brother taught you:
The show's psychiatrist explained I was seeking
acceptance from my family and instead went
for mass acceptance from the public. After two
and a half months in that house I felt drained
and depressed. When I left, the positive reaction
towards me was humbling and has made me a
better person.
1 2
I'll be buggered! Anal sex, bum fun, butt fucking, whatever you call it, when gay men get HIV, fucking
without a condom is how the vast majority of them get it. HIV isn't passed on every time there's an
unprotected fuck. But it could be passed on any time one happens. But why is the arse at the ‘bottom'
of all these HIV infections?
*The inside of the arse has a lining or covering of anal mucus, a kind of slime that lubricates inside
the arse and helps protect from infections. But if someone has HIV the virus can be in this mucus.
More info on mucus coming up …
When a guy has HIV, the virus is in his
body fluids (we're talking blood, cum,
pre-cum and anal mucus*). And the inside
lining of the arse is delicate and full of blood
vessels. So it can easily be damaged and bleed,
letting HIV into or out of the bloodstream.
And inside the arse is a place sexually transmitted
infections can live. This makes it easier for HIV to
be passed on (see page 12 for how).
The lining is also absorbent like a sponge. So
cum or blood (both with HIV in them) can get
into the bum, then soak through the inside
lining of the arse and into the bloodstream.
Gerry: Put down those buns and talk to me, Richard! Now what
I want to know is …how did you cope with the sexual tension
in the Big Brother house and going without sex for 3 months?
Richard: Well, there was no-one in there I really fancied.
I'd billed myself as a ‘sexual terrorist' but there was no man
to terrorise! I just shut down all my sexual needs. My libido
just vaporised.
Gerry: Didn't you even manage a secret wank?
Richard: You'll have to ask the camera man who parked his
camera behind my bed every morning!
Gerry: That's so funny … At the after-show party our
cameramen told me all the boys in my house were wanking
non-stop! One of the toilets had a blind spot.
Richard: Tell me, if a friend wanted to go on Big Brother
what would you say?
Gerry: I'd say ‘Are you serious???!' No, actually I'd ask if
they were sure they were strong enough to cope. The show
magnifies your negative side. And I'd tell them not to complain
about how they edit you. That's just how TV works.
Richard: We've had gay, bi, lesbian and transgender Big Brother
housemates. Do you think someone with HIV will ever be in it?
Gerry: Well, the show's a microcosm of society, so it'd be an
important way to make the issue visible.
Richard: There are lots of people living with HIV very dear
to me in my life. But they'd need to be very secure about
being HIV positive. You just can't keep something like that
a secret on the show. But, you know, I wonder what the reaction
from other housemates would be if Big Brother put an HIV
positive person in the house…
Gerry: Speaking of reactions, what were people on the gay
scene like when you came out of the house?
Richard: I had a lot of nights of stress over that. But the
gay community's been wonderful. And I'm incredibly thankful
and honoured by all the support I've had from gay people in
the media.
Gerry: People were absolutely 100% positive with me. They
still are. My first public appearance after the show was Soho
Pride. I was mobbed!
Richard: And a little bird tells me you've got yourself a
book deal?
Gerry: Yes! It was one of my dreams to be a published writer.
And my dating book is out in the New Year … Treat them
mean, to keep them keen'.
Richard: Me and Lea will have you on our Gaydar Radio show
to plug it: the Dicky and Dolly Show, every Sunday 9am til 1pm
on Sky Digital 0158 or online at www.gaydarradio.com.
Lots of amazing guests and hilarious moments!! Did I tell you,
we're scripting our own TV show too, ready to horrify the
nation. You know, I'm not sure but I might actually be married
to Lea. During a drinking session I remember her dragging me
in front of a priest and saying ‘I do!'
Gerry: Oh God. This gay marriage idea has gone too far!
Anyway, I'm off – I've got a book to write. And don't eat all
those doughnuts. Not with your hips!
Richard: Bitch!
Gerry and Richard chew
over men, sex and fame.
3 4
Neil, can you tell our readers about your research?
It's called INSIGHT and it was carried out by the Medical
Research Council. We interviewed 75 men who had recently
tested HIV positive and 157 men who'd recently tested HIV
negative at sexual health clinics in London, Brighton and
Manchester. They'd all tested HIV negative in the previous
two years. We wanted to know what they'd done in between
these tests that lead to some getting HIV when others didn't.
Any surprising findings?
Well, it was no surprise that men who tested positive were
more likely than the negative men to have been fucked
without a condom. A big surprise was poppers. Men who
tested positive were much more likely to have used them
than the guys that stayed HIV negative. When we took into
account men's risky sexual behaviour, of the drugs men took
only poppers showed an additional risk.
Are we talking about a small increase in risk?
No, it's a big one. 80% of men who tested HIV positive used
poppers compared to 58% who stayed negative. When we
looked at men who'd been fucked without a condom by
someone they didn't know was HIV negative, 61% of the
men who tested positive had sniffed poppers – compared to
32% of men who'd stayed negative.
Should we be surprised at what you found?
Well, there have been quite a few studies over the years
suggesting that poppers are a risk factor for HIV. When you
think about it, poppers are the only drug that causes a major
change to the inside of our arses. They increase the blood
supply to the area, expanding blood vessels, which might make
them more likely to bleed. An unsafe fuck is already risky
but it's easy to see how poppers could make it even more
risky. Also, some researchers think poppers might effect the
immune system for a few days. But this hasn't been proved.
Any other thoughts on poppers?
There might be other ways poppers increase the risk. Maybe
they make rougher fucking easier. Maybe poppers are more
likely to be used by men who like a rougher kind of sex. But
what we do know is that unprotected sex where poppers are
sniffed makes a man more at risk of getting HIV.
Finally, anything else you'd like to tell us about?
It was clear from INSIGHT that the men who consistently
used condoms, even those that used poppers, didn't get HIV.
They really are our best defence. We'd also like to take this
opportunity to thank all the men that took part in the study.
For more on the INSIGHT study, including more about HIV and
poppers, check out www.chapsonline.org.uk/biology or call
THT Direct on 0845 12 21 200.
Right under our noses?
New research suggests sniffing poppers during sex makes it much
more likely HIV is passed on. Exposed! spoke to Neil Macdonald
from Imperial College, London about what his work has uncovered.
When it comes to HIV, bleeding in the arse is a bit of a
nightmare. It makes it easier for the virus to be passed on.
When an HIV negative man's arse bleeds …
• very small cuts and bleeding in his bum from being
fucked leave him open to getting infected if blood,
cum or pre-cum get through this broken skin
When an HIV positive man's arse bleeds …
• blood in his arse can get on and into the dick of
a man who's fucking it.
You might see cuts and blood. But often this damage is
too small to see with the naked eye. Or it's inside the arse,
out of sight.
All these make it more likely to cause small rips and bleeding
inside the arse:
• a rough fuck – especially without lube
• sniffing poppers when getting fucked
• taking things up the arse (cocks, fingers, sex toys
like dildos)
• being fisted (especially before being fucked)
• damaged skin in or around the arse from sexually
transmitted infections or taking drugs up the bum
And dildos, finger, fists, etc. can spread HIV if they go from
one man's arse to another. Covering with a fresh condom
(or latex glove) with each new arse takes away this risk.
5 6
On him, not in him
A man getting fucked by a guy with HIV is a real risk. If the positive man
‘comes' inside his arse that risk is even higher – because it lets HIVinfected
cum soak through his arse lining and into his bloodstream.
A man pulling out before shooting his load cuts the risk. But
there's still some risk because…
• despite their best intentions, it can be hard for men
to control when they ‘come'
• HIV can be in pre-cum. So the virus could be passed
on if this fluid gets inside the other man's arse.
Top. Bottom. What's the risk?
Fucking without a condom is by far the most common way HIV's passed
on when men have sex with each other. But is it a myth that being
‘active' or ‘passive' makes a difference?
It's no myth. The risk of HIV being passed on is higher depending on
whether you have HIV or not and which role you take. Because the
biggest risk comes from HIV-infected cum or blood getting into the
arse, this means…

