Battling with bulimia
Recently hitting the headlines is the news that the former deputy prime minister John Prescott had bulimia. Only now has he felt the courage to speak out about his battle with the illness that began two decades ago.
An eating disorder like bulimia can affect anyone of any age and sex
Since speaking out about his struggle with bulimia, John Prescott has been praised by eating disorder charities for his bravery. They've commented how admitting they have bulimia is a difficult thing for men to face, especially as it's a common misconception that only women experience eating disorders. 
What is bulimia?
Bulimia is an eating disorder, which is characterised by bingeing and purging. 
Bingeing is when you eat large amounts of food in a small space of time, often in secret. 
There is no definitive reason for what causes an eating disorder like bulimia
Afterwards, you may feel guilty about the bingeing and this can inspire you to purge. This is usually achieved by deliberately making yourself sick.
What causes bulimia?
There is no definitive reason for what causes an eating disorder like bulimia. It's thought that a variety of reasons may trigger bulimia in a person. For example:
* Having low self-esteem. You may have a particularly low opinion of yourself. Losing weight or constantly trying to control your weight can often be seen as a way of gaining self-worth. 
* Being depressed. You may use bingeing as a way of coping with your depression or stress. However, purging doesn't relieve the depression, and the cycle continues. 
* Emotional stress. Bulimia can sometimes occur following stressful situations or life events. For example, it is possible for you to develop the condition after dealing with a traumatic experience, such as a death or divorce.
* Having experienced physical illness or sexual abuse. Bulimia can occur in people who have experienced physical illness or sexual abuse. Some people with bulimia have experienced difficult childhoods, with family problems, arguments, and criticism. 
* If you have a mental health problem. Research has shown that bulimia is more common in people with some other psychological problem, such as an anxiety disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) or post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
* Have an unhealthy body image. Bulimia can be caused by cultural and social pressures. Some people believe that the media and fashion creates pressure for people to aspire to low body weights. 
Male bulimia
According to research, around 80% of eating disorder cases are girls and young women, aged between 12 and 20. 
With this high statistic, it can be easy to forget that boys and men are affected too. In fact, eating disorders can affect anyone of any age and any sex. 
One in ten people with bulimia are male. A number of psychologists and eating disorder experts have recently said that they are seeing more men who have the illness. 
Lots of people find themselves bingeing and purging as a way of maintaining control in their lives, when they may feel like they have none. 
In the case of John Prescott, the high levels of work stress led him to binge as a way of comforting himself. Afterwards, as he worried about his personal appearance (being a man in the public eye) he purged as a way of controlling his body weight. This cycle can become addictive. 
Don't suffer in silence
Anyone who has bulimia can find it hard to admit that they have a problem with food. However, for men it can be especially difficult. 
Bingeing and purging can be a way for people to gain control in their lives, if they feel like they don't have any
Many men are afraid to admit that they can't control their eating habits as they see it as a sign of weakness. This can stop them from seeking the help they need. 
John Prescott says that he took control of the disorder over a year ago after seeking help. There are many charities and agencies in the UK who are there to support and help anyone who is experiencing bulimia. 
For more information on bulimia and other eating disorders, see our health encyclopaedia articles below. Also, why not contact the eating disorders charity Beat for further advice and support for any eating disorder.
The great outdoors
With the sun in the sky and long summer evenings on the way, it's the perfect opportunity to enjoy some time outside. 
Barbecues, picnics and outdoor games are a great way to make the most of the sunshine
Summer activities like barbecues, picnics and outdoor games are a great way to get family and friends together, while making the most of the sunshine. As we all know, it's usually best to take advantage of good weather when we get it, as you never know when it'll be back!
So, whether it's in your own back garden or somewhere further afield, why not get out and about for some fun in the sun? Read on for our tips on safe and healthy outdoor pastimes.
Barbecue basics
It's often the first thing to come out of the garage once the weather warms up, and a good barbecue is always popular choice for a sunny day. 
Portable and disposable barbecues also mean you don't have to stay at home, so try making a day of it in a park or on the beach. Just make sure that wherever you set up is a permitted barbecue area, and that you're a safe distance from trees or bushes that could catch fire. 
As for the food, it can be hard to tell when it's properly cooked on a barbecue, and every year many people get food poisoning as a result. 
The key to barbecuing food safely is in the temperature of the coals. Light the barbecue well in advance and wait until the coals are glowing red with a powdery surface. Putting food on to cook before the flames have died down simply burns the surface and doesn't cook the inside. 
If you're barbecuing meat such as poultry, sausages or burgers, check that the juices run clear before you serve it. 
There should be no pink or red meat left inside, unless you're cooking meat that can be eaten rare (still red in the middle), such as steak. Make sure your steaks have been sealed during the cooking process by cutting into them and checking that the outside has changed colour. 
When barbecuing meat, check that the juices run clear 
If you have lots of people to cook for, try cooking meat in the oven before finishing it off on the barbecue. Any frozen meat must be fully defrosted before you cook it, and check that everything's piping hot and cooked through before you serve it. 
Always keep raw and cooked foods separate and use different plates and utensils for each. Salads, cheeses, dips and other perishable food can be kept in the fridge or a cool box until you need them.
Finally, if you're lucky enough to have any leftovers, let it cool down before refrigerating it and use it within a couple of days. When reheating food, check it's piping hot in the middle and don't reheat it more than once.
Don't keep any leftovers for more than two days, except cooked rice, which must be eaten within one day. 
Perfect picnics
Picnics are a great way of getting out and seeing the countryside, and they can be just as good in your own garden. A big cool box is ideal for transporting plenty of fresh fruit and salad, so a picnic can be a healthy option too.
Before you set off, wash and cut up any fruit, salad and vegetables. It's much easier than waiting until you're out, and means that you won't have to wait to dig in! 
Plastic cutlery and utensils are also handy, they're much lighter and disposable ones can save on the washing up.
Pack your food into your cool box with ice packs on top, as this will keep anything raw at a tasty and hygienic temperature. 
Foods like lettuce and pasta salads, cold lean meats, sandwiches with wholemeal bread and seasonal fruit salad are all good choices. Leave perishable food such as cheese and meat in the box until the last minute. 
Insects and birds can be just as interested in your picnic as you are, so keep food covered as much as possible. You could try keeping bugs away with citronella candles, but take care as they can be a fire risk. 
If you can't find a bin to dispose of your rubbish, take it home with you, and take care to leave your picnic area exactly as you found it. 
Sun safety 
Spending time outside in the sun is great, but don't let sunburn ruin it for you. 
It's possible to burn even when it's cloudy, so apply sunscreen with a SPF (sun protection factor) of at least 15 before going out, and reapply regularly during the day.
The most effective lotions block both UVA and UVB rays. 
You can burn even when the sky is cloudy, so apply sunscreen before going out 
Babies under 12 months should be kept in the shade and covered up with a high factor sun lotion or sun block. Encourage young children to play in the shade, and make sure they wear sunhats and a high SPF lotion.
The sun is strongest between 11am and 3pm, so try to avoid it during this time. 
Garden games 
As well as eating al fresco, summer is the perfect time to get active with some outdoor games.
We all know that exercise is good for us, and we should be getting 30 minutes of moderate activity every day. Try getting the whole family involved in a game or two and they won't even realise they're exercising!
If you have enough people, teams games like rounders, football and cricket will get everyone moving. Simply throwing a ball or a frisbee can also work up a sweat.
Alternatively, if you fancy something a little less energetic, boules can be a fun form of gentle exercise. Anyone can play, and you'll be surprised how fast the competition hots up! 
Don't forget your medicines
If you run out of medicines over the bank holiday weekend it's not always easy to get more, as many GP surgeries and pharmacies (chemists) may be shutting their doors for a few days. 
So remember to think ahead and make sure that you have a good supply of your medicines.
If you run out
Should you run out of medicines you may be able to get a prescription from a GP out-of-hours service. But this does depend on what the medicine is and how essential is it. 
If you're given a prescription, you will still need to find a pharmacy in your area that is open. It's a good idea to phone your local pharmacy now to find out what their opening hours will be over the holidays. 
Details of your local pharmacy's opening hours can be found using the local services search
Details of opening hours can also be found by using our local services search, and sometimes in your local newspapers.
You may also be able to get an emergency supply without a prescription from a community pharmacist. You will be interviewed by the pharmacist to find out:
* if you are usually prescribed the medication, 
* if there is a clear immediate medical need, and 
* whether there is no other way to get a prescription. 
The pharmacist will also make sure that the dose you ask for is considered suitable. A charge will be made for the medicines and the service. The amount charged is at the discretion of the pharmacist because this service is currently not part of the NHS contract for pharmacists. 
The pharmacist is required to make a full record of the medicines supplied along with your name and address and the reason why you cannot get a prescription.

