Quarantine that Virus 
14th Oct 2005 
Dr Richard Lawson discusses the impending avian flu pandemic 
October 2005 - offices and public spaces are beginning to echo with the sound of coughing. GP surgeries are beginning to silt up with people who seek advice, antibiotics and certificates for sore throats, coughs, and flu like illnesses. This will continue through the winter, culminating in the annual announcements of NHS overload due to the annual tour of the Influenza A virus as it proceeds majestically around the globe. At the same time, public health physicians world-wide are planning how to manage the global epidemic that would result if the H5N1 avian flu virus manages to mutate into a form that can pass from human to human. Their minds are concentrated wonderfully by the knowledge that a particular variety of Influenza A killed 6 million people in 1918, and locked thousands more into a pathetic lifetime existence of Parkinsonian immobility. The risk of a global pandemic of this sort is always with us but avian H5N1 flu has upped the ante, because it carries a 50% mortality rate. Just to be clear, this means that as things stand, you have a 50% chance of dying if you catch it. At the moment you have to work closely with infected birds to catch it, but if it mutates to get the ability to pass from human to human we will be in for a rough ride. This is not a cause for panic or scaremongering, but it should be a cause of careful consideration of how we respond to infectious diseases. 
The SARS outbreak of 2002-3 gave us a foretaste of how we should respond. The success of the World Health Organisation. in dealing with SARS was due to not to high tech vaccines, but classic low tech quarantine and isolation measures. Doctors learned to isolate cases, to trace contacts and quarantine them. Many died, including many doctors, nurses and healthcare workers, but in the end it was successful. We should learn from that experience, and in particular should develop ways of limiting the spread of the virus through air travel. We should also develop strategies for responding to an epidemic should it break through our airports and other communication routes and become established in our country. This means that we must learn new measures for dealing with common conditions like influenza, so that when a serious outbreak occurs, isolation techniques will be familiar to the general population.
Isolation 
People get infected by mixing with people who are already infected. Therefore, when we have an infectious viral illness we should put ourselves out of circulation. So far as is practicable, we should stay at home and rest. In particular, we should not try not to go to the shops, try not to go on public transport, and we should definitely not go to work.
There are sound theoretical reasons for resting a viral illness. I explain to my patients with flu-like illnesses that they feel tired and fatigued because their energy is being diverted to their defence system. They should therefore try not to divert blood away from their immune system and back into their legs and brain by going to work. They should give their immune system a chance to do its job properly. This argument is effective, because the people who are most likely to carry on regardless tend to be conscientious perfectionists who set themselves high standards, and want to keep on going to work. 
It is true that much viral shedding occurs before the victims know they are infected. Quarantine cannot eliminate epidemics, because sometimes the infection is passed on by people who feel perfectly well. This is not a reason to abandon isolation, since shedding certainly continues after symptoms appear, and isolation can therefore reduce the severity of the epidemic. 
We have a triple line of defence against a global pandemic of the type which currently threatens us in the form of a H5N1 mutant: quarantine, vaccination and chemotherapy. All lines of defence must be used. The danger is that politicians will opt for vaccination and chemotherapy to the exclusion of isolation, because isolation involves much social inconvenience, and will be politically unpopular, unless it is correctly understood. 
The Government's policy is set out in a 134 - page UK Flu Pandemic Contingency Plan (March 2005). In it we find a single paragraph devoted to preventing transmission among the community: "However, simple advice such as hand washing, encouraging people suffering from the disease to stay at home and reducing unnecessary, especially long distance, travel may achieve some slowing of the spread of a pandemic." This coyness stems from the fact that isolation of cases goes against an ingrained management assumption that people should come to work when they are suffering viral illness, and that those who stay home are malingerers until proved otherwise.
Medical logic demands that the NHS and Health Protection Agency should lead a concerted "Stay Home if Ill" campaign to educate the population to recognise a flu-like upper respiratory tract infection, learn how to manage it at home without physically contacting a doctor, learn to stay home from work when ill, and learn to recognise symptoms that indicate complications that need treatment, and learn where to and how to get that treatment. They must start this campaign now, so that people are ready with the new strategy if a serious pandemic breaks out.
Not a Shirker's Charter 
The key battle will be over changing the work ethos so that the default position is that an ill person should stay home, rather than struggle in to work. 
All significant reforms will meet with resistance, and the key objection that the "Stay Home if Ill" initiative is likely to meet is that employers will argue that it will provide an inherently lazy workforce with a Shirker's Charter. There are several answers to this assumption. We can look at the experience of other countries. In America, for instance some firms allow four days off a year, to be taken at a moment's notice. They are called "duvet days". Secondly, patients are often reluctant to stay off work because of the financial loss incurred, as well as the threat to job security. These factors will still counter any abuse of the system. Third, employers need to be educated about the workforce implications of dragging infected employees into work. Given the fact that most offices live on recycled, conditioned air, the products of one cough can be on every desk in the office within the hour. Employers should be helped to understand that an infected employee will spread infection to colleagues, an infected employee cannot work efficiently, that an infected employee who works will be ill for longer than one who rests, and therefore that a "stay home if ill" policy will result in less days lost to illness, not more.
A sensible programme of health education could therefore overcome the objections from within commerce and industry, and indeed , bring them on side. The workers themselves will be happy to co-operate with the new scheme. Less incidence of viral illness, combined with less unnecessary consultations for viral infections will overcome the "winter pressures" that routinely overwhelm the NHS. This reform is one which could enjoy a rapid success. The country will gain improved productivity, and the NHS could gain a decreased workload, freeing up opportunities to improve the quality of medical care that we deliver. These are all immediate gains from this method: but the overriding gain is that it could vastly reduce the potential impact of the global epidemic that could result if the current avian flu virus does gain the ability to pass from human to human. And that could potentially save many thousands of lives in the UK alone.

Peter Reeve addresses racism
3rd Aug 2005 
Education Spokesperson Peter Reeve responds to Times story ("A black day for Britain's self-image," August 3, 2005) 
An article in The Times today points to racism as being endemic in this country, citing prejudice to asylum-seekers, mostly where they have been housed in deprived urban areas, and to the murderous attack on a teenager by young white men emerging from a pub after closing time in Huyton. Public disgust for the crime and warmth towards the family of Anthony Walker by the people of Liverpool has amazed observers and one relative of the victim in that she said: "We didn't know you cared."
Linklater goes on to call for a searching inquiry into the causes of social racism, whether fuelled by yob culture or extreme prejudice and a call for racism to be eradicated in schools, with the whole subject of race relations becoming a component part of the national curriculum. Without the faintest doubt about Magnus Linklater's good faith. I believe that in some way he is not logical or necessarily correct. Not in his reference to lack of self-control caused by alcohol, but in the attitudes that underlie extreme behaviour.
For one thing, Albanian asylum-seekers that suffer insults and abuse on an almost daily basis are Europeans, so that the issue of race does not apply. It is a matter of outsiders being given what is perceived as preferential treatment. Understandably, perhaps, the article does not mention that Anthony Walker was escorting a white teenage girl, which, one presumes, caught the attention of the young men. In other words, it is not merely racism, but also the perception that housing, jobs or females arebeing taken away by outsiders and that is conceived as unfair.
As Greens, we are appalled that a teenager is attacked with an axe, as we are that somebody can be knifed on a London bus or passengers on the London Underground blown up by a bomb, whatever the underlying tensions, be they racial, politically inspired or not. What seems necessary is that children at school experience is what it means to be a human being and the respect that is owed to this concept. For in each and every case in mind, the necessary pre-requirement of respect for the other has been put aside. One realises that 'racial' is really the wrong framework to view matters objectively. In schools, it isn't really the point to teach about an abhorrence for racism, so much as the daily experience of life alongside other people, shared activities and companionship. All the evidence of mixed groups points to this same conclusion. Even adults get on better when they work together. It isn't that as individuals we are all the same. We are not. The point is that we respect and value other people. Even the noteworthy and commendable BBC 2 series on 'My life as a child' last evening grouped together immigrant families and a traveller family.
The fact is that one can easily pick up these things wrong. Linklater is mostly right in his analysis, but wrong in that he thinks that teaching children about racism will really solve matters. Children will bully another child of their own race. It has a tendency to happen at any time. The solution is only partly to talk about it with fairness yet also to have the children sharing experiences together and doing things that allows for tolerance of weaknesses and differences of physique, size, weight, ability, race, colour and creed. This goes beyond the national curriculum. And the necessity is that this should be managed in a way that is entirely unthreatening. We want schools to be truly inclusive. This will foster and maintain an open society in the country of respect and goodwill.
	
