FOCUS ON EQUALITY
Bob Collins,
Chief Commissioner, Equality Commission
In September Citizens Advice attended an Investors in People
(IIP) recognition event to formally receive the IIP accreditation
which recognises the quality of services and the high levels of
staff commitment to the organisation.
Investors in People (IIP) has four main principles, (Commitment,
Planning, Action and Evaluation), there are eight indicators
leading from this which the consultant evidenced in a day spent
interviewing staff. The consultant randomly picked staff from all
sections of Regional Office and also interviewed staff employed
but not based at Regional Office.
Earlier this year we received notification that Citizens Advice had
been successful in achieving the formal recognition of an
Investor in People. The report stated: "Citizens Advice is a
progressive and innovative organisation that values and
develops its staff as its key resource in meeting its objectives.
The organisation clearly meets the requirements of the Investors
in People Standard. It is recommended, therefore, that Citizens
Advice is recognised as an Investor in People."
Citizens Advice were delighted with IIP recognition which would
not have been possible without the hard work of all the staff
employed in Regional Office. The award was presented to Una
Buchanan in Hillsborough Castle by the Minister Angela Smith.
A client from Omagh contacted Dungannon CAB to get
help with a problem of overpaid benefits into her husband's
Post Office account. In June 2004 the client noticed that
payments of benefits of approximately £150 per week were
being made into the account in addition to her husband's
normal entitlement to benefit. She contacted a number of
Social Security Agency offices in Northern Ireland to enquire
about this additional payment, but nobody could tell her
where this money was coming from. Despite further phone
calls the problem persisted and, as advised by a member of
staff from Pensions Branch, the client asked that her
contact with the above offices be recorded on computer.
Following enquiries the adviser in Dungannon CAB
ascertained that the money was being paid by the
Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) in Great Britain.
The person who should have been receiving these benefits
gave the incorrect bank details to the DWP which
happened to be the same account number but for one
digit.
The client then received notification from DWP that
approximately £8,500 had been overpaid into her husband's
account in error and that this money would be recoverable.
The adviser wrote to the DWP to challenge the decision to
recover and asked that the overpayment be written off. The
adviser questioned the DWP on the legal basis which allows
them to recover this money. The adviser also stated that all
efforts were made by the client to resolve this matter but to
no avail. A copy of the record of the client's telephone calls, a
letter from her local Social Security Office, Pensions Branch
and Pension Service confirming that she had sought advice
on these additional payments of benefit were also sent.
The adviser received a letter from the DWP stating that they
had reconsidered their decision and would be no longer
recovering the overpayment. The client then received
notification from DWP that approximately £8,500 had been
overpaid into her husband's account, in error, and that this
money would be recoverable.
Making a Difference
Minister Angela Smith presenting Una Buchanan, Citizens Advice with the
Investors in People award at Hillsborough Castle
Investors in People
Page 9
Citizens Advice won the Northern Ireland
category for ‘Best On-line Customer
Services' at the National E-commerce
awards sponsored by the Department of
Trade and Industry and Interforum held in
the Grosvenor Hotel in London. Citizens
Advice was one of only five local companies
to be selected to compete for the National
award and is another endorsement of the
quality of the technology strategy
implemented by the organisation.
The Advicedirect website provides access to
customers of Citizens Advice Services to a
range of services including training,
consultancy and publications as well as
access to Advicefinder the organisation's
electronic information system and CARMA
the organisation' electronic case
management system. The site provides a
secure environment for customers to
procure Citizens Advice services, registration
is easy and purchase can be made on-line.
The Northern Ireland Assembly Library and
the Department of Enterprise Trade and
Investment are both customers of the new
service and it is
hoped that all
existing Associate
members will
transfer to the new
system in the next
financial year.
John Napier,
Director of
Information
Services, received
the award on
behalf of Citizens
Advice saying
"Advice Direct
was a key
element in
helping Citizens
Advice to sustain
its charitable activities and is a necessary
tool in meeting customer needs. I am
particularly pleased that Citizens Advice
Services won the award for Best
Customer Services as it is a fitting tribute
to the ethos of the organisation which is
dedicated to providing high quality
services to the public".
Citizens Advice has registered the patent to
Advicedirect so that it can distribute a wide
range of services to the public and other
organisations under this brand.
The need for improved cross-border
information and advice services on the
island of Ireland was highlighted at a
conference organised by the Citizens
Advice, the Comhairle Borderwise Project
and the Centre for Cross Border Studies
Borderireland.info Project. The conference
looked at the current cross-border
information, advice and advocacy needs
and services on the island and how the
needs might be met in the future.
A special feature of the conference was a
presentation by a representative from a
cross-border information service on
mainland Europe, Jörg Saalbach of
Infobest, a cross-border information project
serving people in an area of the border
region between France and Germany. Other
presentations at the conference were made
by representatives of the Secretariat of the
North/South Ministerial Council and by
speakers from a range of cross-border
information related initiatives on the island
including Expertise Ireland, Crosslinks,
EURES
Cross-Border
Partnership,
Borderwise
and Border
Ireland.
Liam Murtagh,
Project
Manager of
the
Borderwise
Project said
that Citizens
Advice and
Comhairle had
successfully
developed a
cross border
information
and advice service with Peace 2 funding
and had successfully deployed the first
advice workers on the island to be trained
in both jurisdictions.
For further information about the work of
the Borderwise Project and the conference
organisers visit www.borderwise.org,
www.borderireland.ie ,
www.citizensadvice.co.uk,
www.comhairle.ie or www.crossborder.ie.
Best in Northern Ireland
Crossing The Information Border
Lack of information still great obstacle to mobility
From left to right: Gerry Staple, Biznet, Robin Fergusson and Tim Fergusson,
Chemical Treatment Services, John Napier, Citizens Advice, Geoff Winter, Biznet
Tommy Gorman, RTE, Deirdre Farrell, First Secretary, Anglo-Irish Division, Department of
Foreign Affairs, Derek Alcorn, Citizens Advice, Leonie Lunny, Comhairle and Pat Donaghy,
Deputy Joint Secretary, OFMDFM, North South Ministerial Council
Page 10
The Department of Trade and Industry
have announced that there will be a
new approach to tackling non-payment
of the minimum wage. For the first time,
specific employment sectors will be put
under the spotlight for what will be
known as targeted enforcement
directed at a specific trade sector.
Targeted enforcement is a two part
approach that involves educating and
raising awareness of minimum wage
obligations within the specific trade
sector and an increased number of
‘spot' visits to specific types of
employers to ensure that they are
complying.
The National Minimum Wage Helpline
view the education of employers as one
of the key elements of their strategy,
and in conjunction with the local HMRC
team are designing a new leaflet aimed
directly at local businesses reminding
them of their obligations to their staff.
The first trade sector to come under
the spotlight is hairdressing; whilst
the vast majority of hairdressers are
happy to pay at least the minimum
wage there is still a percentage who
continue to pay too little and there is
also a certain amount of confusion
regarding those undertaking training.
Already this year, the NMW Helpline
has passed a number of complaints
about local hairdressing salons to the
HMRC compliance team for
investigation and recent results include
13 workers in one salon being awarded
£15,000 of arrears and several workers
in a second salon receiving arrears
worth £14,000.
The NMW Helpline will be assisting the
HMRC with targeted enforcement over
the coming months by distributing
specially designed literature regarding
the payment of minimum wage and the
hairdressing industry. For further
information regarding NMW legislation
and compliance call the NMW Helpline
on 0845 6500 207.
Targeted Enforcement of the
Minimum Wage!
Greg Hill, NMW Information Officer and Diane
Wilson, NMW Information Supervisor
The Office of Fair Trading has recently
announced that it is launching an
investigation into the Payment
Protection Insurance (PPI) market
following a supercomplaint from
Citizens Advice. A report published
by Citizens Advice in September
formed the basis of the
supercomplaint and described how
PPI fails many of those who need it
most adding to their debts instead of
protecting them against hard times.
Derek Alcorn, Chief Executive of
Citizens Advice in Northern Ireland
said “This is a clear signal that the
OFT believes there is a case to
answer. It is very good news
indeed and it marks the first step to
a better deal for UK consumers.
People buy PPI because they are
looking for peace of mind. Given
the scale of borrowing and the
amount of money consumers
spend on PPI, it is vitally important
that they get a product that gives
them peace of mind and meets
their needs at a fair price.”
PPI is sold to cover credit payments in
the event of illness or job loss but is
often very expensive, mis-sold to
people who cannot possibly claim on
it and designed to exclude many of
the most common situations that can
lead to debt problems.
Citizens Advice is calling for the
regulators to take joined up action to
tackle the problems with PPI and are
asking the Government to look into
the sale of PPI with credit products to
check policies are fair and to set
standards for promoting and selling
PPI.
A client who is off work due to ill
health sought advice from CAB about
debts of £21,000. Three of these
debts were credit card debts and the
bureau was shocked to discover the
client was paying almost £50 per
month insurance premiums on debts
of £6,600. This is equivalent to an
extra monthly interest charge of
0.75%.
Supercomplaint is
Good News for Consumers
Page 11
Building is progressing at Donegall Pass in Belfast, where the new
offices for Citizens Advice will provide important support services to
the CAB network across Northern Ireland including training, IT
support, updated information for frontline staff, quality assurance and
help with fundraising. The new building will also ensure that CAB can
continue to drive forward new methods of service delivery. Donations
will help reduce our borrowing requirements, and are still needed.
A rise in the number of clients with mental health problems
approaching CAB for help has prompted the writing up of an
Evidence Report called ‘Advice in Mind' which will be published in
December 2005. Given that at any one point in time one in six
people in Northern Ireland will have mental health problems and
that Northern Ireland has a higher overall prevalence of mental
health problems estimated at 25% higher than in England it is
important to determine what the information and advice needs are
for this group of clients.
‘Advice in Mind' clearly illustrates the difficulties and barriers people
with mental health problems face in trying to navigate their way
around various systems such as the benefits system and the
financial sector and highlights the very real and sometimes
damaging effects of their experiences on their mental health
condition.

