Asthma 
Many studies have shown that people with allergies and/or asthma experience more nasal symptoms, headaches, cough, wheezing, sore throat, hoarseness, eye irritation and aggravation of asthma symptoms due to exposure to SHS.3 
Exposure to SHS can also be a trigger for an asthma attack. 
In the UK 5.2 million people live with asthma, of these 2.1 million suffer from severe asthma. A survey conducted in 2003 of people with severe asthma found that 44% said their social life was restricted because they could not go to pubs or restaurants due to smoky atmospheres. One in five of those interviewed said their asthma was life-threatening.15 
The 2001 Health Survey for England found that being exposed to other people's tobacco smoke for six or more hours a week significantly increased the risk of wheezing in the previous 12 months.16 
Other health effects of SHS 
Chronic respiratory symptoms 
The IARC research shows that the strongest causal effect of SHS exposure is chronic respiratory symptoms in adults. 
Action on Smoking and Health www.ash.org.uk 5
A large European prospective study (EPIC) found that exposure to SHS increased the risk of respiratory diseases including Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) among former smokers (having stopped for at least 10 years) compared to never smokers, which could indicate a greater susceptibility of mutations in former smokers (the association was limited to exposure related to work).17 
Irish hospitality workers experienced significant reductions in both air nicotine levels (80% drop) and saliva cotinine concentrations (70% decrease) during the first six weeks of the Irish smoking ban. Cotinine is produced by the body to break down nicotine and can be used to show recent passive smoking exposure. Before the law came into effect, 68% of workers reported having over 21 hours of SHS exposure per week. After the introduction of the ban this changed to 70% of workers reporting no exposure to SHS per week.18 
New York State implemented the Clean Indoor Air Act in 2003. After the ban there was a marked reduction in reported exposure by hospitality employees to SHS. Study subjects reported an 89% decrease in exposure to SHS at work; this was confirmed by urinary cotinine tests of the workers.19 
Stroke 
Few epidemiological studies have examined the effects of SHS on stroke and aortic aneurysms. The SCOTH report found insufficient evidence of an association between SHS exposure and stroke.2 
Previous research in New Zealand, in 1999, found SHS exposure increased the risk of stroke in nonsmokers by 82%.20 Recent research in China has found that non-smoking women living with partners who smoke have an elevated prevalence of stroke. The prevalence increased with intensity of smoking (number of cigarettes smoked) and duration of the partners' smoking.21 The US Surgeon General has concluded that the risk of stroke and SHS exposure warrants further study. 
Glucose intolerance and diabetes 
Recent research released in 2006 has showed an increased risk of glucose intolerance (a precursor to diabetes) from SHS exposure over a 15 year time period. The incidence of glucose intolerance amongst young adults was 17% among nonsmokers exposed to SHS compared to 12% not exposed to SHS. The link between exposure to SHS and diabetes needs further research before being conclusive.22 
Other cancers 
As carcinogens have no known safe threshold, it is reasonable to assume that if active smoking is a cause of a specific cancer then passive smoking will impose some degree of increased risk. 
Action on Smoking and Health www.ash.org.uk 6
SHS exposure has been associated with increased risk of developing cervical tumours (cervical neoplasia). In particular women who have lived with smokers have a 40% increased risk of developing cervical cancer compared to women living with nonsmokers.23 
Other cancers such as leukaemia, nasal and breast may be associated with increased risk from SHS exposure. However, the epidemiological studies of these cancers and SHS exposure are sparse.24 
Health effects of SHS on children 
Impact on children 
Children's exposure to tobacco smoke generally takes place in their home with the main source of exposure being from their parents and in particular maternal smoking. Smoking has a significant impact on the health of the child both in childhood and in later life. 
A child exposed to SHS has an increased risk of cancer; increased risk of developing and/or exacerbating asthma; reduced respiratory function (cough, wheezes); risk of bronchitis; middle ear infection; pneumonia; meningococcal or meningitis infection and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDs). 
In 1997 the Canadian Institute of Child Health found that children are especially vulnerable to SHS as they breathe more rapidly and they inhale more pollutants per pound of body weight (a higher relative ventilation rate) than adults.25 
In the UK around 5 million children are exposed regularly to SHS and close to half of all children still live in households with at least one smoker.2,26 
Children's exposure to SHS can be affected by: 

• the number of smokers at home 

• the number of cigarettes being smoked 

• the level of parents education 

• where the parents or others smoke in the house.27 

Children are more likely to commence smoking if they grow up in households where those around them smoke and are more likely to smoke if one or both of their parents do. 
Cancer 
A study in Sweden released in 2006 has shown that parents who smoke are greatly increasing their child's risk of developing several types of cancer. Similar risks for exposure by mothers and fathers smoking were found for lung cancer (71%), and upper aerodigestive cancer (45%). There was an 8-fold 
Action on Smoking and Health www.ash.org.uk 7
increased risk of developing nasal cancer (nasal adenoid cystic carcinoma) by exposure to SHS from either parent during childhood.28 
Children who are exposed to SHS on a daily basis grow up with more than triple the risk of lung cancer later in life compared to those who grow up in smokefree environments.17 
Asthma 
Asthma is the most common chronic disease of childhood. In particular SHS exposure can trigger the development of asthma and exacerbate symptoms.29 
Three potential modifiable causes of asthma have been identified by researchers, these include: exposure to SHS, lack of dietary fruit intake (fruit intake is related to increased lung function) and the proximity of the home to a main road. A UK study found no association between living close to a main road and asthma, a moderate increased risk for children who consume no fruit, and an exposure-response relation between smoking and asthma. Parental smoking was a causal factor of asthma in children and the prevalence of asthma increased with number of smokers in the home. The authors found that of the three preventable risk factors, SHS exposure was the independent determinant of the disease.30 
Children who suffer from asthma and whose parents smoke are at least twice as likely to suffer asthma symptoms all year round compared to the children of non-smokers. Wheeze and physician-diagnosed asthma was more common in children who lived with a smoker and the prevalence of asthma increases with the number of smokers living in the home. 
An effective means of preventing asthma is to reduce the person's exposure to SHS.29,30 
More information 
Further information on effects on children of SHS can be found in ASH's Research Report: Secondhand smoke: Impact on children. 
Health effects of prenatal exposure to SHS 
The largest source of SHS exposure for children is from maternal smoking. This can be a cumulative effect of exposure during pregnancy and the close proximity of the child to the mother during early life. 
Prenatal exposure to tobacco smoke has adverse impacts on the health of the foetus including low birth weight, premature birth, spontaneous abortion and still birth. 
Babies born to women who smoke weigh around 200 grams less than nonsmokers. There is a small adverse effect on the baby's weight of non- 
Action on Smoking and Health www.ash.org.uk 8
smoking mothers who themselves have been exposed to SHS during their pregnancy. Smoking also impacts on IVF and fertility rates. It has been found that exposure to SHS is as damaging as smoking itself in terms of successful pregnancy outcomes for people using IVF.31 
Prenatal exposure can have adverse impacts on the learning and behavioural development of a child. Maternal prenatal smoking is associated with both antisocial behaviour and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children and adolescents. 
This association remains after controlling for confounders such as socio-economic status, maternal age, birth weight and maternal psychopathology. 
Exposure to SHS after birth is well established as a cause of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS or cot death).32 Therefore smoking during pregnancy and around children should be avoided.33 
Awareness of health risk 
While there is a high degree of overall awareness about the health risks of SHS amongst UK adults, around 80% believe that a nonsmoker's risk of lung cancer, bronchitis and asthma is increased by SHS exposure. However, only 57% of heavy smokers (20 or more cigarettes a day) believe that SHS increases the risk of heart disease.26,34 
Younger people (ie aged under 35) and those who have never smoked are more likely to know about the health effects of passive smoking on adults and children. 
Around 60% of nonsmokers dislike people smoking around them. People do not like the smell of cigarettes (61%); are concerned about the health effects of SHS (45%) and dislike the smell of smoke on clothes (42%). A large number of people also reported adverse health reactions due to SHS including that: it affects their breathing; makes them cough; gets in their eyes and makes them feel sick. 
Education strategies 
Education about the dangers of SHS exposure can have an impact on health. In Norway the proportion of smoking parents has only minimally reduced from 1995 to 2001, but there was a significant reduction in children's SHS exposure and a significant change in the health-risk awareness of passive smoking during this time.35 For example 85% of all households now impose rules to limit people to smoking outside and the prevalence of children's exposure has fallen from 32% in 1995 to 18% in 2001. 
Protection for nonsmokers: Smokefree laws and public places 
Many people are exposed to SHS at their workplace or in social situations. A law to ban smoking in virtually all workplaces in England (separate measures 
Action on Smoking and Health www.ash.org.uk 9
apply to Wales and Northern Ireland) and will be implemented in 2007. Scotland has already enacted legislation from March 2006. 
There is high level of public support for restrictions on smoking in public places. A poll conducted by BMRB? (commissioned by the British Heart Foundation and ASH) found 70% of the English public supported all workplaces, including pubs and clubs being smokefree.36 
This evidence adds to an earlier poll conducted by You Gov in December 2005 (commissioned by Cancer Research UK and ASH) which, when given a list of specific places, 66% of people (in England) agreed that all pubs and bars should be smokefree by law. This figure was up from 51% in spring 2004.37 
The detrimental health impact of people's exposure to SHS will be significantly reduced as a result of the smokefree legislation. 
More information 
For further information on smokefree legislation and workplace smoking bans see www.smokefreeaction.org.uk 
Conclusion 
Exposure to SHS is a major public health issue and a serious health risk. The 2006 US Surgeon General report shows social norms regarding SHS exposure have changed dramatically since the Royal College of Physicians report? on smoking in 1962 and that this is leading towards a society free from SHS exposure. 
The health risks from SHS exposure are now well documented and there is no risk-free level of exposure to SHS. 
The 2006 US Surgeon General report found six major conclusions: 

1. Millions of people continue to be exposed to SHS in their homes, workplaces or social situations 

2. SHS causes premature death and disease in child and adults who do not smoke 


