
.
We believe that traditional examinations are more reliable indicators of a pupil's merit.
Furthermore, they are impartial. With teachers marking their own pupils' coursework, there
is a possibility of bias, whether intended or not, for or against individual pupils. In addition,
some counties have issued guidelines to teachers that in “continuous assessment” (i.e.
modular work), they were not to discriminate and were to award full marks to most candidates.
31
The abolition of coursework may result in some recently-introduced subjects disappearing
altogether.

While it will never be possible to ensure that any particular grade in one subject will indicate
precisely the same level of academic ability as the same grade in every other subject,
we will aim to ensure that as far as possible there will be no subjects, either at GCSE or
“A” level, which are seen as being easier than others. The fact that between 1997 and 2004
the number of “A” level entries for physics, maths and modern languages fell, in some
cases by over one third, whereas the entries for media &amp; TV studies increased by over
200% casts strong suspicion on this being currently the case.
We are firmly committed to retaining “A” levels, believing that, divested of the coursework
component and grade inflation, they will continue to provide a good test of ability. We
recognise the esteem in which the International Baccalaureate is held, and are happy for
schools who have opted for these examinations instead of “A” levels to continue so to do.
Likewise, if the proposal by Cambridge International Examinations for an alternative to
“A” levels (to be called “Pre-U Qualification”) comes to fruition, we will also allow this
also to be recognised as an alternative to “A” levels.
Earlier Exit. Whilst we are committed to providing free secondary education up to Sixth
Form level, we are prepared to consider alternative forms of education or training for 15-
year olds who find school life alienating. Early leavers will have the option to return to
mainstream state education after experiencing the world of work should they so desire. In
this regard, we will replace classes based on age with classes based on attainment. We
believe this will motivate those children wishing to leave full-time education as soon as
possible, as in order to leave before the age of 16, they would have to pass examinations
in basic English and Mathematics.
This change must be coupled with a major expansion in traditional apprenticeships of a
high standard and trade skills training for these children who come into this category.
Restoring the role of parents. Parents delegate to the school certain areas of their children's
education - principally the cognitive aspects. However, the introduction of Personal,
Social Health and Citizenship education and Sex education has allowed the State, via the
school, to intrude into areas which parents rightly feel belong to them and which in most
cases they would manage better themselves.
A generation has grown up with the view that morality is a private matter, with there being
no absolute rights or wrongs, and these erroneous views have been foisted on teenagers at
school through “values clarification” - with parents being kept quite deliberately in the dark
as to what is being taught. As for those who are aware, obtaining an opt-out for their children
can be very difficult.
As with primary schools, we will still want to offer sex education (along with drugs education)
but on an optional basis
33
. Although the objectives of current sex and drugs education
are supposedly harm reduction and prevention, the result has been the opposite. Based
on the assumption that children will experiment, they supposedly encourage them to do so
safely. Pupils should be taught the value of self-respect, as they cannot respect others until
they respect themselves.
We will insist that if contraceptives have been prescribed to under-age girls that schools and health
professionals inform either the girl's parents or a responsible family member in whom the school has
confidence. We note the growing support for abstinence education in the United States in both the
main political parties and among the public at large, and are interested in whether such an approach
in Britain could help reduce the number of teenage pregnancies.
The UK Independence Party will also make it a statutory requirement for explicit parental consent to
be given wherever information such as biometric registration is demanded of pupils.
In conclusion, we believe that these policies, with their much more “hands-off” approach, will result
in a considerable restoration of confidence in the public education system. We will nonetheless guarantee
that those wishing to educate their children at home will still have this option available to them.
3) Tertiary Education
We believe that those who really should be at university should be supported financially by the state
according to their need through to the completion of their bachelor's degree. To make this possible,
we propose the following changes:-
Cutting back on the number of universities. University education is about the pursuit of knowledge
for its own sake, and should only be available to those with a genuine thirst for knowledge and
the acumen to handle it. A target of university education for 50% of school leavers is harmful for universities
and students alike. It is a fallacy that a obtaining a degree will inevitably result in a successful
career and guaranteed prosperity.
In 1962 there were only 250,000 university students. The current figure (2005) is just over 1,000,000
- some 43% of all 18-21-year olds
34
. This percentage is only slightly less than the 47% of students
who gained 5 or more GCSE grades A*-C (and it is possible to gain a grade C with a score of only
20%.) The only possible conclusion, even allowing for an increase in the population and in the popularity
of university education, is that a significant number of students are being awarded degrees
when their academic performance clearly does not merit it. This country simply does not need this
over-supply of graduates.
We will therefore review the Conservative Party's “Comprehensivization” of higher education, which
converted perfectly good polytechnics into third rate universities. The simple fact is that many jobs
do not require qualification to degree level, and that degrees from some educational establishments
are recognised by the students themselves as worse considerably less academically than those from
the older universities such as the Russell Group
35
. We will institute a nationwide review of higher education
with the intention of distinguishing between those institutions that deserve the title of university
and those that do not, and between those courses which merit degree status and those that do not.
We will encourage the redeployment of former university premises that no longer merit the title to
technology and higher skills-based training.
The party will also address the blurring that has occurred in recent years between academic education
and vocational training. While it is true that certain historic university courses do have a vocational
element (e.g. medicine, law), these subjects are serious academic disciplines. The same cannot
be said about tourism or media studies. The touchstone for an academically respectable vocational
course is whether it is essential to have a degree in that subject in order to pursue a career in it.
This is definitely the case with medicine, but not with working in the media or a travel agency.
Training for such careers should either be financed and regulated by the professions themselves or
else undertaken through NVQs. The UK Independence Party will revise the NVQ courses, emphasising
their distinction from degree courses in that they offer practical rather than academic training.
Revising the Admissions policy. Universities were masters of their own admissions policies until
recently, when they caved in to unsubstantiated government accusations that their policies discriminated
against candidates from poor backgrounds.
So now, following the 2004 higher education review, chaired by Professor Steven Schwartz of Brunel
University, which stated “that it is fair and appropriate to consider contextual factors as well as formal
educational achievement”,
36
universities have been encouraged to select pupils with lower “A”
level grades if they come from a disadvantaged background.
The Office of Fair Access (OFFA) was established as a consequence of this review. It is no more than
an official government bully, meddling in university affairs. The UK Independence Party will scrap
OFFA immediately, and allow universities once again to be masters of their own admission policies.
Concrete evidence of discrimination by the universities themselves in the pre-OFFAera has been very
hard to substantiate.
Merit and academic ability must be the sole criteria when it comes to university places, especially if
our most prestigious universities such as Oxford and Cambridge are to retain their world-wide reputation.
A recent study by academics at Oxford
37
has found a strong correlation between “A” level
grades and the class of degree obtained at these universities, regardless of the type of school attended.
Restoration of Student Grants. The introduction of tuition fees and loans has been a retrogressive step.
How many of those of us who benefited from a grant would have had second thoughts about further education
if we had known we would be saddled with a large debt on leaving university? The UK
Independence Party intends to restore student grants.
Our proposals will result in fewer students than at present spending so long in full-time education.
Therefore extra funding will be available which, over a period of time, will enable the student loans
scheme to be replaced by grants.
Considerable additional finance will become available when Britain leaves the European Union, and no
longer has to fund large numbers of continental students at British universities. It is estimated that there
will be some 91,000 students from EU member states in British universities in 2007.
EDUCATION: TIME TO COME CLEAN 19
Instead of having to pay the full overseas student fees of between £8,000 and £20,000 per year,
these students only need to find the £3,000 top-up fee. Like British students, they are eligible
for a student loan to cover this, and so far, little attempt has been made to trace foreign students,
once they leave the UK, to recover these loans. A recent estimate of extra revenue
gained by leaving the EU and thus being able to charge the full overseas fee to students from
the member states produced a figure of at least £50,000,000 per annum
38
, and with fees averaging
£10,000 per annum, the figure for 2007, if the EU student intake increases as anticipated,
the savings would be in the order of £900,000,000.
Furthermore, extra funding will be available by considerably slimming down the Department
for Education and Skills (DfES) reducing the school inspection budget, reduced student costs
along with a £500,000 annual saving by abolishing OFFA.
De-politicising Overseas Study. Although the UK Independence Party will insist on charging
a fee from all overseas students, regardless of whether they come from the EU member states
or not, we recognise the value of students having the chance to study in another country - both
overseas students studying at British universities and British students studying overseas.
However, we are unhappy with the ‘Bologna Process', to which Britain is a signatory. This
builds on the Sorbonne Process which commits its signatories to “harmonising the architecture
of the European higher education system”. We strongly disagree with this, and oppose
Bologna's emphasis on there being a European dimension to higher education. If within the
UK alone there is such diversity in the academic quality of courses at different universities,
there is inevitably going to be an even greater diversity within the different nations of Europe
with their different academic traditions. “Harmonisation”, as always, means dumbing down to
the lowest common denominator, and accepting politicised EU models of university education.
We will therefore withdraw from the EU's Socrates and Erasmus schemes and initiate new student
exchange schemes which are neither politicised nor driven by a goal of EU harmonisation.
We will abolish all lectureships and courses in European studies, including the 357 Jean
Monnet projects in British universities. These are funded by the European Union, and are little
more than avenues for pro-EU propaganda.

