You Never Know
An Autobiography
by Claire Lorrimer

Chapter 1
It was a cold February day when the nanny wheeled her small charge along the Brighton promenade. The little girl's mother was pregnant with her third child and for once would be resting on her bed rather than sitting up at her desk typing one of her romantic novels.
The wind was fresh but despite the cold, the nurse stopped to listen to the bearded man standing on a box surrounded by a crowd of angry men. The orator was in full voice as he urged his audience to take note of the fact that they were being exploited by their government; that he – and he alone - was not a slave. 
“Raise your hands if there is one among you poor downtrodden workers who can call himself free?” he shouted.
There was a murmur of agreement amongst the men whose mood was becoming dangerous. Suddenly a small voice piped up:
“I'm free!”
I had just had my third birthday and was proud of my advanced age.
The mood of the men changed instantly and laughter now rippled through the crowd as my nanny turned the pram round and hurried me home.
Obviously I don't remember the incident but it was recalled in the family whenever the word ‘free' came up in conversation.
On August 12th of that year, l924, my younger sister, Anne was born, my parents' third child and – to my mother's everlasting distress - the baby was yet another girl. Her first born, Eve, although not the son she had wanted, was nevertheless a remarkably pretty baby, blue-eyed, golden haired, like a little doll. I, on the other hand was not only the second girl but was scarlet-faced, bald and heavy enough to have caused my poor mother considerable discomfort when she brought me into the world on 1st February, her birthday, too.By the time Anne came along, my mother vowed to give up her hopes for a boy and devote herself to her career. 
At that time, only six years after the end of the First World War, the country was in a severe economic depression. There were over six million unemployed and my father, a corn broker on the Baltic Exchange, was as a consequence, far from well off whereas my mother's (Denise Robins) love stories were in great demand by D.C.Thompson of Dundee's popular weekly magazines. A very deaf registrar had put my father's occupation on my birth certificate as that of a pawnbroker - a subject of mirth in later years in the family – but which might have been far more economically beneficial in 1924 than his employment as a corn broker.
Although my father was far from happy about it, it was obvious that my mother's financial contributions were much needed. As her literary career developed, she began writing novels and the family were soon able to move from the tiny flat in Adelaide Crescent in Hove to a small county cottage in Haywards Heath from whence my father commuted each day on the steam train to London. 
At the time of Anne's birth my parents' wartime marriage, which had begun so romantically, was already proving less than idyllic. My mother, a young very pretty V.A.D. (women's Voluntary Aid Detachment), had nursed my father who was convalescing following a severe leg wound. Fair haired, blue eyed, handsome and extremely courageous, he epitomized the romantic hero of her dreams. He was, however, not only very young and inexperienced but shy, reserved, in many respects inarticulate and although he loved her devotedly until the day he died, he could not offer her the somewhat unrealistic demonstrative adoration she craved and brought to life in the fictitious heroes of her novels. 
In those early years, she was still loving towards him and one of the nicest of her gestures which I learned about many years later, was in the Depression when they were so hard up, my father was obliged to pawn his treasured pair of Purdey guns in order to pay the bills. Receiving a handsome cheque for one of her magazine serials, she went secretly to the pawnshop and redeemed them for him as an unexpected birthday present. 
Eve, not quite two years older than me, was a shy, rather timid child, who, when she could not be close to the mother she adored, tended to look to me for assurance as, right or wrong, I was never in doubt as to what I wanted to do. She was a remarkably pretty little girl, having been a pretty baby she was now a lovely little girl, essentially very feminine and even then as a presage of things to come, attracting admiring glances from the opposite sex. My mother loved to dress us in pretty clothes, nearly all of which enhanced Eve's charm whilst emphasizing my short sturdy frame and tomboyish demeanour. Shopping with our mother for new clothes was always a nightmare for me, knowing that whilst Eve would look lovely in her dresses I would look untidy and plain. Had I but been born two generations later, I would have been in seventh heaven in a pair of torn-at-the knee jeans! 
By the time we moved to Haywards Heath, we had a governess to look after us as my mother was busy most of the day in the special hut she'd had built in the garden to use as her study. Her first novel, ‘Sealed Lips', was published by Mills and Boon, to be followed shortly after by ‘The Marriage Bond', ‘The Inevitable End', and others, all of which were hugely popular. Towards the end of her long, successful career, she told me that Charles Boon had fallen in love with her – not surprising as she was a very beautiful young woman with perfect bone structure, expressive green eyes and chestnut brown hair. She was quite often likened to the film actress, Marlene Dietrich. Too strictly brought up by her Catholic convent to contemplate an affair with the publisher, they did enjoy a flirtation and it was really he who started her meteoric rise to fame.
She was rapidly becoming a household name. In l927, the actor, composer and playwright, Ivor Novello, welcomed her suggestion that she should turn his latest successful play, ‘The Triumph of a Rat', into a novel. This was published in 1927 and Ivor wrote to congratulate her and thanked her for writing it.
By then I was six years old. Having had a lonely and unhappy early childhood, our mother had found security and happiness as well as receiving an excellent education from the convent in Norwood where she was a boarder. Thinking that Eve and I would be equally happy in a similar environment, she dispatched us to a nearby convent run by a closed order of nuns. Even the reception room where parents handed over their offspring was partitioned off with a grill through which the nun would communicate; and parcels were placed in a revolving cupboard so that she would not have to touch the hand of a male parent.
My memories of the year I spent there remain very acute. There was a large bathroom in which several baths stood in line. We were each given a voluminous rubber cape beneath which we undressed and, still wearing it, climbed into the bath where our ablutions were supervised by a nun. I don't recall how we managed to dry ourselves under the sodden cape which, wet, cold and clammy, clung to our bodies.
I had a vivid imagination and a tendency to take everything I was told very literally. The story of the crucifixion and the mental picture of the horrifying walk Jesus took with the crown of thorns round his head and the heavy cross on his shoulders, kept me awake at night. It worried me to death that I could not go to confession as the Catholic girls did every Friday and have my ever-growing mountain of sins forgiven me. Even more worrying was the story I was told of babies who, because they died unbaptised, could never go to Heaven. A kindly nun consoled me with the news that if I repeated the names of Jesus, Mary and Joseph, a baby would be able to leave Limbo and go to Heaven. From then on (until I suppose I forgot) I spent every spare minute muttering a shortened version of the heavenly names – i.e. Jes-May-Jo, comforting myself with the mental imagine of little round, pink babies floating skywards into the arms of the Virgin Mary whose pretty statues placed all over the convent, compensated slightly for the body of Jesus dripping blood that also dominated the convent rooms, school rooms and corridors.
I do not recall anyone being unkind. We slept in dormitories with each bed partitioned off from the next; presumably yet again to keep us from seeing each other's bodies. I never questioned the oddity of this, nor why my parents should have been asked to remove me (for polluting the minds of the Catholic children) when I was caught doing the dance of Hiawatha with only a towel round my waist and my six-year old chest exposed to my giggling audience. Eve told me that her friend, Angela, had been expelled when she was in the sanatorium with chicken pox and was caught trying to see in the mirror the spots on her bottom. I was, however, reprieved and was determined to be less sinful in the future.
I don't recall being particularly unhappy at the convent although I was often afraid. However, one bitter memory returns even these long years after, of a beautiful doll, which was to be given to the girl who best remembered the lengthy catechism we had just been taught. Having a good memory, I answered most questions right. However, the doll was not to be mine because, so I was told, it was intended for a Catholic not a Protestant child.
I did think it very unfair (and still do!) but I did not mind all that much as I wasn't into dolls – I preferred stuffed animals and my teddy bear
Eve, unlike me, was hardworking, obedient and although homesick, had settled down philosophically to boarding school life. When we went home for the holidays, she preferred my mother's company to mine and as Anne was still too young to be a playmate, I wished fervently for a brother. Meanwhile, my cousin, Buzz, a year old than me, was a substitute. When he visited us, I followed him round like a puppy. I envied him the fact that he wore shorts, not tiresome skirts and dresses which I always seemed to get torn or dirty; and most of all I envied him the snake belt which kept his shorts up! To possess either, I realized, one had to be a boy, not a girl.
The possibility of this radical sex change was presented to me during my second term at the Convent. With sufficient faith, anything can be achieved, a kindly nun told me. Did I truly believe in God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Ghost? I wasn't too keen on the Holy Ghost and secretly hoped never to meet him. However, I did believe in his existence as well as that of God the Father and Son and now in my prayers, begged all three to change me as soon as possible into a boy.
Having no brothers, I was unaware of the difference between males and females but as I woke each morning without short hair, shorts and a snake belt on my bedside chair instead of my uniform dress, I realized that no miracle had occurred in the night. In due course, I reported this tragedy to my sympathetic nun.
“God must have other plans for you, child!” she said. Naturally I wanted to know what plans she thought God had in mind.
“He may wish you to become a nurse,” she volunteered. “Or a missionary, or…” she added with inspiration “…he may wish you to become a nun like me.” 
“But how will I know whether he does or doesn't?” I persisted.
“You will hear His voice calling you to take Holy Orders,” she replied.
This struck me instantly as being a very desirable occupation. The nuns could order any of us to do whatever they wanted and we had to obey. If I was a nun…
I decided to waste no time in trying to achieve my objective, I must now listen at all times whenever possible in case I missed The Call. In class I sat as near to a window as I could so I could hear God's voice, which, I reckoned, would be pretty faint anyway coming all the way down from Heaven. I stopped talking to people except when I was obliged to speak in lessons; I stopped people talking to me. The only person who benefited from this was my sister, Eve, who was fed up being pestered by me with questions.
I was still listening intently when we went home for the holidays. I opened the windows in any room I was in so I could better hear The Call. It was a very short time before my father, a staunch Protestant, asked if his middle daughter was heading for the lunatic asylum, which happened to be a mile or so down the road. This brought about a speedy end to Eve's and my life at the convent and we were sent instead as day girls to the P.N.E.U (Parents National Education Union) school in Burgess Hill. Here my desire to be included in the hockey team supplanted any idea I might have had to be a nun although I did still crave a snake belt. (Memory of this featured in one of the short stories in ‘Variations', a book I had published in l988, and which is still being read in the libraries today).

