I packed a small bag with her bloodstained pyjamas, the book she'd been reading, the teddy bear she called Apricot. Despite the fact that it was June and the weather was sunny, I felt cold so I put an old riding jacket over my business suit. Then we went to Paddington and caught the train to Plymouth. It seemed somehow fitting to be making this journey again ' the one that had begun two decades before, back in the golden days. 

I had arrived at Plymouth Station for the first time in August 1978, with all my possessions packed in the three suitcases I'd been given for my twenty-first birthday, my father's old typewriter balanced on top. Could I walk to my new digs? Could I afford the fare for a taxi? Not really but I had no idea where I was going and the cases were heavy, so I took a cab anyway. 

I had booked into a lodging house run by a woman called Dilys. She was a cut above the other landladies in the area as she took in arty types ' actors appearing in the summer shows at the theatre on the Hoe and journalists training on the newspapers owned by the Mirror Group in the West Country. I was one of the latter. A real-live journalist. No longer a student, a whole world of new opportunities was about to open up for me. 

One of the features of staying at Dilys's was that all her lodgers had to watch the TV soaps on permanent look-out for her 'boys and girls' who occasionally had walk-on parts. But that Sunday night there were no soaps to watch, so after a lonely supper I went to bed early ready for the next day, the first day of my new life. 

In those days the Mirror owned a regional group called West of England Newspapers, to use as a base for training journalists. It was a royal road to a job on one of their nationals and places on the course were hard to come by. It was hugely prestigious and the year I applied there were 650 graduate applicants for six jobs. But it was a long way from Fleet Street. 

The offices were sited on an industrial estate outside Plymouth and it was from here that the regional Sunday Independent and the weekly Plymouth Times were published. A Portakabin parked in the car park formed the makeshift classroom where our trainer, Cedric Pulford, set about telling the 12 of us ' six graduates and six local school leavers ' what was expected of journalists. Or actually he set about telling 11 of us, as one was inexplicably missing. First Cedric asked us if we all had cars. A car, he said, was vital for a reporter. Someone pointed out that we could hardly afford cars on the £16 a week we were being paid. I couldn't drive anyway so sank low in my seat and stared out of the window. I'd failed at the first hurdle. Maybe I wasn't cut out to be a journalist? 

Someone was walking across the car park. I could only see the hair. It was the most unusual colour, not really red, more gold. A flash of gold. The owner of the hair came into the Portakabin apologising for being late, but he'd been out on a story ' investigating the theft of supermarket trolleys in the suburb of Plymstock. His name was John Merritt and he was the missing twelfth trainee. Unlike the rest of us dutifully arriving on the first day as if we were still at school, he'd shown up at the start of summer, convinced the editor of the Plymouth Times to take him on and had actually covered stories and had his name in the paper already. My heart did a double flip. I fell in love with him at first sight. But then so, I'm sure, did everyone else in the room. 

At the end of the first week, John asked me to accompany him to work on the news programme for the local hospital radio. So he was a broadcaster as well as a published journalist . . . I thought there was no end to his talents. And the following Friday he asked me out to dinner at the most expensive restaurant in Plymouth. I was duly impressed, as he'd hoped I would be. He ordered sole, I did likewise, and was appalled to discover it was served on the bone complete with head and dead fishy eyes. I suspect John was, too, but we both struggled to eat it. 

After that, he didn't ask me out again. We were just together. There were no questions, no doubts, no anxieties. We were inseparable. He was 21. I had just turned 22. We had embarked on the careers of our dreams and each found the love of our life. I can picture us now in my mind's eye: both of us tall and slender, me with dark brown eyes and long, conker-coloured hair; John taller still, six foot at least, still with gangly boyish limbs and his astonishing red-gold hair and piercing blue eyes. We must have appeared truly blessed, a golden couple. There was no indication that John carried a deadly genetic trait that would rob him of his life as a young man and then kill his daughter, too. No one who knew us then would have doubted that we had anything other than a glorious future ahead of us. I didn't doubt it myself. Of course, I knew we would face difficulties together but everything in my life had taught me that if you worked hard enough and loved well enough then good things would surely happen. 

It was a philosophy that worked in the past for my family. 

My father Anthony was born in 1929. His father Tom worked at the railway depot in Stratford, East London, and the family lived in a council house nearby. Emma, my paternal grandmother, worked as a cleaner but instilled in her children ' my father and his younger sister Josephine ' her belief that the only way out of the East End slums was through education. She sent Tony and Josephine, later known as Josie, or Jo, to local Catholic schools but her ambitions for them of a good education and qualifications were dashed by the Second World War. Both children were evacuated with their schools until Emma ' unable to live without them ' brought them back to the East End, saying: 'If we're going to be bombed we'll be bombed together.' And they were. They were forced out of their original house in Crowndale Road and had to move around the corner to Chandos Road, London E15. 

Tony's schooling was badly interrupted although he was naturally bright and managed to matriculate at the age of 15. Further education was out of the question, so after National Service he dabbled in various jobs and wrote a play, Vanguard, based on his father's life on the railways. It was put on at the Theatre Workshop, Stratford East, by the director Joan Littlewood in a series of plays by local talent, and starred Harry H. Corbett who went on to play the younger Steptoe in the early sitcom Steptoe and Son. Tony was temporarily lionised as an 'angry young man' and as one of the so-called 'young meteors' of the early Fifties. 

His parents couldn't support him, however, and he was unable to make a living as a writer, so he went into journalism as the next best thing, becoming acting editor of a tiny weekly paper, the Laindon Recorder in Essex. There he played host to a group of Young Conservatives who wanted to see around a newspaper office and was immediately attracted to their 19-year-old organiser, Sheila Pigram. She had jet black hair, green eyes and an 18-inch waist, but was an unlikely Young Conservative, growing up as she had in a bungalow built by her father a mile down an unmade road. It has since been subsumed by Basildon New Town but then Laindon was an unprepossessing country village popular with families who were moving out of the East End and the Dockland areas in search of fresh air and green fields. 

Sheila's family had done just that and her father Albert, a maintenance enginer at Battersea Power Station, had built the family house himself although he never really finished it. One of my earliest memories is of a cement mixer parked in the front garden. Sheila, his second child, was bright, tough and ambitious but, as with Tony, an academic education was out of the question so she left school at 16 and trained as a hairdresser. She landed a job in a West End salon, where she went on the train every day, in clothes she'd sewn herself, smart copies of Christian Dior's New Look. 

Her diaries at the time record a giddy teenage social life with theatre outings, tennis parties and campaigning for Bernard Braine, the local Conservative MP. But within a year of meeting Tony Nicholson they were married and had moved to Ipswich where he had got a job on the East Anglian Daily Times. I was born in 1956, a year after their marriage, when Sheila was 21 and Tony was 27. 

Miles away from their families and unable to afford a car, or even the bus fare back to Essex, they pursued their dreams together. Believing there was little hope of supporting the family they wanted through journalism or writing, they agreed that Tony should read for the Bar. A fairly breathtaking decision for a young couple with a baby and no back-up ' but made possible by the fact that they discovered he could study for his exams through a correspondence course and didn't need a college law degree. 

To save money, they returned to London when I was 18 months old, moving in with Tom and Emma. Tony supported us in between his studies by working long shifts for the Extel News Agency. The house in Chandos Road was what you might expect of a council house in the Fifties. The tiny back yard was concreted over and still had the remains of the bomb shelter where the family had slept every night during the Blitz. There was no bathroom and no inside toilet. I didn't mind a bit. I loved the constant attention from four adults and the baths taken in the scullery with water heated in the old copper, from where ' screened by washing drying on the clothes airer ' I could chat to the rest of the family gathered in the kitchen. 

My grandfather Tom came from a horse-racing family and his own father had been quite a well-known jockey so he liked to think he knew the horses. He would go to the betting shop on a Saturday ' or, if he was feeling flush, to a race meeting. On Sunday lunchtime he'd take his winnings to the pub ' or drown his sorrows there ' tottering gently home at closing time to fall asleep for the afternoon on my bed. This was fine by me as when he woke up there'd be a plate of winkles for his tea and I would sit on his lap fishing them out for him with a pin, while he told me stories of horses that he called the 'gee-gees' and of the steam engines he'd worked on. 

But my mother hated every day of living with her in-laws. She had brought with her a chic little black poodle that fought constantly with my grandmother's fat lazy cocker spaniel ' just one of many ways in which she considered living in the East End vastly inferior to the bungalow in Laindon which, although it was never properly finished off, was at least in the countryside and owned by her family, not rented from the council. 


