
I push through the doors, produce my hundred thousand, ask for a ticket. The pair behind the bar are middle-aged, man and wife, straightforward and gruff, bent over the sink. They are clearly surprised not to know a face. Everybody here knows everybody else by name, by nickname, big boys and old men vigorously slapping down cards on chequered tablecloths and shouting at each other. You'll never understand whether they're arguing or not. They're arguing without being angry. Or they're angry without arguing. In any event the bar booms with noise. The TV has been turned up to deal with it. I have to repeat myself: I want to go to Bari! 

And now the couple are surprised again that they can't place my accent. Why would I support Verona if I wasn't Veronese? Verona are not Juventus. 

I'm handed no more than a torn-off scrap of grubby paper with the biro scribble bari, pagato, on it. Paid. Nothing is rung up on the till. But now a full sheet of A4 is produced and smoothed out on a copy of a magazine that shows celebrities bare-breasted on their yachts. At the top, somewhat laboriously, her hands damp from a sink full of glasses, the woman writes: bari. bus. And she asks my name. 'Tim.' At once I know I should have said Tino. 'Like the phone company,' I explain. 'TIM - Telefonia Italia Mobile.' She shakes her grey hair and writes. 1. Tim. Pagato. Five days before departure I am actually the first fan to sign up. 

And as it happens, I'm the first to sign up for what is, in absolute terms, the very first game of the Italian season. Most league games in Italy are played Sunday afternoon, but for the sake of pay TV each week one game is moved forward to Saturday at three, another to Saturday evening, and one is shifted back to Sunday evening. The evening games, at peak viewing hours, involve the big teams: Juventus, AC Milan, Inter Milan, Lazio, Rome. One of those five will win the championship. Nobody doubts it. The Saturday afternoon games are strictly for the 'provinciali', the also-rans, us. So I am the first person to sign up for what is perceived to be the least-important fixture of the weekend. What can Bari and Verona ever do but try to keep their miserable heads above the dark waters of the relegation zone? Serie A and the company of the elite will always be a luxury for the likes of us. Serie B is always there with open arms ready to draw us into the abyss of provincial anonymity. And immediately, even before the innumerable refereeing aberrations that will doubtless mar the season at our expense, this decision to move the match forward to Saturday afternoon becomes the occasion for that most common of Italian emotions, small-town resentment. My son, Michele, is furious. He wants to come with me to the game - what an adventure to travel through the night to Bari! - but he can't, because Saturday is a regular school-day: eight until one, six days a week. 'This would never have happened if we were Juventus.' He shakes his head bitterly. 'Bastardi!' Every small town footballing dream is dreamed despite the bastardi, against the bastardi; every victory is achieved in the teeth of the bastardi. Apart from the referees, we have no idea who they are. 

In any event, it's late September now and everybody is desperate to see a game again. Everybody is yearning for that stupid excitement of waiting for a goal, for or against, trembling on the edge of our seats, on the edge of euphoria or disappointment. The season has been delayed a month so as not to clash with the Olympic Games, with that intolerable mix of noble sentiments and growth hormones. Needless to say, this is a television-driven decision. Nobody who goes to the stadium would ever dream of missing a game for a long jump competition, or the prurient pantomime of synchronised swimming. What tedium! I swear to God I have not watched a single event of the Olympic Games on TV, not one, and would not travel a single mile to watch them live. How could any of that grim athleticism and loathsome armchair nationalism compare with what is at stake when Verona play Inter, when the familiar players stream out on to the pitch and come to salute the curva and your heart is in your mouth at the thought that the five reserves they have on the bench are worth more than our whole twenty-five-strong squad put together. 

'Cazzo di Olimpiadi,' someone has written on The Wall, the club's internet 'guestbook'. Fucking Olympics. I couldn't agree more. 'And then the bastardi go and put the first game on Saturday,' Michele says. Saturday! He has two hours of Latin, he complains, and I at least twenty-two, there and back, on the coach. Or do I? When I drive by the Zanzibar at ten to midnight Friday evening, the place is closed and the street empty. 

There is a general belief that away from the busy downtown, the suburbs of our modern cities Europe-wide are all the same. It's not true. So fine at creating a generous and thriving muddle around the noble monuments of their ancient centres, or again a charming languor in the skewed piazzas of their knotty hillside villages, the Italians ran out of imagination when it came to modern suburbs. In the modern suburbs they have achieved the last word in desolation and dull conservatism. 

So the periferie of Verona have neither the blowy luxuriance of the English garden suburb, nor the gritty romanticism of the spectacularly depressed area. Here block after six-storey block of featureless flats string amorphously either side of wide, straight, featureless roads. In inevitable reaction, the late-night drivers hurtle at junctions which are often just large empty asphalt spaces with not much indication as to how you're supposed to behave when you get to them. And if the original plan was at least sensible, maintenance is desultory. The coarse grass on the verges is cut only when it reaches knee height. There are no pavements on the side-streets, only expensive cars. 

Perhaps, it occurs to me, locking up the oldCitroën, perhaps since it was built round the stadium, the whole purpose of this suburb was to design a place of such spiritual emptiness as to more or less oblige everybody to go to the game on Sundays. In which case they could hardly have done it better. To show the full extent of their imagination, or as a clue to their undeclared brief, they called the suburb Stadio. Why not? Giving up on the Zanzibar I walk, disconcerted, back to the main square outside the Bentegodi, and find that there is just one bar open.

Or half-open. It already has its iron grille pulled down a little, to threaten closing time. I slip under and ask for a beer. The only two customers are kissing, not passionately perhaps, but certainly determinedly. In any event they are not thinking about Bari- Verona. And at this point - you don't need a glass, do you? the barman asks - I suddenly see myself travelling down to the southern seaport on my own. Yes, I will be the only passenger on an empty coach. I will stand alone on the hostile terraces, the only supporter of la squadragialloblù. The cameras putting together the evening's highlights will focus on me for one split second. I'm shrieking with anger as the referee refuses to grant us a penalty. But it's impossible to support a football team on your own. Can we imagine a fan on his own? It would be like being the only worshipper of a god, the only speaker of a language. You'd be incomprehensible to everyone. Fandom, like family, is a destiny you do together. At ten past midnight a slim figure ducks under the grille and orders a beer. He's thirtyish, shy, sad, broken-nosed, and he has a blue-and-yellow scarf round his neck. 'Bari?' I ask. 'Bari,' he confirms. It's begun. 

The troops gather on the corner of the square. It's twelve forty-five. The bar has closed, but everybody has supplies of beer or spirits. They're carrying them in those little pinky, yellowy backpacks Italian children use to take their books to school. The night is cloudy. The summer is suddenly over. After two months without rain, it has started to drizzle. Football weather. We stand under a concrete portico, waiting for the coach. There are about twenty youngish boys, three or four girls and a dozen men. One boy seems to suffer from a mild case of phocomelia. With his short arms he arranges his yellow-blue cap crosswise on his head, glad to be part of the group. 

'Dio boia!' the boy next to me suddenly shouts. 'Executioner God', it means, a strictly local blasphemy. For some reason Italians find the expression particularly foul, perhaps because of the way the boia is pronounced. You begin with an explosive 'b', popping your lips as if you were a big fish, then you swallow the 'oi' in a long, slow adenoidal sound, lingering on a sort of 'y' deep in the tonsils, before snapping the word shut with an axe-blow, 'a!!' 'Dio bboiyyya!' he repeats, apropos of nothing. Then he starts shaking his head. 'Abbiamo fatto una figura di merda. Dio boia!' He tips up his beer can. The beer dribbles down his chin. 'Covered ourselves in shit,' he protests. 'We covered ourselves in shit.' 

Nobody is talking about football. Nobody is interested in discussing the team, at least half of whom are new this year, some of them the merest kids. Nobody is reflecting on the fact that we have lost Cesare Prandelli, the brilliant coach who got us back into Serie A and then took us up to ninth place last season, the coach who brought us victories against Juventus and Lazio. Nobody mentions that the hated owner of Hellas F.C., Giambattista Pastorello, has put the club up for sale, a disastrous move because it now turns out that nobody wants to buy it. Nobody mentions the fact that the official sponsor, Marsilli Salumi, suddenly withdrew its support two weeks ago, announcing that it was pointless attaching the image of its excellent sausages to a team that sold all its best players as soon as anybody waved any money at them, a team that was thus sure to be back in Serie B by the end of this season. 

For me all these developments are fascinating. I've spent half my summer reading about them. Every day the Arena, the local paper, has at least a half-page dedicated to the city's football team. Every single day, summer and winter alike. Often it's a whole page. After a game it's three pages. I have read oceans of accusations, denials, rumours. That space has to be filled. I have sworn to myself that I will understand the mechanics of football finance before the year is out. I want to know if the dream element distorts the figures, if investments are made in football that no one would dream of making in any other business. Or if it's as merciless as Marsilli's meat-packing. Are we really destined for Serie B even before the season starts? Has Pastorello given up on us? Is he a genius or a fool, well-meaning or a shark? And is it or is it not ominous, given the recent disastrous performance of Nasdaq, that we are the first Serie A football team to be sponsored by an internet company, the hitherto unheard-of Net Business? Suddenly I want to know what is really happening. I want to know who really possesses the team: the supporters, the players or the businessmen? I want to know if we're going to get thrashed down in Bari, or whether we can give the bastards some kind of a game. Who is the new striker we've just bought?
