Chapter I

Bird-Happy

Bird-happy adj. (coll.) 1 Light-hearted 2 Slightly mad.
Universal English Dictionary

Six months ago, on a bright, crisp morning like this one, the sky unblemished and fathomless, I was squeezed tight in the cockpit of a twin-seat jet trainer; my fist gripping the joystick, 230 knots indicated-the first time I'd flown a plane at such speed. I was orange-suited in flame-resistant Nomex, crouching on my parachute, my head bound in fibreglass, the canopy a dome of Plexiglas over me. The vintage fighter's stubby outflung Duralumin wings sustained it in flight. A roar from the twin jets, a steady electric crackle from the headset. The surface of Hauraki Gulf surging by, our onrush making stolid Auckland-bound merchant ships dart at us like speedboats. 

I made a right turn-dipped the stick to the right, tipping the wing, careful to stay nose-high to ward off the pilot's nightmare of an unintended spiral dive. White wave-tops shuddered past; the razor edge of the Magister's right wing seemed to slice through the wake of a merchantman. Roll left, level once more. The coastline ahead growing rapidly. The sky over Auckland on a bright, June, winter's day.

'I'll take her.' Ken Walker, the plane's owner, ahead of me in the tandem cockpit. 

Reluctantly I surrendered the joystick. 'You have control.'

He catapulted us off Hauraki Gulf on to a stretch of the North Island coastline designated for low flight. And we were low, so low that I looked down and saw in fleeting frozen detail upturned faces, open mouths. 

It's a paradox, perhaps, that flight is not at its most exhilarating when you are soaring through the heavens, but when you're close enough to the ground to see it and sense it and know, because every instinct screams it, that a mysterious alchemy has transmuted you from man (legs, ground) to bird (wings, air). 

We hurtled towards a ridge of hills. Someone's microlight went past like a scrap of wind-borne rag. Ken tipped the nose up and in a heart's beat-the time it took for me to retighten my grip on the steel handles welded to the canopy frame-the Magister had shown her tail feathers to the deck and leapt 1800 feet, and again assumed level trajectory. The earth settled into a remoter grid of green and yellow squares. 

This was flying.

The French-built Fouga Magister was the world's first small jet trainer, a flying machine so sensitive, so minutely calibrated to the liquid laws of aerodynamics, that it would be adopted by the aerobatic teams of France and a dozen other nations. First rolled out in 1954, the butterfly-tailed plane would become a classic, some 900 or so built during a production run of over two decades. Celebrated for its balletic grace, the Magister spilled blood, too, in the other r(tm)le for which it had been designed-ground attack-notably for the Israelis during the 1967 Six Day War. 

The mountains of the Coromandel Range swelled ahead of us. We held our altitude, scraped across peaks of exposed honey-hued rock and continued east over the dense-packed forests of the Coromandel Peninsula. The Pacific yawned before us as we flew over the silver fretwork delta of the River Tairua and reached the seaside town of Pauanui. Ken was planning some peacockery over his beach house here. I looked down, and tried to imagine his girlfriend looking up and smiling at the roar of the engines, stepping out into the sunshine knowing that the sleek jet was about to perform a tribute to her. 

Ken's voice crackled faintly over the RT. 'Y'ready, Martin?'

'I'm ready.'

'This is the most fun you'll ever have without taking your clothes off. Hold on tight.' 

Our speed climbed to 280 knots into a 45-degree vertical roll, followed by a Cuban 8-a horizontal figure of eight with two inverted half-rolls in the middle of the 'eight'-and then a loop, and then another vertical roll. I whooped for joy, as the sky above us was replaced by sea, and we languidly revolved, like insects suspended in some cerulean amber. Outrageous beauty, not eclipsed but intensified by the g-forces squeezing your body, compressing your chest and viscera. 

Ken broke out of the roll into a curving dive. The Magister swooped towards the cliffs south of Pauanui. We made a low turn in a cleft in the hills, and climbed back over the town. Ken flicked the Fouga half inverted and finished his display with a low fly-by over the beach-so low that we carved a groove in the yolky sand with our wing-tip. 

I swear it.

I have dreamed of flying since childhood-and so have you. Didn't we all spend our earliest childhood nights flying, reliving the weightless suspension of the womb? So many children are convinced they can fly that they quite often try to do so, breaking arms and ankles. My dreams were so vivid and familiar (they always began with me gliding with mesmeric languor out of my room, along the landing and down the stair carpet that my mother says was patterned but I remember as womb-red) that I was certain of their literal reality. At night, while others slept, I flew.

We lived in a cul-de-sac of steep-gabled cottages off a country lane. On sunny days the local kids would play in the surrounding fields. I remember a few of us lying on the mounds of glossy blade-edged grass that lined the stream and looking straight into an azure sky bellied with summer cumulus, marvelling at the clouds' tireless, playful mutations into human profiles, or boots, or swords. 

And then there were the planes. 

We were close to Farnborough, the historic homeland of English aviation. As a short-trousered boy of five I stood in a corner of the village school playground and watched as the sky was darkened by the solid triangle of an Avro Vulcan, Britain's strategic nuclear bomber. (Our neighbour Mrs Williamson blamed the Vulcan for her miscarriage: one day she was walking up the lane and it arrived like the Apocalypse, just above the treetops, turning day to night and making the very ground tremble, scaring her half to death.) 

During the annual Farnborough Airshow-a public display and a professional market for air force hardware-I could look up from our back lawn and see the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight pass overhead, Hurricane, Spitfire and Lancaster, synchronised with the unguent patrician tones of Raymond Baxter's live BBC1 commentary. It was rare on any sunny day for five minutes to go by without the rumble of an aeroplane, and we would shade our eyes and wait to capture the silver flash like a fish as it passed, seemingly still yet straight and fast, between the chimney and the woods, and we would try to read its shape against the sky-Vampire, Meteor, Hunter-those evocative names. Now, perversely, I am reassured when the summer silence of the countryside-the distant lowing of cows, the hum of bees, wind in the grass-is disturbed by the faint rumble of an aero engine. This, the rumble says, is how it should be. 

I experienced livid, full-colour flying dreams into my late teens. Then they stopped, perhaps because, as the shrinks tell us, dreams of flight are associated with erotic longing. I suspect that the improvement in my love life grounded my dreams. 

I seized every opportunity to fly-in gliders, small Cessnas, open biplanes. I even had some flying lessons, but never made the sustained effort to get a licence. It took a level of technical aptitude I wasn't sure I had, and a depth of pocket I knew I didn't have. Then, a few years back, an American acquaintance asked me which single invention separated modern man from our ancestors.

'Penicillin,' I suggested. 'Photography?'

'No, flight! For centuries they dreamed about it, our ancestors, from Icarus to Leonardo. But we can actually do it-we can do this miraculous thing. We can fly! And we should!'

'It's a moral obligation?'

'That's exactly what it is! We owe it to their memory to learn to fly!' 

An extreme position, but Peter Morrow was an extreme pilot-the owner, I discovered, of three aeroplanes, which lived with him in the turquoise, white and emerald Caribbean. Peter, the evangelist, sensing my sympathy for the true faith, struck: he intended to hire a plane for some practice the following week. Would I care to go up with him? 

It was a brilliant summer day in the Cotswolds. The flying club was a broad acreage of cracked white, grass-tufted concrete that had once witnessed the rumbling of a hundred Lancaster bombers. As I wandered among the parked aircraft I was seized anew by their nautical properties. The Cessnas and Beechcraft were tied down, to prevent the wind from catching under their wings and carrying them off like kites, with fraying, coarse, orange or blue nylon ropes run through rings cemented into the ground; the planes had red banners draped from them, actually sleeves that protected propellers and slender exterior steel organs, and these chivalric pennants flapped and flopped in the summer breeze. I marvelled at the delicacy of the machines, for seen up close they manifestly had little inherent strength. Again like boats, they were ribbed and tautly skinned, and I recognised that just as a small boat so improbably shields its crew from the hostile ocean, and even more improbably holds a chosen course, the aeroplane's ability to navigate the invisible vapour of the air relies on precise observations made by its designers of the element it has to master, translated into the stressed curves of its fabric. What was more, the plane Peter had directed me to was not an aluminium Cessna but a Motorfalke, a classic motor glider with a wooden frame and doped fabric skin-like a Gypsy Moth biplane, or the earliest aircraft, made over a century ago. 

Peter went into the club office and handed over some tenners. No credit cards, no initialling forms in five places: it was easier to rent a plane than a car. We strapped ourselves side by side in the tiny two-seater and he did the engine checks, tapping the glass instruments with a fingertip and muttering ritually. 

We accelerated down the prairie expanse of the runway, and in a few hundred feet-at fifty knots-we were airborne, unstuck from our dark earthbound shadow like a soul departing the gross body. We climbed away from the bosomy Cotswolds and levelled at 5000 feet. Almost at once Peter demonstrated the pedals and joystick, and gave me control. I tipped the nose and wings, the plane banked and soared. We scampered among summer clouds of teased candyfloss. One tiny cloud was the shape of a doughnut and I asked if we could fly through it. 

'It's against the rules,' said Peter. 'We have to keep away from clouds, so that other planes can see us.'

'Oh,' I said. 

I must have looked like a crestfallen child, because Peter twisted in his seat to scan the horizon and said, 'OK-do it.'

I nosed the little aircraft towards the halo of vapour that seemed, as clouds can do, immaterial, whimsical, existing solely to delight. We became wrapped in whipped-white, tendrilled, ectoplasmic mist; aerial acrobats, we danced through the ring and beyond it into a circle of cobalt blue. It was freedom beyond anything I had ever known and I began to laugh, a high-pitched, euphoric giggle. 'Peter, I feel like an angel!'

He looked at me askance. 'Taking people flying I've had some weird reactions, but no one ever thought they were an angel before.' 

Yet the mystery to me is how anyone can experience flight in a small plane and not be euphoric. Professional pilots will tell you flying is a technical affair, precise to the point of dullness-but they are sticking to the party line to tranquillize the nervous public: I know two pilots who earn an unadrenal, commercial living, but spend their private time boy-racing round the skies in aerobatic Pitts Specials. If flying takes concentration, it gives back magic. 

That afternoon with Peter, a dream was reborn: to learn to fly.


