In fact, very little has changed since the 1730s: Aireyholme Farm where James senior became the bailiff is still in operation, some of the key characters' houses are family homes to this day, and the beautiful twelfth-century All Saints Church where the Cooks worshipped still stands, though now a memorial stone for Grace and James senior lies quietly in the churchyard. 

On the other side of the village, a few miles out, lies Roseberry Topping. Climbing up its steep sides, it is easy to see why he loved it so much: the huddled buildings of the village below glisten like fresh-laid eggs in an ants' nest. Here, the blustery wind becomes your playmate, nudging you into an endless game of tag - the perfect place for a boy who rarely got time to himself. It was probably his childhood forays up this hill that set the pattern for the years of exploration to come: whenever he arrived in foreign parts, one of his first actions would be to climb to the top of the nearest peak, look down at the lie of the land and take his bearings. The hill can be a bleak and lonely place at times and, even on a warm summer's day, there is still an edge in the wind that reminds one of nature's potency. The fact he chose to spend his free time in this barren isolation shows a self-reliance and a freedom of thought that would be alien to most small boys. It gives a strong hint, too, that he was happier striking out into a new world - a world according to his rules and observations - than occupying the known world of others. 

One day, the young James led a group of boys to the summit of the hill where he could name every village and hamlet in the vista below. When it came to going back down again, the boys elected to go one way but James was adamant about going the other. What's more, he would not only go down his way but he would be first to reach the bottom! Even when all the boys went the other way, he continued on his path with the characteristic single-mindedness and determination that would mark him out for life. This was typical of young James - but what happened next taught him that exploring alone was not without its dangers. He saw a jackdaw flying into a nest wedged in a crack in the rock and, following it up the crag, he grabbed on to a sapling, pulled himself up to the nest, collected some of its eggs which he put in his cap, then he put the cap in his teeth and began to climb back down. However, this proved rather more dangerous than he had imagined: the sapling he was holding on to suddenly began to come loose from the rocks and he slid perilously down the crag. Luckily, he was not alone on the hill: a soldier on watch for signs of Jacobite invasion from Scotland heard the cry and Cook was rescued, somewhat chastened no doubt, but allegedly having lost none of his courage or adventurous spirit.

More tales from this time allude to his developing strength of mind, although all of them fit a little too nicely into the folk legend surrounding the young explorer to be trusted as pure fact. But romanticised or not, there is probably an essence of truth in some of them that makes them worth adding into the story of his childhood. For example, John Graves in his 1808 History of Cleveland paints an interesting picture of the boy who would change the face of the globe:

It appears that he was never much regarded by the other boys É and was generally left behind in their juvenile excursions; a circumstance which can only be attributed to his steady adherence to his own plans and schemes, never giving way to the contre-projets of his associates. This, instead of conciliating their regard, naturally rendered them averse from his company. It has been asserted by those who know him at this early period in his life, that he had such an obstinate and sturdy way of his own as made him sometimes appear in an unpleasant light; notwithstanding which, there was something in his manners and deportment, which attracted the reverence and respect of his companions.

James senior was by now impressing his employer, Thomas Skottowe, with the quality of his work - but it was not only the father who caught the Lord of the Manor's eye. Skottowe was a wealthy man - a member of the gentry rather than a yeoman-farmer - and he no doubt saw it as his duty to scatter largesse amongst the villagers where he could. Great Ayton also boasted a rare amenity in the villages of the day - a sometime charity/sometime fee-paying or 'petty' school with space for twenty to thirty pupils, all taught by a single master. This had been established as far back as 1704, partly to teach Christian principles and obedience to the working classes and partly, perhaps, in reaction to the increasing popularity of Quakerism. This had been given a boost by the Toleration Act of 1689 which removed penalties to members of non-conformist religions and they were now growing to the extent that they were worrying traditional Christians who saw them as seducing believers away from the English Church. Of all these 'new' types of faith, Quakerism had taken the strongest hold in the north of England and by the time the Cooks moved into the village, it was well-established in Great Ayton. Not only that but it also had a high-profile sympathiser there Ñ Thomas Skottowe, the Lord of the Manor.

Skottowe was a regular member of the Church of England - a memorial to him graces the wall of the ancient All Saints chapel in the village. However, he was also a non-conformist and even had a small non-conformist chapel at his home in Ayton Hall; this suggests that he was progressive in his ideas as well as his religion - perhaps progressive enough to think outside the rigid confines of the eighteenth-century society when it came to education and self-improvement. It is also pertinent that, although the Cooks certainly worshipped at All Saints, over recent years historians have highlighted their Quaker links, with the suggestion that Grace Pace may have come from a Quaker family. Certainly, the future career of James was given a firm footing by the close-knit members of this faith but whether it was a religious kinship or like-mindedness, a recognition that 'there was a something' in the young boy that warranted investment, or most likely a combination of the two, Thomas Skottowe decided to pay the penny a week for him to attend the Great Ayton school.

Here, he learned reading, writing, arithmetic and, of course, the catechism - most probably by rote with strict discipline and little in the way of fun. It may also have been at school where he came across the story of Robinson Crusoe, published in 1719-22, written by another non-conformist, Daniel Defoe. This immensely popular story capitalised upon and further stimulated the public's hunger for information about the exotic lands across far-off oceans; it would certainly have whetted a young boy's appetite for travel and adventure. Other reports from his contemporaries in the village allege that he was more interested in sums than literature, having a 'remarkable facility in the science of numbers'; this was soon borne out by his first job as a shop-boy and, later still, his talent for surveys and navigation. However, there is no indication that he was a shining genius, even though he acquired this reputation within a few years of joining the Navy. For the meantime, he clearly kept his head down and studied as hard as any young boy would, when forced to sit still in a cold, dark schoolroom, learning enough to give him a sound platform for his real education - a self-taught one - in future years. 

From Great Ayton's marriage records, it seems that few of the village's girls were educated out of illiteracy - most brides signed their names with a cross, making it likely that the school was mainly 'boys only'. There is also no evidence that any of James's brothers attended the school, so he must have been clever enough and lucky enough to have caught the attention of the benevolent Mr Skottowe. Or perhaps not: one intriguing suggestion coming from the village of Great Ayton is that Thomas Skottowe might not have been quite as altruistic as he first looked. With a nod and a wink, I was told to look closely at the portrait of Cook compared with the portrait of Thomas Skottowe's son, John, of roughly the same age. John went on to become Governor of St Helena and a fine seaman in his own right, aided by the connections of his father but, then again, Skottowe also used his connections with the Admiralty to further Cook's career. Was it possible that Cook was Skottowe's son? The dates would seem to cast doubt on the whisper: James had spent his first eight years in the village of Marton but then his father must have known Skottowe before the move in order to get the job. James senior had stood out enough to capture his future boss's attention - had Grace Cook done the same? If she was a Quaker, this would be most unlikely - and it is even less likely that James senior would move closer to the source of marital strife. Meanwhile, the portraits show two strongly-featured men, both from the same village - two men not dissimilar in appearance.

For the next four years, James was a regular attendee of the school, probably under the tutelage of a William Rowland. Rowland had been granted an archbishop's licence in 1738 to teach a 'petty' school in Great Ayton, though from the parish records he appears to have been living in the village for some years before that. There is a striking similarity in the copperplate handwriting of both Cook and Rowland, exhibited alongside each other at the Captain Cook Schoolroom Museum that now occupies the site where young James would have received his lessons. 

Cook finished school, aged twelve, to help his father on the farm. Although he barely refers back to his Great Ayton days in the surviving papers and records, there were some legacies from his rural upbringing. When he made his travels in later life, he would take a healthy supply of farm animals and seeds with him which he would help establish in the new lands he visited for the benefit of the natives and returning sailors. The privations of his early life also stood him in good stead with Navy food - he could stomach even the poorest fare and was famous for his open mind when it came to experimenting with the strange local produce they encountered en route. But beyond these, he was no rose-tinted romantic and never one for looking back; childhood was just a necessary stepping-stone onwards and upwards. 

It was not just the young James who was ready to move on; the countryside itself was changing. By the middle of the eighteenth century, the industrial revolution was getting underway, bringing new developments in terms of technology, employment and social confidence. While these were most visible in the emerging towns and cities, they also transformed much of the British countryside. Rural villages now sported a whole host of industries and for those with the brains and the ambition - and of course the right connections - it was occasionally possible to break the mould of your parents' lives. As for the young James, he was about to take a step that would take him off the farm forever.
