TB was a rampant disease during this period; a four-year stay at sanatoriums wasn't unusual and the mortality rate was high. Almost everybody would have known someone who had been whisked away from home to a sanatorium, often miles from their family. 

Now, nearly sixty years later, Ray still remembers clearly the day Alan arrived. ‘Up until that time, the place was full of mainly exservicemen. I was the youngest in the place, so when Alan arrived, together with a load of other young guys, the atmosphere changed immediately. It was good for me because, at last, there were people of my own age to speak to.' 

Only a matter of months separated the births of Ray Galton and Alan Simpson. Ray was born in Paddington in July 1930, and his family moved to Morden, Surrey, when he was just six months old. His father was a regular in the navy for most of his working life, serving in both world wars. He returned to civvy street for a short period during the 1930s and worked as a bus conductor but remained a naval reserve; he was called up again when the fleet was mobilised during the Munich Crisis of 1938. He remained in the forces until 1946, by which time he'd split from his wife. Ray says: ‘It was a traumatic time for me. I was kept in the dark about their separation for some time – I used to wonder where he was. In those days, it was such a disgrace to even contemplate divorce or splitting up. I used to pray every night that the war wouldn't end so that the kids wouldn't ask me where my father was. It had a terrible effect on me.' 

After leaving school at the age of 14, Ray started work as a plasterer's apprentice in a building firm. When the work became tedious, he turned his attention to labouring and was hired to repair bomb-damaged sites in Wimbledon. Before long, he was working behind a desk at the Transport and General Workers' Union in London, where he stayed until finding himself bed-bound at Milford. 

Alan was born in November 1929, in Brixton, the son of a draughtsman. His father worked at Vickers just after the war, before becoming a milkman with United Dairies. 

When Alan was four, the family moved to the ‘posher suburb' of Streatham. ‘My parents bought a house for £425 and had to save two years just to put down a deposit of £25!' recalls Alan. ‘I lived most of my life in Streatham until I married.' Reflecting on his childhood days, he regards them as ‘very happy'. ‘I don't have many memories of Brixton, except the day my father looked after me one evening, as well as the boy next door. We were playing table tennis in the basement and this other kid started crying his eyes out – he must have been missing his mother or something. My father, normally a very patient man, was getting more and more frustrated, and I remember me, at the age of three, being a very smarmy boy, a right little crawler, saying things like: “Look at me, Daddy, I'm not crying.” Being an only child meant I was very spoilt.' 

Soon after the outbreak of war, Alan, who was attending Mitcham County Grammar School, was evacuated with the rest of the school to Weston-super-Mare for ten months: he hated every minute of the experience, feeling a deep sense of loneliness. During his first night in the Somerset seaside town, the docks at Cardiff, just across the Bristol Channel, took a pounding from German bombers. ‘On their way home, the bombers jettisoned some bombs over Weston – it was a frightening time. Of course, I'd been evacuated to, supposedly, keep me away from such dangers.' 

When his father was called up in 1940, Alan's mother allowed him to return home. ‘I used to write such pathetic letters,' he recalls, smiling. ‘When she died a few years ago, I found she'd kept all these letters I'd written as a ten-year-old, saying things like: “Mummy, I love you, please bring me home. I'll do everything you want, including going shopping with you without complaining . . .”' 

Before the cessation of hostilities, Alan's father was invalided out of the army after contracting Hodgkin's disease. Within months he was dead, aged just 43. ‘He was such a gentle man. One of my great regrets is that he never lived to see my success. I owe him so much, including introducing me to show business because every Monday evening he'd take me to the pictures.' 

Alan completed his education in disappointing circumstances. ‘I was brilliant as a kid up until the age of 11 – I was top of the class; it was downhill from then onwards, though. By the time I reached 16, I was quite thick, educationally. I took my matriculation but failed, ending up with a dodgy School Certificate. A meeting was set with the headmaster, who asked what I wanted to do with my life; when I told him I hoped to be a sports journalist he laughed his head off.' There was an ulterior motive behind Alan's desire to follow a journalistic path: being a keen sportsman himself, he thought the job would provide him with complimentary tickets to various sporting events. 

In the end, Alan's first job was at a firm of shipping agents in Leadenhall Street, London. He remembers his interview well. ‘I was considered for a position in the postal department by this very old man, one of the original partners, who must have been in his eighties. He said: “We can start you off at £81 a year, with annual increments of five shillings.” All I could think of was £81 – I'd never heard of so much money in one go. It wasn't until I got on the bus home that I started realising that, of course, you had to divide it by 52, which worked out at something like one pound, ten shillings a week; after I'd deducted my lunch and fares into town each day, plus my board and keep, there wouldn't be much left.' 

But the onset of the disease brought his life to a standstill as he spent what seemed like an eternity trapped inside hospital, trying to recuperate from this deadly illness. 

Before long, Alan and Ray were moved into the same ward and it soon became apparent that they had much in common. ‘When we got talking we found we had identical likes in terms of entertainment,' explains Alan. ‘We were both comedy fans. We were also film fans and had the same taste in music – in fact, it's amazing how close our thoughts are regarding politics, culture, wine, food. More importantly, though, our sense of humour was almost identical, which meant that as soon as we started working together we became almost telepathic. We could finish off each other's sentences.' 

The seeds of their working partnership were sown at Milford. The hospital possessed its own radio system, installed by the Friends of the Sanatorium, a charitable organisation who tried its utmost to make the patients' lives just a little more bearable. Eventually additional money was provided for a dedicated internal network system, and Ray played a part in the creation of Radio Milford. ‘These two guys – Tony Wallis and another patient called Saunders – installed the radio line throughout the entire sanatorium,' he recalls, ‘and although I wasn't allowed out of bed, I spent ages drilling wooden blocks for the wall in which the sockets were inserted. 

‘Between them, they not only developed the idea but also equipped the sanatorium with this additional network. In their pyjamas and dressing gowns they ran around the entire place, including the administration and the girls' block, fixing up the new channel. 

‘The sanatorium blocks were all one storey, divided into twoand four-bedders,' recalls Ray. ‘At the time I shared a room with Tony Wallis. He was a mad engineering geek whose father owned an engineering firm. The walls and the floor were covered with engineering and radio equipment – there was hardly enough room for me and my bed to be in there. 

‘He had a lovely RAF radio called a 1155 which had come out of a Lancaster, I think. This radio allowed us to listen to American Forces Network AFM Munich-Stuttgart at night-time, and also in the afternoon if the reception was good. If he approved of some of the people in other cubicles he'd run the wire to them and let them listen to it as well, and we'd be up half the night.' 

Initially, Radio Milford broadcast for an hour a day, playing record requests from a converted linen cupboard acting as a studio. Lots of romances blossomed at the hospital, with patients meeting each other at film shows or card evenings in the utility hall, and records would be requested for partners. As the station's popularity grew, a radio committee was established to evaluate new programme ideas; it wasn't long before Ray and Alan were identified as fervent supporters of the station and invited to join the committee. ‘The station had become more ambitious; we'd extended the broadcasting hours to two a day, and started introducing new aspects rather than just playing records,' explains Alan. ‘We tried our own version of BBC panel games, like Twenty Questions, and a show called A Seat in the Circle, where once a week, the presenter would go to a cinema and record a half hour programme; if you were listening at home it was like being at the pictures. We thought that was a good idea, so at our film show every Wednesday evening we made our own version of A Seat in the Circle.' 

‘Alan and I happened to mention one day that we weren't doing any drama or comedy shows, so they [members of the radio committee] asked us to come up with an idea,' adds Ray. ‘We decided on a comedy series titled Have You Ever Wondered? and agreed to write six 15-minute instalments – trouble was, we ran out of ideas after four! But that was the start of our partnership. The show contained extended sketches, and in 1949 we received our first fan letter, which was published in the Milford Bulletin, the hospital newspaper.' 

Galton and Simpson enjoyed the process of writing comedy sketches so much that they realised they wanted to pursue the art further. Although still far from being fully fit, their stay at Milford was coming to an end and they would soon be returning to civvy street. Neither had any idea how to nurture their interest into, perhaps, a future career, so sought advice from two of their heroes, Frank Muir and Denis Norden. Muir began writing for the Forces radio while serving with the Royal Air Force in Iceland during the Second World War. After demob he acquired an agent and subsequently met Norden. They had just begun writing their hit show, Take It From Here, when a letter from Galton and Simpson dropped through their office letterbox, asking how they could become scriptwriters. The would-be writers offered their services as tea boys in their office, hoping to observe how Muir and Norden went about their job. Keen to advise, Muir and Norden replied, suggesting they send a sample of their work to Gale Pedrick, who was employed as script editor at the BBC. It was another year before Alan and Ray had scripted a piece of work they regarded fit for scrutiny by the Beeb. In the meantime, they continued on their recovery programme and looked forward to the day when they could wave farewell to the many friends they had made during their enforced stay at Milford. 

Alan left hospital six months before Ray, reasonably fit and able to resume work, albeit part-time, at the London shipping office. Ray wasn't so fortunate: he wasn't allowed to work, was ordered not to smoke or undertake anything strenuous, and had to ensure he had early nights. He didn't take too kindly to the doctor's suggestion that he adopt a more sedentary lifestyle and spent the first night of freedom tapping away to the music at Ronnie Scott's Jazz Club in London.
