

A little later my elder brother, Tony, bought the first Bob Dylan album, which he proceeded to play over and over again while struggling to sing along in Dylan's nasal vocal style. I'm not sure who sounded worse. Today, neither my brother nor Bob Dylan would get through a single audition on Pop Idol - at least, not as long as I remain one of the judges. One of them can't sing and the other's too boring. Throughout this era of early rock-and-roll, my parents continued their long-running affair with artists such as Frank Sinatra and Tony Bennett. As a child, these artists did nothing for me, although eventually I came to understand the appeal of Sinatra. One of the world's greatest entertainers. 

And then, of course, the Beatles came onto the scene and changed it in ways that no one could have predicted. At the end of 1963 - during the same dismal period I mentioned earlier, when the Profumo scandal was on everyone's mind - the Beatles had hit No. 1 in the pop charts with 'She Loves You', which was also the first record I can remember asking my mum to buy for me. In part, this was because my elder brother, Tony, had it, but it wasn't only a matter of imitation. It was the first time in my life that I had been interested in music; and I was desperate to own a copy. There was something about that music that made me sit up and listen. 

At the time, it seemed like a wonderful, peaceful revolution. What I didn't realize then - I was only four years old, after all - is that record companies were the main benefactors of the Beatles' ascendancy. Soon, the British public was bombarded by sound-alike bands like the Hollies and the Dave Clark Five, looking to jump on the bandwagon. The cultural revolution meant big money for someone. And after Time magazine coined the phrase 'Swinging London', it was only a matter of time before America got the message, too. The next Beatles record, 'I Want To Hold Your Hand', went to No. 1 in the United States and four other Beatles tracks went simultaneously into the top five slots on the Billboard charts. 

Rehashing the Beatles' early career may sound like ancient history, in a sense, but it's also important history, because it utterly changed the possibilities for popular entertainers. Not only were the Beatles wonderful singers and increasingly talented songwriters, but they were something else: celebrities at a level for which there was no precedent. The Beatles were also the first band to be photographed living it up in what we now perceive as traditional rock-star fashion. They were seen lounging in the backs of limos, drinking champagne and lording it up in hotel suites. But they were also young and boyish and seemed utterly distinct from the musical acts of previous generations. For the first time young people looked at them and thought wistfully, 'That could be me.'

I was one of those young people. 

I spent my happy childhood, as I have said, growing up in a large country house in Elstree, just twenty miles north of London. Abbots Mead, the house, was in five acres of landscaped grounds. Part of my father's job involved assessing a building site and determining the materials necessary for completing the construction, and he had purchased Abbots Mead as a sad ruin. Convinced he could return the house to its former glory, he spent two years gutting and then rebuilding the interior. The house itself was built on four floors with eight bedrooms, four bathrooms and a ton of places in which to hide and explore. For a naughty four-year-old boy, Abbots Mead was the perfect place in which to grow up. 

Life at home was a well-organized affair. Mum was the captain, and she ran a tight and orderly ship. We had a gardener named Robin who pruned and tended the gardens. Mrs Ostler cleaned the house and kept it shipshape. And Heather, our devoted live-in nanny, had perhaps the hardest job of all. Heather looked after the three youngest Cowell children: Tony, Nicholas and me. If we were little devils, Heather was nothing less than an angel. She cooked for us, cleaned for us and even made sure Tony was in bed before two in the morning - he was just entering his trainee rock-star rebellion period, and didn't care for rules and regulations. To this day, she still has a number of mementos from her years with us, including my old pink pram, which she proudly displayed on This Is Your Life this year. Thanks Heather!

In those days, Elstree was the Hollywood of the British film industry. It had begun as a sleepy country village, but then, in the early part of the century, two major studios were built there and a town grew up around them and the jobs. Those two studios, MGM and Associated British Picture Corporation, were the home to a string of British-made films, including Secret Ceremony with Elizabeth Taylor, Where Eagles Dare with Richard Burton, Robert Aldrich's The Dirty Dozen and Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey. In fact, some years later, Kubrick himself bought Abbots Mead from my parents. According to my dad, who had always been a snob when it came to architecture and interior design, Kubrick ruined the house by turning most of the ground floor into a private cinema. 

During my childhood, the stars who worked at Elstree included Roger Moore, Gregory Peck, Robert Mitchum, Bette Davis and Maureen O'Hara. This created a brand new world of celebrity for my parents, and, by extension, for me. The stars soon became our friends and neighbours, and whenever they were in town I got to rub shoulders with the cream of Hollywood, as long as I could squeeze my way past my mum. The leader of this exclusive Hollywood circle was our closest neighbour, Gerry Blatner. Gerry was head of Warner Brothers Films in the UK, and whenever Hollywood stars came to Elstree they would stay at Gerry's house. The first guest of Gerry's that Mum ever met (over the garden fence) was Bette Davis, who became a regular visitor to the house. There are not many kids who can say that they sat on the knee of Bette Davis while she learned her lines. (Though how she managed to learn her lines at all in the presence of my mum, who could out-talk anyone, remains a complete mystery.)

Roger Moore, best known as James Bond, was another star who was in town quite often. Mum was a big fan of his television show The Saint, which had rocketed him to fame, and Roger would often invite us to watch him film the TV show on the back lot of Elstree Studios. By this time Tony was working as a runner on the show, and his job was to drive and position the cars on the set. Often he would let me ride around the studios in the back seat while he drove, as long as I kept my head down - which, of course, I stubbornly refused to do. Other frequent dinner guests were the actor Trevor Howard and his wife, Helen Cherry. Trevor once asked me if I wanted to be an actor when I grew up. 'No,' I replied, bored. 'I don't like actors.'

With Mum so at home with 'theatrical' types - it came from her days on the London stage, she always said - it wasn't long before the Cowell family was enjoying a nonstop whirl of film industry parties, often held at Abbots Mead. My parents entertained with endless cocktail hours and formal dinners. From my perch at the top of the staircase, I used to peek through the rails in fascination at the scantily dressed women sipping champagne. This is an interest, I admit, I have never lost. 

Some nights, as the music and laughter increased, I would venture further down the staircase, step by step. I knew that if I attracted the attention of one of the more intoxicated guests I would soon be invited down to join the fun. My dad cut a handsome figure. In fact, with his jet-black hair and stylish suits, he was often mistaken for one of Gerry Blatner's film-star guests. Dad had a wicked sense of humour and would hold court at dinner parties with a nonstop stream of witty anecdotes and rude stories, which he delivered with a deadpan face. 

Dad was highly successful in his business and worked hard to make his money. That meant, of course, that he was off to work early each day; every morning at 7.30 a.m. he would jump into his white E-type Jaguar and drive the twenty miles to his London office with the hood down and one of his trademark Cuban cigars in his mouth. With Dad away most of the day, the bulk of our rearing was left to Mum. And since my own disobedient tendencies were apparent from an early age, that meant that Mum had to take a firm hand with me. She was always telling me what to do or what not to do, and I was forever refusing to listen to her. 

It is easy, with hindsight, to reflect on how this privileged upbringing and artistically rich atmosphere came to influence my interest in music and films. It certainly gave me confidence at a very early age. Mixing with the cream of Hollywood, I always had a feeling that I would end up working in the entertainment business. 

While the Beatles and the Rolling Stones dominated the airwaves during the mid-sixties, my parents hadn't really noticed. The dulcet tones that reverberated down the corridors of Abbots Mead, mostly in the early hours of the morning, belonged exclusively to (yawn) Charles Aznavour, Shirley Bassey, Perry Como and Jack Jones (Mum had the hots for Jack). They were all hugely successful artists, but to a four-year-old, strong-willed little brat, not to mention his teenage older brother, they were just a terrible noise. I may not have been able to read, but I already knew precisely what music I didn't like - and my parents had a sizeable collection of it. My younger brother Nicholas and I would constantly beg Mum to 'turn that rubbish off', and we even began to hide the records we hated most by slipping them under the expansive sofas in the lounge. One day in a fit of pique I actually put a huge scratch across one of Mum's favourite records using one of Dad's screwdrivers. I was determined that I would never have to hear Shirley Bassey ever again.

Tony had been banished to the top floor of the house, as he was in his early teens. It was there, in Tony's smoky bedroom, that I first experienced a wide range of rock and pop stars - Bob Dylan, Neil Young, the Beach Boys and even Tom Jones - and listened to Tony's own painfully pathetic attempts to emulate Jimi Hendrix. It's a shame that I was too young to offer him my informed opinion and guidance. 

But my first music lesson at school gave me just that opportunity. As a five-year-old in a rowdy class of twenty other junior Beatles, I was anxious to get my hands on a guitar like Tony's. My po-faced music teacher, Mrs Jones, had other ideas. She made me play the bass drum. Not at all amused by the choice of instrument, I proceeded to bang the drum so hard that it drowned everyone else out. Mrs Jones looked on in horror and promptly swapped my drum for a triangle in a vain attempt to bring some order to the class. I soon realized what a complete and utter racket we were making; it was terrible. I raised my hand and demanded an explanation. 'Miss,' I said, 'this is absolutely dreadful. Why are you making us do it?'

I had no idea back then that this was how I would end up making millions. 

Neither did Mrs Jones, who saw to it that I was promptly escorted out of the class and not allowed back. Thank God.
