THE ITALIAN WRITER PRIMO LEVI DIED TODAY FROM
A FALL DOWN THE STAIRWELL OF HIS TURIN RESIDENCE.
POLICE SAID THEY WERE TREATING HIS DEATH
AS SUICIDE. HE WAS 68.

Turin, Italy, Reuters

Some time between 10:00 am and 10:15 am on the morning of 11 April 1987 the commissariat at 73 Via Massena in Turin received a telephone call. It had been relayed from the police emergency number 113: there had been an accident. An ambulance accompanied by the police flying-squad proceeded to 75 Corso Re Umberto. This was a block of flats in a residential area of the city; the main doors were already open to let the police inside. In their first report to the Public Prosecutor's Office, dated that same Saturday 11 April, the police noted: '. . . Corpse found in vicinity of lift . . . Identified as Primo Levi.' The body had fallen fifteen metres head-first down the stairwell of the building and struck the marble floor at the foot of the lift shaft. Death was instantaneous. 

Preliminary investigations ruled out the possibility of third-party involvement. However, there had been no witness to the last moments of Primo Levi's life. According to the police reconstruction, Levi opened the door to his third-floor flat, stepped out unseen on to the landing and pitched himself over the railings. He fell in silence. The time of death was approximately 10:05 am (and not, as the Italian newspapers reported, 10:20 am or 10:30 am). This would have been about ten minutes before the police arrived on the scene. One of the last to have seen Levi alive was Jolanda Gasperi, the concierge. 

Nineteen days after the incident, on 30 April 1987, she was questioned at the Via Massena commissariat. A small grey-haired woman, her recorded testimony is unnaturally stilted, owing to police formality: 'I confirm that I perform the duties of concierge at 75 Corso Re Umberto.' So begins the transcript. 'At about 10:00 am, after sorting out the post, I went to the residence of levi the writer, which is situated on the third floor of the aforesaid address, and personally delivered his post. I then went to the main entrance hall of the building to do some work. I was about to start sweeping when I heard a thud from the small lobby by the stairs. I went in there at once and saw the body of levi on the ground, adjacent to the base of the lift.' Jolanda Gasperi tried to telephone the Red Cross for an ambulance, but her call went unanswered. At that point a man entered ('the owner of the cleaning company, I don't know his name') and dialled 113 for the Police Central Operator. After the police and ambulance arrived, the concierge called Primo Levi's son, Renzo, on the intercom and told him what had happened. 

Renzo Levi, twenty-nine, a biophysicist, was living in the flat next to his parents. In spite of the proximity he had heard nothing of the commotion downstairs. Levi's daughter Lisa, thirty-eight, a biology teacher, lived nearby in the same neighbourhood: she arrived soon afterwards. The speed with which the flying-squad reached 75 Corso Re Umberto was due to the absence of traffic that morning; many had left Turin for the long Easter weekend. Everyone agreed that 11 April 1987 was an unusually bright day; after months of rain the horse-chestnuts along Corso Re Umberto were showing the first spring buds. 

According to one journalist's report, Jolanda Gasperi had said to Primo Levi that morning: 'Have you seen what sunshine there is today, professor!' Many people addressed Levi as professore (he held no such title; it was a mark of deference). Gasperi was just ten days younger than Primo Levi; born on 10 August 1919 in the nothern Italian province of Trentino, she had worked at 75 Corso Re Umberto for the last twelve years.

That Saturday, as was her custom every morning at ten o'clock, Signora Gasperi had left the porter's lodge with a bundle of post for any occupants who were still in. Milan's Il Giorno says she took the wide granite stairs by the lift; making her way past the brass name plates and double wooden doors, she routinely delivered parcels and envelopes. Presently she reached the third floor and rang the bell to flat 3A. Primo Levi opened the door and extended a hand for the correspondence. 'No, there was nothing in particular,' Gasperi told the Rome daily La Repubblica. 'Some publicity leaflets, a book, a magazine. Nothing, I mean, that could have upset him.'

In her long years as concierge, Jolanda Gasperi had got to know Levi well. A week earlier he had signed her copy of his latest book: 'With friendship and esteem'. As far as she could remember, there was nothing untoward in Levi's behaviour that spring morning. 'He greeted me as he had always done. A smile, a thank you.' La Repubblica also quotes Gasperi as saying: 'I knew that he had been depressed for some time. But he never betrayed his condition Ð his sadness Ð to me.' From Il Giorno we know what Levi was wearing that morning: a white short-sleeved shirt, grey trousers, black shoes. 

Jolanda Gasperi had returned downstairs when, scarcely five minutes later, she heard 'un tonfo', a thud. At that moment only Primo Levi's mother, Ester, and a nurse, Elena Giordanino, were in the flat. 'I wasn't aware that anything had happened,' the nurse told a regional newspaper. 'I was busy looking after the elderly lady.' In fact the two women were in the room furthest from the entrance; no sound would have reached them from the third floor landing of the stairwell. Giordanino was also questioned at the Via Massena commissariat. Born in Turin on 26 October 1930, she opens her testimony in the usual formal way: 'I confirm that I am a nurse and that, from the month of August 1986, I have carried out my duties at the residence of primoLevi the writer, where I assist his mother, Ester, aged ninety-two.'

The transcript continues: 'The writer primo Levi, after having been discharged from hospital where he had undergone a prostate operation, was extremely disturbed. In fact he sometimes asked if he would ever be entirely cured, as he found it difficult whenever he had to receive visitors. On 11/4/87, as I had always done at about 8:00 am, I gave him his usual injection, then I continued my work. At approximately 10:00 am Levi called me; he asked me if I would stand by the telephone as he had to go downstairs to the porter's lodge.' It would appear that Levi had wanted to ensure that the only mobile person in the flat at that time Ð nurse Giordanino Ð could not accidentally distract him from his awful task. 'From that moment I never saw Levi again,' the nurse went on. 'I only became aware of what had happened when levi Renzo, his son, arrived at the residence accompanied by police officers.' Prompted by another question, the nurse repeats herself: 'I confirm that the writer levi Primo was very disturbed. In fact sometimes I would see him sitting with his head in his hands, thinking.' 

So it seems likely that the nurse, and not the conciege Jolanda Gasperi (as the Italian newspapers claimed), was the last person to see Primo Levi alive. Levi's wife of forty years, Lucia, had gone out shopping that morning at about 9:30 am. She had not yet returned when Gasperi's cry for help alerted Francesco Quaglia, seventy-two, a dentist who had known Levi since school and had an office in the same building. (Whether Quaglia is the owner of the 'cleaning company' mentioned earlier by Gasperi to the police is not clear; he was responsible for administering the condominium.) 'It was a terrible sight,' Quaglia told La Repubblica. 'One look was enough: there was no hope.' Levi's wife came back laden with groceries. Reportedly both Quaglia and the concierge tried to hold her back. 'We didn't have time to shield her from the spectacle,' explained Quaglia. Lucia embraced Quaglia. 'Primo was depressed,' she repeated to him. 'You knew it, too, didn't you?' 

All the Italian newspapers allude to Primo Levi's depression, or to some sort of mood disorder, in his last months. One of them quotes his wife as saying: 'I feared it, everybody feared it. Primo was tired of life . . . We did our best never to leave him alone, ever. Just one moment was enough.' I feared it, everybody feared it. Allegedly those were Lucia Levi's first words as (according to the august Milan newspaper Corriere della Sera) she 'flung herself down beside her husband and tried to lift his head'. Presently the police were joined by forensic detectives; someone had thrown sawdust on the marble floor by the lift, where a small pool of blood had gathered. Levi's mother apparently had intuited a calamity. The Turin daily La Stampa claims she cried out: 'What's all this coming and going . . . this disturbance . . . has something happened? . . . Primo . . . has something happened to him?' She was told that her son had been taken to hospital following a heart attack.

There is a brief, hand-written note from the doctor called in by the police to the scene of the accident: 'Confirmed hereby the decease of Primo Levi as the likely result of suicide. Faithfully, Dr Roberto Mandas. 11/4/87.' Signed on-site at 75 Corso Re Umberto, this is the first mention in any official report of a self-inflicted death. 

Well-wishers, friends and relatives gathered outside the apartment building. Some placed orchids and forget-me-nots where Levi had fallen; there were so many floral tributes that Jolanda Gasperi had to remove them to the porter's lodge. The Italian Communist newspaper L'Unitˆ tried to capture the sense of shock and bereavement. 'Just as the concierge is closing the main doors half-way as a sign of mourning, a girl arrives on a bicycle. The woman says a couple of words to her and the smile vanishes from the young face. "Primo Levi dead?"' 

As ordered by Turin's Assistant Public Prosecutor, Dr Loreto, the body was taken to the University's Institute of Forensic Medicine; it was deposited there at 11:45 am, less than two hours after the incident. Two days later, on Monday 13 April, a post-mortem examination was performed on behalf of the police by Professor Mario Portigliatti. Although there was no doubt that Primo Levi's death had been self-inflicted, the autopsy was carried out in accordance with the Italian penal code Article 365, which obliges a pathologist to report his findings to the Public Prosecutor. It notes: 'Rigor present. On the extensor surface of left upper forearm is the tattooed number 374572 (the numerals are scarcely legible). Bilateral haemorrhage from ears and right nostril . . .' The pathologist, a personal friend of the deceased, might not have known that the concentration-camp tattoo was clearly visible in life as 174517, not the numerals quoted in the autopsy.

The cause of death is summarised: 'Cerebral crushing with multiple fracture of cranium. Severe traumatic lacerations of heart, lungs, liver, spleen . . . Multiple fracture of vertebral column, sternum, of all ribs, clavicles, pelvis, right femur, right wrist.' The physical act that led to death is recorded as 'precipitazione dall'alto', a 'fall from a high place'.

This sad chronicle was closed on 5 June 1987 when a Turin law court officially declared that Primo Levi had died by his own hand. There would be no penal proceedings, therefore, and 'all papers relative to the suicide' were consigned to the tribunal archive.
