CHAPTER 1 

A Winter's Tale 

In 1961 when I met George I was twenty-four and married to my second husband. I had two children, Patrick who was six and Candy who was seven months. Some people thought I was beautiful, but not everyone. I had once been a model and when a famous photographer tried me out, he told a fashion editor, 'No matter what I do with her, she just looks like a little old lady.' 

George was thirty-five, quite short and just getting to be rather plump; his feet were tiny so he minced slightly when he walked; he had brown eyes, a big nose, a huge smile and was famous for singing in a jazz band and being bisexual. 

There is a side to George that has always been attracted to unstable, needy women - and that was me. I responded to almost any man who wanted me. Until I met George, this haphazard selection usually ended unhappily. 

When I married Michael, my first husband, I was sixteen. He was an imaginative, feckless Irishman of aristocratic origins which impressed me at the time but meant that he considered most jobs beneath him. We lived in bed-sits on hand-outs from my mother who was working as a housekeeper. Debt collectors came round most mornings. One of them, who came with a writ from the gas board, ignored the fact that I was eight months pregnant and made a heavy pass at me. 'Don't worry girlie,' he had said, 'I could sort this out for you if you're nice to me.' 

When our son Patrick was seven months old, Michael was still out of work. Unable to afford the rent of a flat or even a room, we went to live with his parents in Sussex. My mother-in-law and I disliked each other and after a few weeks I walked out, left Michael and, taking Patrick with me, went home to my mother. Her employer only allowed us to stay for a couple of months, saying that I should stand on my own two feet. 

I found a room, I waitressed at night and was moderately successful at modelling. During the day Patrick went to a crèche, at night he was left alone. Sometimes after leaving the coffee bar where I worked I went out dancing. Then Patrick got measles and I had to stop work. The money ran out and I sent Patrick, now two, to live with my aunt in Essex. After leaving Patrick, I went to live with a writer called Michael Alexander who took me to Afghanistan. We travelled there in his battered Land Rover while he gathered material for a book. 

When we came back, he left me and married someone else. I got 'engaged' to three different men. None of them seemed too desolate when I changed my mind except for one. Johnnie Moynihan was a journalist, we had the same friends, he was kind to his mother and I ran out of reasons for saying no. 

But it was another year before Patrick came to live with us, because Johnnie wanted to wait until we had a child of our own. So when my aunt brought Patrick to the London flat, our daughter Candy was already three months old. Just six weeks later Johnnie was sent to Paris by his paper, the Evening Standard. The job was to last for two months and he was lent a large flat near Les Deux Magots on the left bank. I went too but we left the children behind: Candy with my mother and Patrick back with my aunt. Johnnie had given two reasons for not wanting the children to come: money, and the busy social life that we would have to lead. I missed them and, when Johnnie heard that he was being sent down to Monte Carlo for a further month, I decided to go home. 

We had let our flat for the duration of the French assignment, so after visiting Patrick at my aunt's house, I squashed into my mother's tiny bed-sit with Candy, who at six months was still just small enough for a carry-cot. Five years before, when I'd run away from Michael taking Patrick with me, my mother and I had shared the same bed. Patrick had slept on two chairs tied together because I couldn't afford a cot. 

Back there again, I still didn't like staying at home with my mother. I would often leave her to babysit and would climb the rather grubby stairs to Muriel's, a drinking club in Soho. Encouraged by Muriel, someone would usually buy me a drink and I would go and sit with it on top of the piano. I always imagined that my rather short legs would look better if I was high up. One night George came in and everyone perked up. He came over to me, and then said to Muriel, 'Who's the sexy mouse?' For some reason young women were called mice in the days before they were called birds. 'That's Johnnie Moynihan's wife,' said Muriel, looking pleased. Any possible sexual encounter involving trouble always excited her. 

I knew that George Melly was well known in a small circle of jazz fans and to habitués of Soho. I also knew that he wrote a strip cartoon for the Daily Mail and I had seen him on a news programme talking about the nuclear threat and wearing a ban-the-bomb badge. He had a reputation for being sexually wild and a boozer. There was a buzz when he was expected, either on a left-wing march or at a Chelsea bottle party. He had given me such a big hug at one of those parties that my breast milk (I was feeding Candy at the time) had soaked through the pads in my bra. At another party I was talking to his wife Victoria and another woman, both of them models. George swayed up to us and said he didn't know which of us was the more beautiful, or whom he should give the apple to. Once I arrived at a party in a studio in Paddington just too late to see him being carried off by a huge West Indian belly dancer. It was rumoured that she had first knocked him out. 

George was flirting with me in Muriel's when the phone rang. It was his wife, Victoria, explaining that she couldn't meet him that evening to go to the opening of the Establishment Club. The idea for the club, a place where you could have supper and watch a satirical cabaret, came from Peter Cook and Dudley Moore. It had attracted a huge amount of publicity and invitations for the opening were in demand. Naturally I accepted when George invited me to take Victoria's place. Later on that evening George and I made love on Hampstead Heath. 

The following day we met in a pub and rather casually decided that somehow we would live together. Victoria had recently agreed to move in with Roy Boulting, the film director, but Johnnie was angry and hurt. Coldly I ignored his feelings and, taking the children, moved into Andrée Melly's flat. George's sister was an actress and was away rehearsing in Bristol, but she sent George a firm letter: yes, I could stay there until Victoria moved out, but Tizzy, their brother Bill's girlfriend, was also staying there and she was more conventional. The letter laid out the rules: 

1 Not to let Tizzy be a penny out of pocket re food 
2 Not to get tight and use bad language
3 Not to fuck in the flat
4 To be charming to Tizzy's mother. 

Two weeks later I moved into George's house on the borders of Golders Green and Hampstead. He was singing three or four times a week with Mick Mulligan's band, and that night was on tour in the North. Victoria had moved out only that day. She had taken her child Pandora, her sports car, the brass cot from Harrods and the portrait of herself painted by Tim Whidborne, who she said was the father of her child. (Tim was a pupil of Annigoni, who painted the famous portrait of the Queen.) George rang me from the Manchester Jazz Club and asked me to hang 'the lamb painting' in place of her portrait above the mantelpiece. George had bought paintings since his father had given him £200 when he was eighteen. He was now thirty-five and it was a large collection: Magritte, Max Ernst, Picasso and others less well known. I searched the house for a lamb in any shape or form - Cubist, Surrealist, Kitsch. No lamb, and nothing signed Lamb. 

I knew better than to own up to this hole in my knowledge of art. The previous week I had gone to a jazz club with George and had been asked to find 'Bix', the piano player. I found a man practising some chords on the piano and asked him if his name was 'Bix'. I hadn't heard of Bix Beiderbecke, the famous American jazz musician, and when Ronnie - for that was his real name - told the band of my ignorance they had a good laugh at my expense. They also enjoyed it when I clapped on the on-beat. 

The only member of the band that I got on well with was Mick Mulligan, the band-leader. He was a tall, shambling man, good-looking with a strong sexual aura softened by a fatherly manner. Perhaps I also liked him because he said to George, on meeting me for the first time, 'You've got a good one there, cock.' I also liked Ian Christie, the clarinettist who became a film critic for the Daily Express when the band folded; but Ian thought I was a snob and didn't have much to say to me. The rest of the band didn't think my reign would last long and treated me accordingly. 

When George came back from Manchester he asked me why I hadn't hung the lamb and I replied I had tried it and it hadn't looked good. It was some months before I spotted 'the lamb'. It was Wilfredo Lam, not a terrifically well-known painter, with an indecipherable signature. 

In 1960, the year before I met George, there had been a demonstration against nuclear weapons culminating in a big sit-down in Trafalgar Square. I watched it on the TV and had seen George being carried off by the police along with Vanessa Redgrave, John Osborne and Doris Lessing. He always wore his ban-the-bomb badge, and once, when he was asked to remove it for a TV programme about trad jazz, he refused and his song was cut from the show. 

Not all of his defiant gestures were equally attractive. I always disliked the point system. While travelling in the bandwagon, the Mulligan band would award themselves points whenever they had the opportunity to run over a disabled person. It was six points for a blind man and eight if he was also on crutches, and the same for a pregnant woman. But these were the days before political correctness, when de Sade was only seen as a great liberator. It was also before feminism and the British jazz world was as full of male chauvinists as other more conventional worlds. Men knew best and I never corrected them. 
 




