Chapter One




When she eventually returned to London she enrolled at the Slade School of Art to study life drawing, but never wanted to pursue a career as an artist because, she says bluntly, ‘I wasn't any good', though she had a deep interest in art and, on a trip to Italy in 1937, her friend, Julian Oxford, was ‘struck by the confidence she always showed in her own judgements, and her caution in accepting the opinions of the fashionable critics of the time'. By 1938, she was impatient with the conventional London scene and refused to participate in the ‘awful thing called “coming out” . . . I was fairly bolshie about that'. She declined to be presented at court or to have the traditional ball in her honour: ‘I thought the whole thing was just nonsense. Boring to a degree.' As a New Statesman reader, she had left-wing friends who did not fit in with the débutante scene. Spurred by a romantic attachment, she returned to Paris. 

When war threatened in 1939, Clarissa was staying in Romania with a writer friend, Marthe Bibesco. Oblivious to danger, she at first resisted her mother's urgent plea that ‘Winston says there's going to be a war, you must come home' – perhaps because she'd heard it so often at Chartwell luncheons, and also because the ‘very good-looking' Romanian Foreign Secretary assured her there would be no war. Luckily Marthe Bibesco's aviator husband flew her to Bucharest where she caught one of the last planes out before Romania fell to the German advance. 

In 1940 she moved to Oxford after a friend, Roy Harrod, asked her what she wanted to do and she replied: study philosophy. It was an unusual choice as none of her women friends had been to university. Though not an undergraduate (she had left school without any qualifications) she was tutored by philosopher A.J. Ayer and at the age of 19 found people who sparked her intellectual curiosity. ‘My whole life changed,' she recalls. ‘It was the most incredible thing that could happen to one. [It] was a revelation, terribly exciting.' She mixed with the pillars of Oxford's academic community – Isaiah Berlin, Maurice Bowra and David Cecil, who had been a friend of her mother's – and was ‘the dons' delight because she was beautiful and extremely intellectual', says Antonia Fraser. The eccentric Gerald Berners, who Clarissa thought was ‘a dilettante in the best sense', became a great friend: ‘I'd never seen anything like him. He painted very nicely, he composed very nicely, he wrote very nicely, and his whole attitude to life was incredible. He also did the music for ballets with Diaghilev.' 

At his house, Faringdon, she mixed with photographer Cecil Beaton (who thought her ‘a most romantic character'), Violet Trefusis, John Betjeman and others on the literary and academic scene. Berners based a character in his novel Far from the Madding War on her: ‘The first impression of her was of gentleness and modesty . . . she was extremely pretty [and her hair] was reminiscent of a cornfield at daybreak', and she appeared in James Pope-Hennessy's London Fabric as ‘swift and amusing, seeing things in silhouette and immensely capable of intelligent judgements', with a ‘charming, evanescent shyness, smiling a private smile'. 

In the informal atmosphere of wartime Oxford, where she bicycled to and fro and nobody dressed up for dinner, her originality blossomed: ‘She's basically a very private person,' says her friend Gay Charteris, who enjoyed her values, her fun and her unexpectedness. ‘You never knew what she was going to say next, but it was always her. She was unusual, not at all running with the herd.' She had a natural style: ‘Even when we were doing fire-watching duties together and slept in our clothes, she would get up looking as though she'd walked out of Vogue,' though her aloofness could be disconcerting to her contemporaries: ‘She was hard to please. It was a sort of challenge to make Clarissa laugh. She didn't go out of her way with anybody much, and yet she had appeal,' diplomat Nicko Henderson, an undergraduate at the time, recalls. 

Without quite knowing what she wanted to do, but concluding that she couldn't spend the whole war enjoying herself in Oxford, she took a job as a clerk at the Foreign Office decoding telegrams. Her friend Alfred Duff Cooper (Churchill's Minister of Information) arranged for her to live at the Dorchester Hotel – in cut-price rooms at the top because, with the danger from the bombing, ‘nobody wanted to be at the top of anything'. Bombs never particularly frightened her, until the coming of the ‘doodlebugs' – the V1s – in 1944, and later the V2 rockets, by which time nerves were a little frayed. She ate out at restaurants, although in 1942 there was ‘nothing but fishballs', went to night-clubs, was courted by young men, and read voraciously, especially French literature. She worked briefly for the Women's Voluntary Service and in a factory where ‘Alice and I sit [with] red hot irons soldering something'. When the Dorchester Hotel arrangement ended she moved into a flat at Rossmore Court, in Regent's Park, a rather ‘poor place to be' but all she could afford. It had a marvellous view over Hampstead and Highgate, and was just down the road from another friend, the writer Elizabeth Bowen. 

During the war, her contact with Winston, then Prime Minister, and Clemmie was intermittent; she stayed with them at Chequers after the shock of her mother's death in 1941, and convalesced there after an illness when ‘the house was icy &amp; I slept in my fur coat' and ‘W[inston]. was as loving, humorous, great and utterly seductive as ever in a series of quilted Chinese dressing gowns, &amp; champagne for every meal', she wrote to Cecil Beaton. She had her own circle of friends, including critic Cyril Connolly, editor of the literary magazine Horizon. ‘People like Cyril had little gatherings in London and then one met all the other writers, and that is where I felt happy,' she remembers. Her first published article, in 1944, was a dispatch from Berlin for Horizon reporting on what remained of theatre and cultural life in the devastated city, and before that she worked briefly for a Ministry of Information newspaper directed at a Russian readership, called British Ally or Britansky Soynznik. 

At the war's end, still with no clear idea of what she wanted to do and no private income, Clarissa landed a job on Vogue, reviewing theatre, music and art in the Spotlight column. Her articles were sharp and perceptive, but she never viewed this as a career. ‘I'm completely idle by nature,' she declares, ‘I never worked out of ambition. I just did it because I needed the money.' Career women were anyway regarded as ‘rather peculiar' then. In 1947 she moved to a better-paid job at £25 a week doing publicity at London Films for the producer Alexander Korda. On the set of The Third Man she met Orson Welles – ‘a modern version of those extrovert, creative, vital Renaissance figures' who became ‘a pleasantly patient, polite and humane' dinner companion, and a number of other stars who were less to her taste. Shy and often uncompromising in her judgements, she found actors, except Welles, ‘not very interesting' and most of the films mediocre. Writing publicity coverage for Anna Karenina, An Ideal Husband and Bonnie Prince Charlie among others, she interviewed the ‘always terribly grumpy' Cary Grant, and a temperamental Vivien Leigh, and escorted actress Paulette Goddard on a rather wild trip to Brussels. 

Her life seemed to have gained its own momentum, almost despite herself, but for Clarissa, as for everyone else in Britain, life generally was pinched, with clothes rationing and shortages. So it was a high spot to be sent to publicise An Ideal Husband in New York, where she stayed at the Plaza Hotel and experienced a ‘different world – very chic'. On her return to Heathrow airport, then a fairly small hut surrounded by grass, her current boyfriend didn't recognise her – she'd cut her hair short and had on ‘the most incredible coat' which reached almost to the ground. She reflected the feelings of most women who longed for the end of austerity and rationing, and welcomed a new era of long flowing skirts, hourglass waists and feminine lines – a style that couturier Christian Dior had only recently unveiled with his ‘New Look'. When someone gave Clarissa an smokey-orange Dior chiffon dress, she recalls, ‘It was like a fire. It was beyond belief to have – absolutely wonderful.' 

The gradual easing of wartime restrictions led to a new flowering of literary and cultural life. In 1949, Clarissa was offered a job as acting editor at Contact Books, a series on post-war Britain devised by the publisher George Weidenfeld. (The first of these, by a young civil servant named Harold Wilson, was called A New Deal for Coal.) Clarissa stayed for nearly a year and was, Weidenfeld remembers, ‘a good editor. People liked her and she had very good contacts. She was a very, very interesting person – she still is.' When Contact folded she became an editor at Weidenfeld and Nicolson, where she remained until her secret engagement in January 1952. It was then expected of women that they would give up their work to take on the role of wife. Indeed in some professions, the Civil Service for instance, women were compelled to leave work on marriage. 

On her engagement to Anthony Eden Clarissa was 32 and living an independent life – the proud owner of an early Morris Minor car, which was ‘so rare that people used to stop in the street and look at me', and a cottage called Rose Bower which Cecil Beaton had helped her find in 1946 at Broad Chalke in Wiltshire. ‘I am so excited I cannot sleep. I have never owned a bit of earth before,' she wrote to him. The cottage released in her a passion for gardening which became a lifelong pleasure: ‘I'd been in London for so many years and suddenly the whole idea of the country and a garden was intoxicating.' Though all her friends were married, she was not in the least concerned about still being single: her private life was very much her own. She seemed to Cecil Beaton ‘so independent and capable of living by herself that one wondered at her ever deciding to “settle down”'. In her eventful social and personal life, she moved easily between the country house set, fashionable society and the intellectual worlds of Oxford and London. 

Clarissa had first met Eden when she was 16, at a country house party at Cranborne. He was the glamorous Foreign Secretary, a generation older than her, and she was a schoolgirl; he was, she says, ‘a famous figure one looked at'. Ten years later, in 1946, she sat next to him at a dinner party given by Emerald Cunard. On his other side was a foreign lady ‘who was very anxious to marry an Englishman at all costs so she monopolised him the whole meal'. It was only at the end that they had a brief conversation which, Clarissa recalls, ‘ended with him saying in an undertone, “Perhaps we can have dinner.” And I thought “Aha!”' She adds, ‘You can tell the moment a man talks to you if they really like women, can't you? Just somehow the way they talk to you.' They went out to dinner together, and she went to weekend house parties at his country home, Binderton in Sussex. They were just friends, Clarissa says, for years. ‘It didn't occur to me to marry him – he was a politician for a start. We weren't having an affair or anything, he just seemed a good friend.' But their relationship deepened.
