

This evening Jackson went live on TV and was visibly furious. His words pulled no punches: 'If proven, such appalling conduct is clearly unlawful, but also contravenes the British Army's high standards of conduct. Again, if proven, the perpetrators are not fit to wear the Queen's uniform and they have besmirched the Army's good name and conduct.' Downing Street made similar noises: 'We expect the highest standards of conduct from our forces in Iraq despite the difficulties they face.' And the Defence Minister, Adam Ingram, said the behaviour was 'clearly unacceptable'. Nobody is denying anything, nor are they trying to criticise us for damaging troop morale. The speed and ferocity of the response has been more than I expected. They obviously want to nip this in the bud right away. Fiona Bruce emailed me from BBC News: 'That is a great story. I knew it wouldn't only be the Yanks. We're going to lead on it.' 

SATURDAY, 1 MAY

Terrible night's sleep. Big-story insomnia. The adrenaline just surging through the veins. Our scoop was leading every news bulletin and the general reaction was one of revulsion at the photos. Nobody was giving us any stick for publishing, there was a universal acceptance that this was appalling behaviour. 

I went up to the Arsenal/Birmingham game at midday as a boardroom guest of City's boss Karren Brady, who also publishes the Daily Sport, so is, technically - very technically - a newspaper rival. I doubted they would be too aggrieved over there at missing this particular scoop. 'Fantastic story,' she cried, though, when I arrived. And that was the view of just about everyone else in the boardroom. There's nothing like the buzz of breaking a huge story and going somewhere quite public like this. 

As the (very tedious) game progressed, I got a flurry of text messages from the Mirror picture and syndication departments telling me that the whole world's media was clamouring for the photos. 

But listening to the radio as I drove back to Sussex afterwards, there were a few murmurs questioning the authenticity of the pictures. I know they're fine, of course. And we've done everything by the book. But I did feel uneasy enough to ring the newsdesk to check that there couldn't possibly be any question marks over the authenticity. 

They assured me there weren't, but I took a call late this afternoon from the Mail on Sunday, who said the MoD were now casting 'serious doubt' on the photos. I laughed it off to them, saying, 'They would, wouldn't they?' but inside I was beginning to feel distinctly unsettled. If these pictures aren't real, it's a potential bloody disaster. I rang the newsdesk and relayed my concerns. They were confident there is no problem. 

SUNDAY, 2 MAY

Slept very badly again. More fear than adrenaline today. Woke at 7am to see the BBC News leading on 'Fresh doubts over Iraq photos' and quoting Colonel 'Bonking' Bob Stewart saying everything from the troops' shoelaces to their floppy hats and type of rifle is wrong. 

I wanted to be physically sick. I called the newsdesk and demanded: 'Get back to our two soldiers and find out what the fuck is going on here.' To my relief, the soldiers said they were standing completely by their story and - more importantly - the photographs, and were going to give us a load more pictures of them out in Iraq. I felt a bit more relaxed after all of this. I called Sly Bailey to explain what had been going on, and stressed that we have no reason to doubt the photos at this stage. She was supportive. But she's the chief executive, I'm the editor. This was my call, and it will be my head on the block if it goes pear-shaped. 

I sent Steve White, our very experienced Northern news editor, to grill the soldiers, and he relayed very positive feedback afterwards. 'They are telling the truth,' he said. 'In fact, they are totally bemused as to why anyone would want to question what they have told us.' 

But as the day wore on, the heat got more intense. Bank holiday weekends are great times to break a good story, because nothing ever happens, and everyone's desperate for anything to fill their airtime. Except for when things go a little awry like today, and we are the only story in town, with more and more 'experts' queuing up to berate us. The best form of defence in this kind of situation is attack. I issued a statement at 2.30pm, standing by the photos and saying: 'The Daily Mirror makes no apology for exposing this outrageous and unlawful behaviour, which has been common knowledge among disgusted British servicemen in Basra for many months. Nor do we believe there is any reason to think that these photographs have been faked in any way at all, given the powerful testimony we have received.' 

The TV news guys gave us a fair crack with it, but it hasn't turned the tide. The knives have well and truly come out for us and the pressure is mounting. The first editions of tonight's papers confirmed my fears that the story is now the question of whether we've been hoaxed, not the question of whether British troops have been abusing Iraqis. 

I don't like this at all. 

MONDAY, 3 MAY

It was a lovely, sunny day today, and the boys were desperate to play football. But I was equally desperate to work out what was going on with these photos, and spent most of the time on the phone in the garden, to their mounting - and quite reasonable - fury. Eventually it came to a head. 

'Dad,' said Spencer, 'you are so useless. Get off that phone before I throw it in the pool.' 

I lost my rag. 'Listen, you ungrateful little wretch, I might get sacked over this, so for God's sake leave me alone to sort it.' 

He looked shocked, upset, and worried - he's only eleven, after all. I instantly felt appallingly guilty. The job takes up enough of my time without it dominating precious bank holidays with them too. 'Sorry, mate - look, I'll be there in a minute. Just let me deal with this. I'm not going to get sacked, it's OK.' 

But much as I wanted to switch off, my brain was racing with this unfolding crisis and I soon gave up trying to concentrate on being Thierry Henry and returned to the TV and phone. 

We led tonight's paper on Soldiers A and B standing by their account under the headline WE TOLD THE TRUTH. 

But Charles bloody Kennedy has gone on TV saying that, true or false, the damage is done and the pictures will put our troops in more danger than they are already. 

That's not a line I want to run very far. The ultimate nightmare looming now is that British soldiers get killed in revenge for the photos. 

I spoke to Jeremy in Basra. 'I think we both know what's going to happen now,' I joked. 'You're going to get kidnapped by Al Qaeda, and beheaded live on TV by some bloke clutching the Mirror front page.' He laughed, because he shares my black sense of humour, but we both realise this is not a laughing matter. He reckons the photos could be genuine, and the stories echo what he had heard had been going on before his regiment got out there. He said they all have floppy hats and wear bootlaces however they like, so a lot of the 'flaws' being claimed about the pictures are nonsense. But still the nagging doubt remains. Couldn't eat supper, and drank a bit too much wine. 

TUESDAY, 4 MAY

I had a day off planned today and decided to take it anyway. Sometimes when things go wrong like this it's better to be out of the office and clear your head. But it did feel slightly surreal to be licking ice creams on the end of Brighton Pier under a sign saying 'End of the pier show' at the precise moment Adam Ingram was addressing the Commons about the scandal. Encouragingly he said: 'From the outset we have taken the allegations seriously and taken the photographs at face value and will continue to do so unless there is evidence to the contrary.' 

I was asked by the MediaGuardian website what I thought of the Express calling us liars on their front page. 

'Being called a liar by that lot is like being called a halfwit by the village idiot,' I said. 'A crushing blow, but you get on with the day as best you can.' 

Des hasn't made any attempt to contact me since the storm broke. Not a single phone call. Quite incredible. What kind of a deputy is he? I finally sent him an angry email at 5pm, saying his behaviour was disgraceful. He feigned bemusement, but I suspect he's just sitting there, keeping his head down, and quietly hoping I get fired. 'Come and see me tomorrow morning,' I said. 

WEDNESDAY, 5 MAY

Des shuffled sheepishly into my office. 

'Sorry, I was at a family wedding in Ireland.' 

'Don't they have newspapers or TV in Ireland, then?' 

'I didn't hear about it, really sorry.' 

'You're the deputy editor of the Daily Mirror and you didn't hear for three days that your own paper was leading every news bulletin in the fucking western world?' 

'Nobody called to tell me. Bloody newsdesk, I've told them before about this ...' 

I cut him off. 

'Nobody had to, for Christ's sake. You are paid enough to find out what is happening every day. This has been the biggest crisis I have probably ever faced and you have shown no interest in helping or even offering support. It's appalling.' 

'Yes, sorry about that.' 

He didn't give a damn. I could imagine him scurrying back into his office to call Carol Vorderman, his girlfriend, immediately after I'd finished with him and chortling: 'He's finished, I can tell. We're nearly there.' 

He thinks they'll be the new Harry Evans and Tina Brown. Harry Redknapp and Tina Turner, more like. 

Blair sent me a handwritten note today: 'Thank you for the Mirror's renewed support, it's come at a good time.' Blimey. Is this what he calls support? 

The families of Iraqi civilians killed by British troops appeared in the High Court today to challenge the MoD's refusal to consider legal responsibility for the deaths. The cases include the death of Baha Mousa, a hotel receptionist allegedly killed in Basra last September by soldiers from the Queen's Lancashire Regiment. This is obviously helpful. But Michael Howard turned the screw on me in Prime Minister's Questions by saying the photos had done 'enormous damage' and asking: 'Does the Prime Minister agree ... that if the photos turn out to be false it will be a matter of the utmost seriousness for which the editor will have to take full responsibility?' 

Blair dodged the question, but the matter of my resignation is now being openly discussed everywhere. Shit. 

The Defence Select Committee have called me to appear before them, which is something I'd normally enjoy, but not this time. There are too many unanswered questions. I don't feel sure of my ground. Unlikely support came from Andrew Neil in his Standard column who said that whether the pictures are fake or not, I will survive because the story behind them is true. 'He is an editor with more lives than a cat,' he concluded. Prompting Rebekah over at the Sun, to bike round a talking toy cat ... ho, ho, ho. 

Stephen Glover, in the Spectator, said that I must quit. But that's the fourth time he has said that about me in ten years, so I see that as rather encouraging.
