On the Line 

The difference between the mile and the marathon is the difference between burning your fingers with a match and being slowly roasted over hot coals
Hal Higdon 

I am standing on the start line like a teenager on a date, all hope and anticipation. The spitting rain shivers off my shorts and trickles down my all too naked legs. Someone behind is treading on the backs of my shoes, and hundreds more are pushing me forward. I am already breathing too fast and there's a taste of panic round my lips. 

I am nervous, uncertain, excited. I fiddle with my watch, strain for the boom of the cannon and wonder if this, at last, will be the one I've been waiting for. Perhaps out on the road I'll find what I've dreamed about for so long - the elusive, perfect marathon. 

I ought to be a lot more confident, less fearful of the distance. I am young, fit and fast. I've been an athlete for years, racing everything from the mile to the marathon. But lining up with so many thousands for this first London Marathon in 1981 is like nothing I've ever seen. 

I woke up long before the alarm, pulse already racing, and joined the hordes spilling off the train and trudging towards Greenwich Park. In the swelling rain we are a billowing sea of bin liners. 

Among the crowd I spot the odd familiar face, a fellow club runner or two, but most are strangers to me. Where, I wonder, have they all come from? I thought I knew most marathon runners and believed I knew all about marathons. I've run them before - tough marathons, fast marathons. On the Line In Harlow once, on an undulating course, I hit the wall, that invisible barrier that every marathon runner dreads, but I still dragged myself home in 2 hours and 21 minutes. 

Marathons like that were high-class races, with fiercely fast fields. But only a few dozen runners would ever show up, maybe a hundred or so at most for a championship event. They were grim affairs, full of hardened, anorexic-looking men, proud of their athletic club vests, their reputations as runners and their exclusive membership of a brotherhood of suffering. 

The biggest race in Britain, the most impressive field we ever saw, was the National Cross Country Championship. That had over a thousand and we thought it was huge. But here is a race - a road race - that has attracted entries from many thousands. Something very strange has happened to my familiar world of running - and it seems to have happened overnight. 

In the years to come we athletes, who once enjoyed the privileged loneliness of the long-distance runner, will reckon we can blame the sudden appearance of this horde on a man in a Richmond pub - a man with a pipe and a pint. 

Back in the 1970s, across the Atlantic, the American evangelists of a new fitness cult were urging their converts to put down their pipes and beer and jog, jog, jog their way to health and happiness. Their proudest pilgrimage was a new and spectacular annual ritual, the New York Marathon, in which legions of fun runners took to the streets and closed down the city for a 26-mile procession that was half race, half carnival. 

Here in Britain, too, there was a scattering of such middleaged fanatics who enjoyed and preached the joys of jogging. Of these none was more colourful or eccentric than Chris Brasher, that man with the pipe and the pint - a once-upona- time Olympic gold medal winner, sometime pacemaker for the first four-minute mile and, by the 1970s, long-serving athletics and Olympics correspondent of the Observer. 

His idea of a perfect day was to get some exercise, the madder and tougher the better, and to round it off by embroidering accounts of it over a few beers. It was actually in a pub, the Dysart Arms - used by members of his running club, the Ranelagh Harriers - that Brasher and his friend John Disley first heard tales of a New York marathon. 

Thousands, they were told, could be seen running through the city streets, with hundreds of thousands more cheering them on. Some of the Ranelagh men had raced there, returning with wonderful accounts of this new world of running. The New York Marathon, Brasher decided, could be a very good story indeed - so he set off to run it himself and to write about it for his newspaper. 

Brasher and Disley, his one-time steeplechasing partner, climbing companion and business associate, came back from New York in 1979 bubbling with enthusiasm for the idea of a big-city race on a scale they had never seen before. Brasher wrote of it in the Observer: 

To believe this story you must believe that the human race can be one joyous family, working together, laughing together, achieving the impossible. 

Last Sunday in one of the most trouble-stricken cities in the world, 11,532 men and women from forty countries, assisted by over a million black, white and yellow people, laughed and cheered and suffered during the greatest folk festival the world has seen. 

I wonder whether London could stage such a festival? We have the course, a magnificent course, but do we have the heart and the hospitality to welcome the world? 

His question was answered that wet morning of 29 March 1981 when 7,055 runners (in those days only 300 of them were women) set out to run the first London Marathon over a course designed and masterminded by Disley. 

Brasher and Disley had been encouraged to think that they could dare to take on the planning of a marathon through the streets of London because they had already successfully organised the World Orienteering Championships in 1976, at Aviemore in Scotland. They had picked up the tricks of promoting this event as they went along, recovering quickly from their mistakes and learning above all the advantages of organising the championships free from the bureaucracy that dragged so heavily on athletics at the time. 'We wanted nothing to do with committees, governing bodies and officials,' said Disley. 'We wanted to get on with it and sweep aside any problems. Orienteering was new, and we could get away with doing it our way.' 

For those orienteering championships Disley had been the Event Director and Brasher the Course Director. When it came to planning the London Marathon they decided to exchange duties. It was an inspired piece of role swapping and together they were able to get their marathon on the road. 

Dealing with the police, the keepers of the royal parks, and the local politicians who ruled the boroughs of London was never going to be smooth, but Brasher was not a man who allowed himself to be slowed down by the weight of too much diplomacy. Along with Disley, he harnessed the help of Donald Trelford, the then editor of the Observer, and a whole army of well-wishers, to bulldoze his way through brick walls of bureaucracy and clear the ground for his dream. 

Early in 1980, Trelford met with Brasher and Disley to do battle with anyone who might object to their ideas - including the Greater London Council, the police and the athletics governing bodies. Later that year Brasher and Disley went back to America to visit the Boston Marathon, the world's oldest marathon outside the Olympics, and to revisit the New York City race, hungrily devouring any detail they could find of how such races were organised and financed. 

Afterwards they roughed out a budget showing that their marathon needed around £75,000. They badly needed a backer, and an old friend, BBC sports commentator and agent Peter West of West-Nally, a public relations company, found one. Gillette had just ended a sponsorship deal with cricket and were looking for other games to play with their money. They had heard about the running boom in New York and were shrewd enough to wonder if the London Marathon might catch on and be worth sponsoring. They came up with an offer of £50,000. It helped to buy 2,000 foil blankets, 75 portable lavatories, and 50,000 plastic cups. 

At a second meeting with the Greater London Council and the police, Brasher was finally given the go-ahead to stage the race, but with one tough warning from the Council leader, Sir Horace Cutler, who told him: 'Never ask the ratepayers to bail you out. You'll not get a penny from the ratepayers.' 

Brasher and Disley celebrated their breakthrough over a drink and together they scribbled out some rather grandsounding aims: 

1. To improve the overall standard and status of British marathon-running by providing a fast course and strong international competition. 

2. To show to mankind that on occasions the family of man can be united. 

3. To raise money for the provision of recreational facilities in London. 

4. To help London tourism. 

5. To prove that when it comes to organising major events, 'Britain is best'. 

6. To have fun and provide some happiness and sense of achievement in a troubled world. 

Romantic these dreams might have sounded, but the race immediately caught the popular imagination. More than 20,000 hopefuls applied for a starting number. The excitement, the uncertainty and hype in the months leading up to the event were infectious. Nobody foresaw what was about to hit London. 

I had a taste of what was to come when I was sent by the Daily Mail to run in the New York Marathon in November of 1980, just months before the London race. New York had gone marathon crazy. The papers were buzzing with race previews, shops and restaurants offered special discounts for runners, a passing cab driver, spotting me training, urged, 'Burn some rubber on marathon day.' On the streets of the city I discovered a new breed of runner - men and women who ran not to compete or to win, but because they believed in and preached the magic effects of exercise. 

Of course, there has always been magic in movement. And there have always been those who have known the secret of this magic. You would have seen them in the mists of pre-history working up a sweat over the steps of some ancient tribal dance. And you can see them today, loping around the Serpentine, scrambling up the peaks of Yorkshire, or simply plodding the roads and paths of their local park. 

The secret that every runner knows - the real magic in movement, the thing that keeps them going after the novelty of losing a little weight and gaining a little breath wears off - lies in what it does to the mind. For while running makes the heart grow stronger, shapes the body and provides an invaluable reservoir of energy for work or play, to thousands of addicted runners those are only the sideeffects. They run because it makes them feel good and induces the euphoria that was being hailed in America as the 'jogger's high'. 

The New York Marathon, the brainchild of a man called Fred Lebow, had caught the wave of recreational joggers who had taken to the streets in search of this magic euphoria, to lose weight, to follow fashion, or simply to ward off the effects of age. 

They were encouraged and inspired by Frank Shorter winning the Olympic marathon for the United States in Munich in 1972, and by evangelists of the new aerobic movement like fitness guru Kenneth Cooper, running coach Arthur Lydiard, and the best-selling author of The Complete Book of Running, Jim Fixx. 

The New York Marathon was a glorious celebration of their enthusiasm. It was the first of the new generation of big-city marathons. The Boston Marathon had existed for the best part of a century but the New York Marathon was invented to cater for the 1970s jogging boom. Here was a race that encapsulated a sporting revolution - it was open to all runners of all shapes and ages, no matter what their ability. 


