At the same time he carried on the supposedly fast-disappearing profession of a freelance critic, becoming an important broker in the literary exchanges between Britain, Continental Europe and the United States. In some of his responses to his social and educational formation, he both exemplified and helped to form his period. He has devoted fans everywhere in the English-speaking world, and of every age. Even so, if you mention the name V. S. Pritchett today, you have to be careful to distinguish him from V. S. Naipaul, or Terry Pratchett. 

Pritchett would have been disappointed if he had known how his fame would decline in the years immediately following his death, but he wouldn't have been surprised or dismayed. Some of his best work was driven by his generous eagerness to show why this or that forgotten writer should still be read. Besides, if he saw the human race as ‘mythological', one of his myths of himself was that he was uninteresting. ‘Nothing continues to happen to me,' he wrote in his early fifties. He was daunted by having just heard the English novelist Rosamond Lehmann and the American publisher Blanche Knopf discussing possibilities for Lehmann's next book. When Lehmann said, ‘I might write about George Eliot,' Knopf replied, ‘Why, did anything happen to her? Is there any colour in her life?' 

It was an absurd question, not least because Eliot, like Pritchett, devoted so much of her career to showing that every human life is interesting. But in any case, Pritchett's modesty shouldn't be taken at face value. At the time when he claimed that nothing happened to him, he was actually going through a crisis in his personal life – one which is recorded in painful detail in his letters and notebooks. The disavowal was the equivalent of a physical gesture he had, a distinctly Edwardian one, of pulling his chin wryly and a little sideways into the folds of his neck. It was a sign which combined affability, reassurance, mild selfscepticism. It was also comic, turning his face into a convulsion of malleable flesh. What would it become next? Would it disappear into his shoulders? And the movement had the effect of emphasising his lips: what they were saying, how they were saying it, even what they didn't say (Pritchett sometimes seemed to use his mouth for listening). Meanwhile, though, the gentle pantomime distracted attention from the alertness of his quizzical gaze. Because one of its motives, conscious or not, was to allow him to watch better. Self-effacement was among Pritchett's professional tools as a writer, as well as part of his personal magnetism. 

Both contributed to the impression he gave of unusual happiness. Over all, and in the end, V. S. Pritchett does seem to have been happier than most people. Yet the qualities that were often seen as happy in him – especially his zest and energy and humour, his innocent appetites – were, like his writing, far from simple in effect. 

His emphasis on myth is important because, given how much of him went into his writing, the man has to be seen to some extent through his versions of himself. Myths are cumulative and progressive, and this was how Pritchett's repeated explorations of his family and upbringing worked. He was a performer, an anecdotalist, always improving and adding to his repertoire of self-revelation. His friend the diarist Frances Partridge said, ‘he was a bit of an actor, a great raconteur. . . . I see VSP always – when he was telling a story – acting movements, rather crouching ones, slightly grotesque. He wasn't a natural man. . . . I sometimes think he was an actor manqué and would have been a good comic.' 

So the showman in Walter Sawdon Pritchett lived on in his gifted son. In his seventies, ‘VSP', as he was always known, even gave readings from Dickens to audiences in America. This aspect of his personality sometimes bothered the writer, because he knew too well that performance could dispense with truth. He often pondered the negotiations between the two in autobiography and came to believe that in writing about himself, there was ‘no absolute truth': ‘You write twenty pages and then you stop. Why is it that you are bewildered? Why do you have the sensation of being in a rowing boat in the middle of the ocean and have [sic] lost your oars? Who is this “I”, you wonder; which of my many selves is writing?' He concluded that, ‘like my story telling mother, I was an inventive person. I was one of those . . . who invents himself and had not much capacity for self-analysis.' In a BBC radio interview, he made the same point more strongly. ‘I inherit from my mother a tendency to turn everything that happens into a story and the story is a kind of lie, really. . . .' Perhaps he was thinking of the fact that in A Cab at the Door and Midnight Oil he gives two completely different versions of his father's last words, neither of them – as was pointed out to him by his younger brother Gordon (in whose arms Walter died) – at first hand. 

To tell Pritchett's unexpectedly complex story, then, it helps to start with the story of the stories he told about it. They took various forms. His parents' marriage, for example, was an obsessive theme not only of his published work but of his conversation and letters, especially his long, vivid, unguarded correspondence with Gerald Brenan. ‘I went to see my parents yesterday,' he wrote in September 1950: 

In a little dark suburban room piled up with new books, hundreds of them, that have never been read, newly bound volumes of Christian Science publications, and so crowded with sofas, armchairs, desks &amp; tables that one can hardly walk across it, sit my father &amp; mother. She is white and skeletal, nervous and alert and the whole time she gazes at her husband with a hypnotised look of fear, desperation and hopelessness. He, spread in an armchair with his fat hands twiddling continuously on a spherical stomach, smiles continuously as he continuously talks about house property and what he said to the butcher. . . . My mother often opens her mouth to say a word, and a look of hatred comes over his face, a hatred all the more terrible because it is now mechanical and automatic. . . . The horrible notion of ‘one flesh' and the fight to be the tongue of it. 

Like Pritchett's fictional characters, they are vividly, almost grotesquely present: that battling tongue could be a character in a Samuel Beckett play. But no one else who knew Walter and Beatrice seems to have thought of them in quite this way. This was partly a matter of family secrets. Victor's son Oliver, for example, was to be astonished by the stories of scams and bankruptcy his father wrote about Walter, who had impressed Oliver as ‘absolutely the epitome of virtue and uprightness'. By this, Oliver wasn't, of course, implying that Victor's version wasn't true. Yet – if only in emphasis and degree – there was a subjective element in it. Oliver's sister Josephine remembered her Pritchett grandparents as much more ordinary than in her father's versions. The idea that Beatrice was downtrodden, so vehement in Victor's many accounts of her, didn't fit Josephine's recollection: ‘No, I remember her as being a sweet, funny old lady who liked to laugh.' And Victor's younger brother Gordon felt strongly that the writer had exaggerated their mother's vulnerability and, with it, their father's faults. 

To everyone, though, there was something magnificent about Walter's charlatanism. As Gordon recalled him, 

He was an impressive figure. He had all his clothes made in Savile Row, but I don't think he paid for many of them. He would produce a soft leather case with a real gold rim all round it. Inside would be an engraved card: ‘Sawdon Pritchett' and, underneath, ‘The Athenaeum'. He would walk in anywhere and say, ‘Well, I'd like four of those. Send me the account. Here's my card.' 

(The Athenaeum, needless to say, has no record of Sawdon Pritchett among its past members.) Gordon also remembered his father showing him a little book entitled How To Avoid Payment of Debt: ‘He said it had belonged to his father but I don't believe a word of it.' Gordon was ninety-two years old when he told this story, and he had his own share of the family's appetite for myth making, but there was nothing wrong with his memory. The useful pamphlet, How To Avoid Payment of Debt. By a Solicitor was published in 1901. The first of Walter's bankruptcies was filed in that year. 

Victor was then one year old. To the lower middle class, so desperate to be more middle than lower, bankruptcy was a stain – one which, intensified by the fear that it would happen again, spread through Victor's early years. In some ways it was to colour his whole life. Though it was a nightmare and could lead the boy to feel suicidal, it was also a stimulus. For most of his long career, Victor was driven by the need to find intellectual and artistic scope without forfeiting financial security. But, as he recognised when he came to write about another financial fantasist, Honoré de Balzac, the storytelling ways by which he himself earned his living derived something from Walter's inventiveness about money. 

On both sides, the family was socially very mixed. Victor's paternal grandfather was a Congregationalist minister in Yorkshire. In addition to Walter, the minister had another son, Edward, who, according to Victor, was a still blacker sheep. The details are muted in the published version of A Cab at the Door, but an early draft mentions ‘horrifying rumours of drunkenness, police, prostitutes – the usual tale of a clergyman's son'. In Pritchett's 1951 novel, Mr Beluncle, there is a loose-living and hard-drinking aunt who is a fictional version of Edward. But perhaps the fiction didn't start here. Already, we have to be on our guard. Edward, as a previously unknown cousin of Victor's told him after reading A Cab at the Door, emigrated to Canada, where he lived perfectly respectably and brought up a large family. 

Victor's maternal grandfather, meanwhile, had been a stable-boy and then a coachman, his grandmother a barmaid. Their volatile daughter Beatrice, Victor's mother, became a shop assistant in Kentish Town, north London, which is where she met Walter. One of Beatrice's sisters, by contrast, eventually married into a well-off family in Suffolk. When Victor was born, his parents were living near this sister in Ipswich, where Walter briefly had an ailing business as a newsagent and stationer. The rich relations were at the top of the hill, in the desirable recent Victorian development of Warrington Road. Walter, Beatrice and the baby lived above a shop in St Nicholas Street, a dilapidated part of the medieval town down by the docks, just along the road from an old Unitarian meeting house. One side of Victor's birthplace looked over the wonkily gabled street towards middle England; the other side towards the port and Continental Europe. 

The combination of Walter's financial undependability and Beatrice's emotional fragility meant that the steadier of the couple's relations often, directly or indirectly, took charge of the young family. When they were small, Victor and one of his brothers, Cyril, lived for some time with Walter's parents in Yorkshire. William Pritchett, Walter's father, had struggled out of the working class – his father had been a North Sea trawlerman – to become a minister, first in Ripon and then in the solid market town of Sedbergh, just south of the Lake District. It was in Sedbergh that Victor went to the first of his many schools, walking the steep short distance up Joss Lane behind his grandparents' square little manse, its walled garden opening on to a busy cattle market beyond the self-important Victorian stone chapel. From the school, now a shop, you can see over the roofs of the town – and also over the roofs of the exclusive ‘public' school by which it is still dominated – to wild moorland and fells all around.
