In 1886, the Liberal Party under William Gladstone had proposed a modest Home Rule Bill which was scuppered by the Conservative Party, whose chief agitator Randolph Churchill famously declared, "The Orange card would be the one to play". He subsequently went to Belfast and stirred up sectarian passions. In galvanizing support from the Protestant lodges in the North and fomenting their fears of the overwhelming Catholic majority, the Tories were able to kill the bill. Six years later, a second Home Rule Bill was passed by the House of Commons but vetoed by the House of Lords. 

The long fight for independence by Irish nationalists was rekindled in 1910 when the Liberal Party, led by Herbert Asquith, urgently needed support from Irish Members of Parliament in order to retain office. A deal was struck and matters reached a critical stage in 1912 when the House of Commons passed the third Home Rule Bill. Its implementation seemed unstoppable but it was bitterly opposed by key members of the British establishment, most notably the Conservative leader Andrew Bonar Law - the son of an Ulster Presbyterian minister - whose policy echoed Randolph Churchill's ominous warning: "Ulster Will Fight - And Ulster Will Be Right". 

Militant Ulster Unionists required no prompting. Fears of crippling economic problems resulting from a break with the British market alarmed and united the predominantly Protestant Northern population, particularly in Belfast, then one of the richest cities in the British Empire. If the Union could not be saved by constitutional means, then its supporters were ready to take up arms in defiance. Under the leadership of Sir Edward Carson, a provisional government of Ulster was formed and a volunteer army pledged to defend loyalist rights. Some 471,414 citizens signed the Ulster Solemn League &amp; Covenant, unveiled at Belfast's City Hall on 28 September 1912. Anti-papal cries of "Home Rule Is Rome Rule" echoed the unremitting beat of the loyalist lambeg drum. Amid the unrest over 2,000 Catholics were forcibly expelled from the Belfast shipyards. As the Catholic workers staggered out, they were showered with "Belfast confetti" - a combination of rivets and iron nuts. 

In January 1913, the newly named Ulster Volunteer Force announced that it was ready to take on the British Army, if necessary, in order to stay part of Britain. Even the Tory leader Bonar Law advocated this civil disobedience and law-breaking, telling Unionists, "There are things stronger than parliamentary majorities. I can imagine no length of resistance to which Ulster will go in which I shall not support them." His protestations were supported by British officers at the Curragh camp who mutinied rather than opposing Carson's private army. 

By inflaming religious prejudices, the Tories manoeuvred their political opponents towards a policy of withdrawing all or part of Ulster from Home Rule. It was the Liberal Party member, T.G. Agar- Robartes who had first suggested removing the four Protestant counties: Antrim, Armagh, Down and Londonderry/Derry. Carson concluded that this was not enough and suggested that the nine-county province of Ulster should be excluded from Home Rule. Ironically, in light of subsequent events, this proposal - which would have provided an overall Catholic majority in Ulster - might ultimately have led to a democratically elected united Ireland. But that point was lost on most nationalists, whose chief concern was securing Home Rule for the entire island. 

It was now clear that an Amendment Bill dealing with the 'Ulster question' would have to be introduced despite objections from the nationalist Irish Parliamentary Party whose leader John Redmond had implored: "the two nation theory is to us an abomination and a blasphemy". Political journalist Arthur Griffith, who had founded the radical militant party Sinn Féin in 1905, also spoke of Partition in religious terms: "Ireland cannot shift her frontiers; the Almighty traced them beyond the currency of men to modify." These views were reiterated more prosaically by the Republican socialist James Connolly who feared for an Ireland politically divided by religion in which the Orange Order would hold sway in the North. "Belfast is bad enough as it is," he warned. "What it would be like under such rule the wildest imagination cannot conceive. Filled with the belief that they were defeating the Imperial Government and the nationalists combined, the Orangemen would have scant regard for the rights of the minority left at their mercy." 

By early 1914, the increasingly beleaguered John Redmond had agreed to some accommodation by accepting British Prime Minister David Lloyd George's County Option Scheme which offered individual counties the chance to opt out of Home Rule for a maximum of six years. Carson recoiled in indignation at this proposal and refused to accept "a sentence of death with a stay of execution for six years". His rhetoric was well-founded for it was obvious that five of Ulster's nine counties, with their Catholic majorities, would elect for Home Rule. Even if the six-year ruling was removed from the equation, it was unlikely that a four-county exclusion zone could survive, politically or economically. Knowing that some form of Home Rule was inevitable Carson was reluctantly forced to change tack and, in July 1914, elected to push for a six-county bloc - an extremely worrying tactic from the nationalist viewpoint since it guaranteed a Unionist majority in the North under a guise of reasonableness in surrendering Donegal, Monaghan and Cavan. Summarily repudiated by nationalists, it gradually won support among pragmatic Protestants as their likeliest hope of maintaining the Union. 

The Home Rule Bill entered the Statute Book on 15 September 1914, but its implementation, along with the Amendment Bill, was delayed until the end of the Great War. With the vexed question of Partition still unresolved, there was always the likelihood of some militant response in the South from the radical IRB (Irish Republican Brotherhood) or disenchanted Irish Volunteers. But when insurrection finally came, the circumstances would take the world by surprise. 

Back in East Belfast, Van Morrison's paternal grandparents, George Albert Morrison and Margaret Young, were a courting couple heading for the altar. They had decided to marry at the end of the long holiday weekend and chose Easter Monday, 24 April 1916. It was a crisp, fine morning as they independently set out for the noon service at the Westbourne Presbyterian Church. The twelve bells chimed as they prepared to exchange vows. At that identical moment, less than a hundred miles south, the Angelus bells were ringing across Dublin as people flocked to midday mass. None were aware that they were about to witness one of the most important and momentous events in the history of Ireland. A doomed procession of hard-line patriots marched down Middle Abbey Street, then descended upon the General Post Office in Sackville Street. At 12.45pm, their spiritual leader Pádraig Pearse walked out of the building and declared the birth of the Irish Republic as an independent state. News of what was happening in Dublin did not reach the Morrisons until hours later. "Sinn Féiners have seized the Post Office in Dublin," they were told. In the House of Commons, Edward Carson, who had recently advised Unionists to resist officers of the Crown with arms, told his fellow MPs: "Gentlemen, we should be ready to put down these rebels now and ever more." The story of the insurgence was relayed internationally, and what sounded like a minor rebellion rapidly took on immense significance. The Easter Rising was successfully transformed into a propagandist blood sacrifice after the British executed 15 of the insurgents, including the signatories of the Republican proclamation. Public opinion in Ireland changed utterly and support switched from the nationalist constitutionalists to the Republican revolutionaries. On the eve of his execution, Pádraig Pearse, the chief doctrinaire of blood sacrifice, had written an elegy The Wayfarer, in which he acknowledged: "The beauty of the world hath made me sad/This beauty that will pass". W.B. Yeats recognized a more complex aesthetic at the heart of the Rising, rightly observing in his poem Easter 1916 that "a terrible beauty" had been born. 

By 1918, the ailing John Redmond's Irish Parliamentary Party had been replaced as the main political force by Sinn Féin whose ascendancy was confirmed after the British War Cabinet enforced conscription on Ireland. Three years of guerrilla warfare in Ireland followed before the nationalists and the British were forced to the negotiating table in search of a settlement. 

On 23 June 1921, King George V opened the Parliament of Northern Ireland at Stormont, Belfast. Partition of a six-county Ulster was now a political reality. Lloyd George had craftily offered the Irish Treaty delegation the compromise of a vaguely concocted Boundary Commission whose findings it was hoped would remove Fermanagh and Tyrone from the province, thereby possibly rendering Northern Ireland unworkable. Under immense pressure from Lloyd George, and with a settlement in jeopardy, the delegation from Dublin accepted Dominion status (similar to that in Canada, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand) for 26 of the 32 counties, complete with an Oath of Fidelity to the Crown and Partition subject to a Boundary Commission. Chairman and guerrilla warfare strategist Michael Collins understood the fearful implications of these concessions all too well and privately declared with prophetic accuracy: "I may have signed my actual death-warrant." 

On 7 February 1922, Dáil Éireann ratified the Treaty by a small majority and, five months later, the people of the new Irish Free State (Saorstát Éireann) supported that decision in their first General Election. Anti-Treatyites, led by Éamon de Valera, refused to recognize the Free State and the South was plunged into civil war, which effectively left the newly established Northern Ireland in an even more powerful position. By the time the conflict was over, Ireland had lost most of its most influential nationalist figures. The demoralized new Irish government half-heartedly pursued the Boundary Commission, whose findings ended in stalemate. A six-county Northern Ireland - Antrim, Armagh, Derry/Londonderry, Down, Fermanagh, Tyrone - was now firmly established. Unionist politicians, ever cautious, preached the doctrine of eternal vigilance against the threat of a united Ireland. The cries of 'No Surrender' would echo down through the generations for the remainder of the century. 

This was the new statelet that Van Morrison's parents were born into during the early Twenties. It was, in many respects, a place apart - partitionist and isolationist in character and philosophy. Ulster Unionists inculcated a loyalist mindset which influenced every aspect of Northern life. Whereas the populace had once seen themselves as 'imperialist Irish', recent events ensured that it was now their exclusively 'Ulster identity' that prevailed. Political historian Alvin Jackson observed perceptively; "For loyalists 'Ulster' became the geographical corollary of being 'Unionist' . . . 'Irishness' was an unavoidable but uncomfortable element of the Unionist heritage and was consigned after 1920 to a mental and constitutional quagmire." 

The Morrison dynasty was forged in the smithy of this isolated Ulster. Violet Stitt entered the world on 24 September 1921 in her family home at 47 Connswater Street. Eight months later on 21 May 1922, George Morrison was born at 142 Lord Street. Both of their fathers ( John Stitt and George Morrison Snr, respectively) were toiling as labourers in the shipyards then but these were troubled times in Ulster. Partition may have saved the Union but it did little to assist community relations. Anti-Catholic pogroms in Belfast ended in riots and death. In the year of George Morrison's birth there were 97 reported cases of murder in Belfast alone, and 59 of attempted murder. More than a quarter of the city's Catholic population, totalling 23,000, were evicted or burnt out of their homes. The shipyards were again depopulated of 'Fenians' by their fellow workers. In a familiar pattern, sectarianism was closely linked with fears of unemployment and economic decline. A post-war slump had plunged Belfast into an unprecedented recession. Reduced demand for raw materials and a lack of income to purchase goods created a frightening downward spiral. The shipyards were badly hit resulting in mounting unemployment and in 1927 the linen mills began their inexorable decline.
