They branded us 'Left Footers'; we called them 'Proddy Dogs'. All us Irish Catholics lived on Scottie (that would be Scotland Road to anyone from out of Liverpool), and all the Protestants lived on Netherfield Road across to the east, with Great Homer Street running parallel down the middle. Inevitably there were street gangs, and it could get pretty rough. There was always a lot of posturing and name-calling and, if you were really unlucky, it could end in push-shoves, digs in the ribs and fisticuffs. The divisions between Catholic and Protestant were as strong as in Northern Ireland - the Protestants against the Catholics and vice versa. But on Saturdays everyone, whatever their religion, went to do their shopping at the butchers (we always went to Wood's), the grocers, the greengrocers and bakers on Great Homer Street, buying family favourites like boiled ham and pigs' feet - so once a week the two sides would come face to face. We kept a respectful distance from each other, but of course on significant dates, such as St Patrick's Day on 17 March and the Orange Parade on 12 July, which I loved watching, there was more friction than normal.

Fortunately I was a very sporty child, and I always thought if a gang did pick on me, I could easily outrun them. Once, though, on 12 July, after watching the Lodge parade down London Road, I had just left a busy main street and entered a quiet, deserted side road, when a gang of five eleven-year-old girls - the same age as me - fell in step behind me. I didn't need to look twice to realise they meant trouble.

'What d'you think?' the leader was saying as they came into earshot. 'Is she? Is she one of them? I bet she's one of them!'

She was a big, brawny red-head, and the other four girls, all mousey-haired, were not exactly tiddlers. Sure I was in for a hiding, I glanced up and down the street, desperate for an adult - anyone who might intervene and say, 'Oi, you lot, get home - yer mam's got cake!' but there was nobody.

I decided this was a case of flight rather than fight, and made a run for it. But they'd got too close, and this time I knew my skinny long legs weren't going to save me.

'She is one of them!' the leader roared, egging the others on.

The chase ended moments later. Having wrenched me to a standstill by one of my sleeves, the gang circled me. I swivelled this way and that, giving one last desperate look up and down the street, then, seeing nobody, I clenched my fists into tight, defensive balls. 

Their mutterings, 'Yeah - she's one of them!', were louder now.

They grabbed me, poked me in the ribs, shoved me backwards and pinned me against the wall. I had tried to stand up to them, but my fists felt like cotton wool.

'You are one of them, aren't you?' their leader kept taunting me, her hot breath drizzling on my cheeks. 'You are a Proddy Dog.'

But I wasn't - I was a Left Footer. Her question had implied that she was a Catholic, too - so what should I say? Maybe it was just a trick and I'd get a beating anyway. I decided to tell the truth, take the punishment, and try to give as good as I got. Better that, I reasoned, than tell a lie and be chastised and called a coward by our priest in confession the next day. 

'I'm a Catholic,' I cried out, the bold note I had injected into my voice camouflaging my fear and trembling.

The finger-jabbing stopped. Suddenly. Just like that. They exchanged frowns with each other, then the uncertain grimaces on their faces underwent a dramatic change. 

'Jesus, Mary and sweet Joseph!' one of them whispered. 'Let her go, Bernadette. She's one of us. Leave her alone.' 

They unpinned me and I stood breathless and wobbling as they drifted off laughing, their arms flung around each other's shoulders. My heart was in my mouth. Slowly it began relocating to my chest. One of the gang - the smallest of the ruffians, the girl with the most freckles - had the cheek to turn and give me a friendly farewell wave. I was tempted to run after her and give her a right thump, but even then, as a skinny eleven-year-old, I knew when to get out. So instead I hurried onwards down the still-deserted street towards the safety of my home in Scottie Road.

~

Scotland Road, the main road out to East Lancs, was about a mile long. With its huge Irish-Catholic population and a pub on every street corner, it had a bad reputation as the roughest residential part of town, but I felt totally safe playing in the streets there as a child, and later as a teenage girl walking home on my own after dark. The Church and Family were the foundation of our life, and we all grew up aware of what it meant to be good neighbours, good Samaritans, and a help to other people. Family priests had a great influence on adults' as well as children's behaviour. We all went to confession, said our rosary as a penance for venial sins, and lived in fear of committing a mortal sin and being damned or excommunicated. People in our area either went off the rails in a major way or stuck to them.

Thousands of Liverpool children were evacuated to the countryside during the Second World War, but many families, including ours, decided to stay together in the city. Fortunately, by the time I was born on Thursday, 27 May 1943, the worst of Liverpool's bombing was over. I was too young to be aware of D Day in 1944, or VE (Victory in Europe) Day in 1945, but, like most kids born during the war, I was very aware of rationing and ration books. The coupons we got only allowed us two ounces of sweets and were gone in a flash, usually at Saturday morning pictures. In between I used to eat the squares of gelatine that our mams used for making jellies. I loved stretching them until they became about a foot long.

Home was our flat at 380 Scottie Road, above George Murray's barber's shop, behind a branch of Midland Bank and next door to Mrs Lee's Chinese laundry. The bank was the landlord, and we rented the flat from Mr Murray. Despite the semi-derelict state of some of the bomb-damaged buildings around us, the flat was not short of space. I lived there with me mam, dad and two older brothers, George and John. When I was born, George was seven and John was three. When I was about five, little Allan joined us - he was actually a cousin, my Auntie Ann's baby, and me mam and dad adopted him at nine months old. Allan was an angel baby with perfect blond curls; he got a lot of attention, and I was definitely put out at losing my cherished 'baby of the family' position. Auntie Ann always came round at ours at weekends (she used to do my nails for me) and although it was meant to be a secret that she was Allan's mam, I found out quite early on.

Our kitchen-cum-living room was on the first floor, and the bedrooms were above that, along with another very large room which we used as a living room. This room, the best, was actually as large as the lounge of the house I live in now. It was certainly big enough for the piano that my father bought from the North End Music Store (NEMS), the Epstein family's furniture store in Everton, and spacious enough for all our family, friends and neighbours to get together on special occasions and Saturday nights. Making your own music was the norm in the fifties for people like us who couldn't afford television sets. 

Not only were the rooms of our flat really large - but on the upper floor there were other rooms that we didn't even occupy. These were always left empty, though, because we were not allowed to rent them out. I loved singing up there, because there was an echo that amplified my voice! 

Our home was full of music when I was a kid. We listened to records, and always had the radio on - I remember listening to Victor Sylvester on Monday mornings if I was ill and kept at home from school. Me mam, bless her, was named Priscilla, but she was known as 'big Cilla' after I was born, and I was dubbed 'little Cilla'. She was always singing, especially on Monday mornings, which was washday in our home; and me dad, whose name was John, was forever playing his mouth organ when he wasn't tending his budgerigars. Me mam had an amazingly high voice and she loved opera, especially 'One Fine Day' from Madama Butterfly. Arias from that, and her renderings of 'Chirri Chirri Bee', were second to none. 

Irish, with thick jet-black hair on which he used Brylcreem, me dad had a strong, guttural Liverpool accent. Handsome and a bit of a stoic, he was nine years older than me mam, and before becoming a docker he'd worked in construction for eight years in London and helped to build the Dorchester Hotel in Park Lane. Even though he was a docker, he was a very dapper man who loved his waistcoats, and he never missed going to London for the Derby every year. Down at the docks, his workmates called him 'Shiner', because his boots were always so beautifully polished you could see your face in them. 

He was a very quiet, shy man until he was in the company of men. He was very old-fashioned in that respect, but, like many Scousers, he could be a bit of a lad at his favourite pub, Fitzie's, on Bostock Street. Women never went to the pubs with the fellers in those days. It was very much a man's thing. Once inside, Dad and his mates would buy a round, then it was time for blokeish digs in the ribs, leg-pulls, and risqué jokes, most of which were considered too filthy, unfit for women's ears!

After the men had all had a few jars on a Saturday night, it was often back to our place for a 'jars out and a singsong' when the pubs turned out. They'd bring home shandy for me mam and Guinness for themselves. They'd also bring in pigs' feet and fish 'n' chips. Dad would then play his mouth organ and everybody would do a turn. My mam was very into Country and Western as well as opera, and her party piece was 'T For Texas And T For Tennessee'.

I was always in bed when they came home, but I used to get up and sit on the back stairs while all the furniture, including the kitchen table, was being moved to make space for the Irish jigs, knees-up and group renderings of 'Danny Boy' and 'When Irish Eyes Are Smiling'. I loved crouching there, watching and listening and, from the age of three onwards, I could not wait to do my turn. Then, when I was five (it may have been around the time that Allan joined our family), on one magical night that I've never forgotten, everything changed. Instead of the usual: 'Get back to bed, girl', and being tucked back into bed with 'Off to sleep - church in the morning', somebody took me downstairs, stood me on the kitchen table, and said, 'All right, Queen, you do something.' 

Standing on that table, in my creased winceyette nightie, looking down instead of up for once at the expectant faces of all those grown-ups, was the most marvellous feeling in the whole world. I was in my element. 
