act one 

i want 

Sometime in 1975 – around my sixteenth birthday – an incident occurred that blew my comfortable, middle-class upbringing violently off course. Overnight my life changed. I lost the plot and spiralled into a deep void, a dark and turbid place where no one could reach me. I recall the incident that sparked it off as if it were yesterday – indeed, I only have to close my eyes and I'm back there at once. 

The school's production of Gilbert and Sullivan's operetta, The Yeomen of the Guard. 

What's the problem? I told myself, as I settled down in the perfume-filled comfort of the stalls. There'll be some clunky old tunes, teenage boys in crêpe beards under a few hastily arranged spotlights, and an orchestra of student musicians scratching away on industrially produced violins. I'll have a laugh and be home by ten. 

I should have known. 

I was plunging into the world of amateur operatics, and before the end of the performance, I was hypnotized. Although we were in a school hall in suburban Brighton, I was still held captive in the Tower of London. To a grubby teenager with few academic skills and already bearing an uncanny physical resemblance to a young Claire Rayner, the world on the other side of those footlights promised all the glamour and security lacking in my real life. 

The sights and sounds of the performance haunted my dreams all that night and lingered into the holidays. I started going to other shows by other companies in other halls, once a week, then twice, until I was staying out nearly every night, often going on long and treacherous journeys to exotic and far-flung destinations: Crawley, Horsham, Littlehampton … Nothing else mattered. My schoolwork, appearance and general hygiene all went to pot. They were terrible times. Even now I can't bear to think what I put my parents through. 

The world into which I'd disappeared was one of draughty church halls and flickering orchestra lights; lukewarm tea and insipid orange juice served in crackly plastic beakers, and biscuits at twopence each; elderly women in wimples with unfeasibly large eyelashes and turkey-neck chins; tip-up seats and the aroma of pipe tobacco; late-night bus journeys and windswept car parks; front curtains that squealed when they were opened; rocky coves made out of hardboard and painted backdrops that rippled when you walked within five feet of them; Ruritanian princes who looked like estate agents; peeling photographs pinned to green felt display boards in musty foyers; ticket stubs; floral dresses; support tights; Grecian 2000; and adverts for the Bognor Regis Youth Mandolin Orchestra. 

My Letts school diary for May 1974 records that during that month alone I attended performances of Iolanthe at Hurstpierpoint College, HMS Pinafore at the Lewes Road United Reform Church Operatic Society, La Vie Parisienne by the Le Roy Players at Hove Town Hall, and Gay Times Twenty- Seven by the Dawn Jordan School of Dancing and Movement at the Brighton Dome. I also spent a Sunday afternoon at a staging of The Mikado by a Czechoslovakian puppet troupe, as well as a performance of Trial by Jury at Tarring Infants School in which the child performers mimed from the stage while their teachers bellowed all the songs from the darkness of the wings; a night of such pointlessness that even then I remember dubbing it the Tarring Inferno. 

My diary also records An Evening of Viennese Favourites at Eastbourne. I tried not to stoop so low as this, with its endless waltzes and blokes wrapped in cummerbunds, holding glasses of fake champagne and yelling that they ‘must go back to Heidelburg, the city of romance', but if I couldn't get Gilbert and Sullivan then I made do with Viennese Favourites or Rodgers and Hammerstein, and if the worst came to the worst, even a scout show (‘the 14th Whitehawk Troop presents That's Showbiz, all proceeds towards a new minibus'). 

I had no dignity left. Simple as that. 

As my obsession deepened, I started collecting light opera memorabilia: seventy-eight records, posters from original productions and signed photographs. On one occasion I even caught a train to Reading to view the private collection held by an ex-cleric turned schoolteacher who had the largest one in the south-east – or so he assured me on the phone. Even I should have realized that visiting ex-clerics was a potentially dangerous activity for a teenager, but Peter Joslin proved the soul of discretion, holding me enthralled in his upstairs bedroom for an entire afternoon with his old programmes, sheet music covers and commemorative tea-towels, and when he finally revealed a blemished linen handkerchief supposed to have been used by Gilbert himself, it was the nearest I'd yet come to a sexual experience. Just think, it might actually have been his snot that caused those stains ... 

I've spent time since trying to discover just why I took such a wrong turning at a time when I should have been seeking out sex, drugs and rock 'n' roll. 

There were even early warning signs. I dimly remember one occasion, not long after I started to seek out this twilight world, when I found myself comparing weekends with a schoolmate. Trevor was a jokey, sporty sort of kid, who already spent most Saturday nights drinking with his mates at the Pavilion Tavern in Brighton town centre (known colloquially as the Pav Tav). This particular weekend he'd ended up at a party in Hangleton where he'd managed to get his hand inside Alison Walls's bra. Alison was the sister of a kid in my year. She was a fearsome prospect, built like a scrum-half with a line in sarcasm that could freeze you at ten paces. It was a daring raid, and he recounted the unbuttoning of her blouse and the teasing open of the bra cup with a glint of triumph in his eyes. 

I didn't want to tell him how I'd spent my time, but deep down, I think I knew what I was doing. Neither Alison Walls nor anyone else with demonstrable female genitalia was ever going to allow me free access to their mammaries, rock concert or not, and something in me realized this even then. So rather than spend my weekends as a frustrated sexual spectator on the fringes of the ultimate teenage participation sport, I took my piece off the board. Alison Walls couldn't reject the lethal combination of my middle and index fingers if they were thirty miles along the coast tapping along in rhythm to the overture of Hastings Operatic Society's Brigadoon. 

There was another reason. Going to amateur shows was warm, reassuring, constant, like dozing on the sofa on a Saturday afternoon with rain spattering the windows and the football results being read out on the radio. The productions, costumes, and moves were always the same, as comforting as James Alexander Gordon or those curling snapshots on the mantelpiece. Fifty-one weeks of the year I might have fretted over exams I couldn't pass, girls I couldn't touch, sports I couldn't play and acne I couldn't cure, but I could always flee to Titipu. There, Doris would do wardrobe, Reg would play piano for rehearsals, and Doreen would play the Third Little Maid, even if she had just celebrated her ruby wedding anniversary. It was not so much entertainment as feeling part of a complex ceremony, a semi-Masonic ritual. 

But most of all, it was a haven from Alison Walls and having to get to grip with her Watney's Red Barrels. 

Those two or three years now seem like a dream, a chimera, the trawlings of my darkest subconscious. The images that haunt me from that period in my life seem barely credible. 

Did I really see a jolly Venetian in Crawley Operatic Society's production of The Gondoliers barged off the stage into the orchestra pit during the dancing of a gay cachucha, for instance? 

(I did. His name was John Castleton. The St John's ambulance men said he'd had a lucky escape: eighteen inches further left and he'd have landed on the trombones.) 

Was I really there at Falmer High School's Ruddigore when the conductor suddenly threw his baton at the soloist, shouting, ‘No, no that's bloody awful – hand it back, we're starting again.' 

(I was. The conductor's name was Alan Skull. A friend of mine was once served roast badger for Sunday lunch at his house. Skull had run over the animal while driving through the back lanes near Uckfield.) 

And did that female chorister really trip in the wings and accidentally set off a fire extinguisher during the rendering of ‘When You Walk Through a Storm' in Burgess Hill Society's Carousel? 

No. 

No, no. 

I must have imagined that. 

And yet ... 

My love affair died as quickly as it had begun. I'd gone to a Saturday night performance of The Pirates of Penzance in Horsham, and as the cast came on to take their curtain calls at the end of the show, I realized I was bored shitless. Nothing had gone wrong. Nobody had forgotten their lines. The soprano's wig hadn't fallen off. None of the chorus had tripped over the scenery. It had been a perfectly presentable evening: solid, unspectacular, thoroughly creditable. And I hated them for it. I'd come all this way on the train only to be robbed of my entertainment, and I wanted my money back. 

Had it come to this? 

The mistakes and mishaps and trundling ineptitude so often part and parcel of this whole, stupid, unwise, and goodwilled family of amateur musicals were now all I craved. I'd seen too many Pirates, too many Pinafores. I now needed them to be freak shows, and unless some humiliation occurred at least once a performance, I felt cheated. Their virgin enthusiasm, which had once proved so enticing, I now despised. When I was finally thrown free from my temporary oblivion, towards the end of the sixth form and on the cusp of adulthood, I found the world had changed. Harold Wilson was back in Downing Street, seatbelts had been introduced and Jimmy Saville was advertising British Rail. Worse, my mates had grown up without me. Some had passed their driving test: one or two even had their first car. They talked of studying economics at Warwick, of heavy metal and James Taylor, of going on holiday to Yugoslavia with their girlfriends. 

I had none of these things. No car, no girlfriend, no trendy clothes, no chat-up lines, and Meatloaf was still something I had with chips and peas. My schoolwork was in tatters, most of my teachers had given up on me, and the future I had always envisaged for myself, involving a decent university and a steady career as a solicitor, was a diminishing prospect. A job in a factory, I was told, was the best I could hope for. 

Or was it? 

But in fact, all those nights in Scout halls had left me with an ambition. I now had the belief that I could be an actor. Not just one of those amateurs, spending my life working in some stultifying job waiting for a few precious nights, but a pro who could swank about on a stage in fancy dress every night, and with a wage cheque at the end of it. I'd heard the actor Patrick Troughton on the radio describing his job as ‘shouting in the evenings'. 

That was what I wanted to do with my life. 

But how? A visit to my local theatre provided the clue. My parents were given some free tickets to Two and Two Make Sex starring Patrick Cargill, and they took me along. It was the programme that pointed the way ahead. According to the biographies of the cast members, nearly all of them had trained at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. 

If it was good enough for the Queen it would surely do for me. 

I sent off for the RADA prospectus.
