

This, despite being uttered in the midst of an argument, struck an immediate chord. The first reason was personal and exclusive to me. That May evening seven years earlier at Silverstone was still as fresh in my mind as if it had just taken place. I still recalled exactly the pained expression on the German's face as I sped past, my unbelievably puerile joy, the misguided conviction that my overtaking manoeuvre had outsmarted the master, and the tremendous glee I have taken ever since in recounting the same, tired story to the same, tired friends. 

So, yes, come to think about it. That was the answer to my wife's sarcastic question. I do think I'm Michael 'Bloody' Schumacher. Well, at least I did back then. I gave this notion some reflection as the predictable silence that follows every argument presented some valuable thinking time in the car. 

When you boil it right down the main difference between Schumacher and me was the fact that he drove a much faster car than me, and had around thirty years more practice. Maybe, if I had started racing one day after being born, or when still a foetus, or whatever age it was when the German first started to race, I'd be as good as him now? 

It's a hypothetical question that can never be answered. Schumacher will just have to accept, as an irrefutable fact, that he will never know if I would have been as good as him if presented with the same, level playing field. 

Given that I couldn't possibly hope to emulate the great man, there was still no reason why I could not prove my worth as a motor racing driver. I kept my initial thoughts to myself, of course, as I fixed my eyes firmly on the road ahead and observed my children pinching each other in the back. If my wife was reading my mind just then she would have been well within her rights to have made a quick exit from the car, even if it was moving, and an equally rapid phone call to the nearest mental institution. 

The second reason was not only universal but, as I analysed it more deeply, the overriding issue. I had just turned forty years of age. This, frankly, was not only unbelievable, but ridiculous. So ridiculous that I had kept on examining how this could possibly be the case. I didn't act forty. I didn't look forty, I convinced myself. For goodness sake, it was only a day or so ago that I was leaving university. Only five minutes earlier that I had turned thirty. How the hell could this have possibly happened? 

I looked into the wing mirror again. I had a sixteen-year-old daughter. For Christ's sake! She was old enough to get married! When I first became a father, once I had overcome the terrible shock of disjointed nights, a wrecked social life and disgusting nappies, I thought it would be rather good to have a virtually grown-up daughter who would see her cool, still young, forty-year-old father as her soulmate and her companion, who would discuss music, and social issues, and boys with him, and who would actually want to have a drink with him in a bar with her friends. 

That illusion had long since evaporated. What I failed to realise at twenty-four, but what I now understood at forty, was that the age difference mattered less than the fact that, whichever way we looked at it, she was my daughter, and I her father and that, because of this parameter, I was of a different generation. As a result, if I made a comment about music/fashion/boys/absolutely anything, it was always wide of the mark because . . . well because, how the hell would I know at the ripe old age of forty? 

It was still silent in the car, save for the noise of the potted plants falling over in the back and scattering soil all over a paperback copy of the Book of the Road. Yes, I was almost ashamed to admit, we were, indeed, returning from the garden centre, like countless other families who live in the sprawling conurbation known as suburbia. After we had returned home I thought I might just wash the car, or clear out the garage and drive to the local refuse dump. Hey, the options are countless when you lead as wild a life as this. 

But hold on a minute! This description had not been strictly fair, at least not in the recent past. I had been leading a double life. On the one hand there was suburban man, with his garden centre trips, parents' evenings at schools and dinner parties. 

On the other hand there had been numerous journeys to exotic corners of the globe: to the Khyber Pass and the Rift Valley, to Copacabana Beach and Table Mountain. To Tokyo and Sydney, Bangkok and New York, Greenland and New Zealand. To practically everywhere! 

Better still were the experiences. I had made a living writing about my sporting adventures in these far-flung lands. I had played football with the Brazilians, and rugby with the South Africans. I had run with the Kenyans, played squash with the Pakistanis and cricket with the Australians. I had boxed against American world champions, rowed with British Olympic gold medallists, played golf with Inuit in the high Arctic, and ridden elephants playing polo in Thailand. It wasn't quite Action Man, but it had been a pretty colourful last few years. 

A friend of mine once admitted that when his company invited me to any kind of function he would always press the 'speaker' button on the telephone so that the whole office could hear my excuses. 'We used to have a sweepstake with a list of ridiculous excuses,' he admitted. Once I came up with the true fact that I would be in Finland competing in the world air guitar champion-ships, live on stage, in front of thousands of music fans. 'One of us actually got that one right,' he added. 

Right now, though, that office sweep would show items such as trips to the garden centre, the DIY warehouse, the dump, the supermarket and the video rental shop. Not exactly rock and roll. 

Well, forty or not, there was no way on this earth that I was simply going to bow out of my well-extended youth, grow up and succumb to the onset of middle age. No way! For the past two years playing golf to the extent of meeting Tiger Woods had supposedly conditioned me for this but now, with my fortieth birthday party been and gone, and the hilariously funny greetings cards banging on about my 'old age' read and discarded, I was not going to lie down without one heck of a fight. The rot was beginning to set in. I had to stop it. 

My mini-revolt was to complete the London Marathon, something I duly achieved in April 2004, albeit with post-race hamstrings so tight that getting in and out of my car proved a major operation, while the excruciating process of sitting on the loo made me yearn for constipation. But that was a one-off. Besides, I saw plenty of people in their sixties running alongside me, I was beaten to the finish line by a man wearing a telephone box, and I looked extremely old when I observed myself in the mirror of a post-race changing room. 

My major revolt, however, would prove how turning forty had made no difference at all to the way I act, the way I am, and the way I will continue to be. Mid-life crisis? What crisis? What mid-life, for that matter? 

This, ironically, had been precipitated by my wife's comments in the car and exacerbated by the fact that we were in the midst of living out the very kernel of suburban life. 

She asked me if I thought I was Michael Schumacher. Michael Schumacher! Now why hadn't I done any motor racing before? Well, clearly I had been busy. There hadn't been much time to race cars, what with all the boxing and running and putting and rowing and everything. Besides, I had driven a car virtually every day of my life for the past twenty-two years. 

Maybe there was more to it than this though. Maybe, deep down, I had shied away from it because, more so than all the other sports, its star components were not only inaccessible, but seemingly from another world. I had enjoyed a semi-jet-set life over the years. Nice hotels, a decent class of travel, a few posh dinners along the way, and some of the best seats in the house for most of the most prestigious sporting events on the planet. But my jet-set life was no frills compared to the supersonic standards of Formula One. While I drank Mumm champagne, they swigged Veuve Cliquot. And while I made small talk with PR girls, they swapped numbers with supermodels. 

Could I, at forty, not only still carry off my version of a jet-set life, but lead the kind of lifestyle Formula One offers? Could I find a way into this inner sanctum? And, even if I could, would I then want to risk my life racing motor cars? 

There were no bones about this final question whizzing around my head. There had been plenty of times when I had placed my body in danger. Fighting Roy Jones junior is an instant example of this. Playing rugby league for Wigan against St Helens is another. Completing the Cresta Run, fighting as a professional wrestler, fending off bouncers from Australian quick bowlers. None of these actually threatened death. 

But motor racing. At high speed. With a na•ve and inexperienced racing driver at the wheel. Quite clearly there were possibilities here. 

The man who had just bought the potted plants would have dismissed this as a pie-in-the-sky notion, a great deal of hassle, and the creation of potential danger that was entirely unnecessary. The man who had been a reserve for the Springboks, twelfth man for Australia, and a human punchbag for Roy Jones, saw it as a challenge. At forty, a necessary challenge, too. Glamour and speed was, after all, an enticing cocktail to a man on the precipice of middle age. 

As I pulled the car into the drive at home, lifted the boot up and filled my arms with a vast array of pansies and chrysanthemums, I realised the first strands of another journey had been born. I would attempt to become a racing driver of sorts, explore all kinds of motor racing in the process, travel the world in my quest, get to meet a who's who in the sport, learn the trade to the extent that no proverbial stone would be left unturned, and prove to anyone who cared to listen that I had what it took to become a racing driver, forty or not. 

Then came the final goal. In truth it had been staring me in the face all the time. My wife, unwittingly, and to her subsequent horror, had presented me with the climax, indeed the only climax, to this high-octane adventure. I would meet the man himself. I would get to know him. And I would find a way, somehow or other, of proving to the greatest racing driver in the history of the world just how good a driver I really was. 

The end result would be triumphant. If Michael 'Bloody' Schumacher was impressed by my racing skills, if Schumi, or just plain Michael, as everyone in the business seems to know him by, gave me the green light then nobody would ever again be in a position to pass any damning comment on my driving. Least of all my wife! 

Maybe even more important than this was the fact that looming middle age would be no more than a figment of other people's imagination. If I could slot effortlessly into motor racing, with all its surrounding glamour and prestige, then even my daughter might take a different view of the so-called generation gap.
