

I like the Italians a lot and if there is one international team I haven't enjoyed stuffing down the years, it's them. You don't feel sympathy in Test rugby at the best of times because the people you are playing against are generally trying to ruck your head off and bury you into the earth in the tackle. In my experience the Italians are as physical a side as any in world rugby but on the couple of occasions when England have racked about forty or fifty points against them, or other less developed teams for that matter, I tend not to go hunting for openings in a way that I would, say, against New Zealand or South Africa. I hope that doesn't sound patronising, but thrashing another team (especially Italy, for me) simply isn't as much fun as you might think. When we beat Romania 134-0 not long ago I felt positively depressed afterwards. It was as if I had spent the afternoon clubbing seals. 

Back in Lancashire, the centre of my life for the next twelve years or so would be the village of Hurst Green in the Ribble valley north of Blackburn. Even when I got sent off to boarding school, home was only a couple of miles down the road. My parents have a house there to this day and whenever I am asked where I come from I reply, ‘Hurst Green, Lancashire'. Beers I have drunk elsewhere have never tasted quite as good as those I have enjoyed in the Bayley Arms. Work has brought me down south for the past decade or so but I will always be a Lancastrian and a northerner to the tips of my size twelve boots. 

After a year at the local primary school, I went to St Mary's Hall prep school where my mother taught mathematics and from where most pupils went on to the Jesuit-run Stonyhurst College next door. I was a dayboy for two years, but at ten I became a boarder. Dad became the rugby coach at Stonyhurst and, like all school rugby coaches, taught a bit of geography, too. (If you have ever wondered about the link between rugby and geography, it is because in the 1950s and 1960s many of the leading universities, including several colleges at Cambridge and Oxford, used to take on a handful of promising rugby players to study ‘land economy'. The practice died out for a number of years thanks entirely, legend has it, to the onetime England back-rower Chris Sheasby, whose staggering lack of commitment to his studies led to a revision of the Oxbridge selection process. That, anyway, is my excuse for being the only member of the Greenwood family not to get into Cambridge, and I'm sticking to it.) 

St Mary's, like Stonyhurst, attached a lot of importance to outdoor pursuits and I soon found myself playing a variety of sports and loving them all. At that age I wasn't particularly tall or obviously athletic, but by the time I left on a sports bursary to go to Sedbergh, I had become a reasonably good cricketer, rugby player and triple jumper. To this day my mother says that her proudest moment in my sporting career was watching me in my green and white hooped shirt score a hattrick in the final of the Malsis Under-11 Sevens competition at the age of nine. I remember receiving the trophy after our victory and thinking at the time that it was roughly the same size as the old, jugeared European Cup in football, but I saw a picture of it not long ago and it's no bigger than a coffee mug. 

In those days I was probably as tidy a cricketer as I was a rugby player, and it wasn't until my late teens that rugby began to exert a greater hold over me. As a middle-order batsman and first-change bowler, I managed to win a call to the Under-13 North Lancashire team to play our South Lancashire rivals at Old Trafford in the summer of 1984. My captain that day was a run machine called John Crawley and in the opposition line-up was a swaggering, bushyhaired all-rounder called Ronnie Irani, both of whom went on to play for Lancashire and England. I still have a copy of the scorecard today. We lost by 21 runs, Ronnie hit an unbeaten 75 and took 3 for 22. He actually had me plumb LBW first ball, but the very nice umpire, reluctant to give a kid out for a golden duck, shook his head and pointed down the leg side. Later that summer I played alongside the two future Test players for Lancashire Under-13s. I promise that I don't go round boasting about my prep school sporting achievements today, but, for the sake of historical truth, I have to record here that I also won the triple jump competition in the National Prep School Athletics championship in Haringey. 

In sport, I had found something that I was fairly good at and, although it increased my confidence, I remained a painfully shy child throughout my time at St Mary's and for a long time into my teens. The fact that my mother taught there made me that little bit more self-conscious; it was only through my dad putting me in so many positions where I simply couldn't be shy that finally I stopped going red and squeaky whenever someone spoke to me. Roughly twenty years after leaving St Mary's, it seems that I have come a very long way on the shyness front in the intervening years, at least according to an anonymous letter I received in April 2003. It read as follows: 

Greenwood,
You are a fucking arrogant arse and too self-centredly blind to see the harm which your attitude is doing to the game of rugby. Grow up. 

And if you think that's bad you should see some of the hate mail I get. I certainly couldn't fault my correspondent for frankness, but even if he had had the courage to leave a name and address what are you meant to say in reply to abuse like that? Playing for England in recent years gets you used to being hit with the ‘arrogant' line of insult from time to time. I suppose it's meant to wind us up and provoke a response but we tend to yawn or mutter the words ‘change the record' at the mention of it. International sport is a very unforgiving, black and white world: if you fail to win everything, you're a ‘loser'; if you win, you're arrogant. Being called arrogant is a sign that your team is doing well. Losers never get called arrogant. 

The older I get the fonder my memories become of my time at boarding school, but I hated it at first and as soon as term was over I was straight home and out with my mates on our street, Smithy Row, playing football in the winter and cricket in the summer. Recently, during a rare gap in my schedule, I went back for my mum's birthday and as I walked back into the Bayley Arms there were all the mates I used to play with as a scabby-kneed, snotsmeared youngster – the Hayhursts, the Youngs, the Boltons and Neil Brown . . . I love going ‘home' and catching up with all the local news. On this occasion I was as interested to know how they got on in the recent local football derby against Longridge as they were to know what had gone wrong in England's Six Nations defeat against Ireland. 

Back then I had a very strong Lancastrian accent; it has been diluted by living down south for so many years but it comes straight back whenever I return. Lancashire meant everything to us as young sportsmen. You were Lancastrian first and English second. It wasn't exactly Basque separatism, but the county certainly forged our identity and this was fuelled by the fierce rivalry with neighbours Yorkshire. One of the most stirring pre-match talks I have ever experienced was delivered by a man called John Burgess, one-time President of the RFU and a man so Lancastrian he could almost pop. He gave me my first cap for Lancashire at the age of eighteen, and it was in the changing room before we played a Cumbrian side in a charity game, all of us pulling on our red and white hooped shirts, when he gathered us around and delivered the words which still resound in my ears today. ‘I have three things to say to you, gentlemen: Lancashire, The North, England – in that order!' he bellowed. 

Perhaps I risk upsetting my southern paymasters and I may well be making a horrible, biased generalisation but I've always thought the best English rugby players over the years have come from the north. The nature of rugby is changing rapidly in the professional era, but the superiority of the north as a rugby breeding ground certainly seemed to hold true when I was making my way up through the junior and representative ranks. Will Carling's excellent England teams of the late 1980s and early 1990s all had a hard core of northerners to them. Perhaps that's all changing now as the England team that won the World Cup was dominated by southerners and Midlanders. Tindall, Balshaw, Jason Robinson and myself were the only players of the twenty-two that day to be born and brought up in the north. 

The older I got the more I enjoyed St Mary's and when I went off to Sedbergh on that sports bursary, an hour and a half to the north in the middle of the Cumbrian wilderness, my little prep school seemed like Disneyland compared to the outwardly chilling institution where I was to spend the next six years. For some reason I had always been in the year ahead at St Mary's and so I was just twelve years old when my parents dropped me off at my new school, where the motto Dura Virum Nutrix (Hardy Nurse of Men) didn't exactly put a spring into the step of fresh-faced, homesick newcomers. I absolutely hated it at first. 

Say what you like about public schools – and I personally don't feel that strongly about them one way or the other – but I know for a fact that Sedbergh hardened me up, emotionally if nothing else. Unlike many professional sportsmen on tour, I've never suffered from homesickness when abroad. Going to boarding school also meant that I spent the better part of a decade running around outside playing sports – a dream for a lot of young kids as well as a privilege and an opportunity that is no longer available in most state schools. I was never bullied or abused, I got into one of the country's best universities with four good A levels to my name and I made some very good friends while I was there. As school experiences go, at Sedbergh mine was a pretty good one, though it took me a couple of years to find my feet and feel truly comfortable there. 

I was lucky to have a great housemaster called Angus McPhail in my last two years, and by the time I left his charge in 1991 I was a happier, more confident, better rounded and higher achieving individual than I had been on the day of his arrival. Angus – can I call him by his christian name now that I am almost thirty-two? – is a double blue (at cricket and rugby) and a man who doesn't have to work hard for his respect – you just give it to him instinctively. He was also my economics teacher and he had a tremendous influence over me in all areas of my life. He has since gone on to become the headmaster at Radley, or The Warden to give him his official title. His predecessor was a strict man called Mr Thomas and I always seemed to be in some kind of trouble with him, mainly for drinking at weekends.
