

Each pub had its own following and reputation. The World's End Pub itself was never thought of as particularly boisterous. The Reilly and the Weatherby were recognised as the roughest pubs, the Weatherby from its position on the corner of Slaidburn Street. Now a middle class cul-de-sac of powder pink- and blue-painted houses, Slayburn, as it was pronounced by everybody who lived in the World's End, was known for its Saturday night fights. To my brother and me, as children who really only heard about the fights from our grandmother, my mother's mother Eliza Toop, it was known even more for its bonfire on Guy Fawkes Night. Then, the fire would be built in the middle of the narrow street and the flames would leap between the houses while the men would stumble out of the Weatherby and, against the cries of their wives, drag out furniture or hurl chairs from the upstairs windows onto the blaze. 

We were nominally in my grandmother's charge but as often as not she had slipped into the pub for a ‘twist of snuff' and we were free to push our way through the crowds for half an hour. The swirling smoke and leaping showers of sparks, the crack of fireworks and the whoosh of rockets all fuelled our intense excitement as we edged closer the action. At some point it always got out of hand. The bonfire would tip towards one of the houses. A flapping net curtain would singe and flame. Men and women, probably husbands and wives, would be pushing each other in big untidy fights, their children screaming. The police would be there, probably having been waiting round the corner, And, of course, there was never a Bonfire Night in the thirties without a fire engine or two in Slayburn Street. It was a World's End institution. 

Another was undoubtedly its women. Many a ‘Piccadilly girl' came from World's End. Perhaps it was in line with the area's honourable tradition (of which more later); perhaps it was the simplicity of the journey. Tuppence on the 22 bus took you, in little more than fifteen minutes, from the World's End Pub to the Eros statue in the middle of Piccadilly. Numbers are always difficult to come by but we know some things by newspaper scandals and from reports even closer to home. Two World's Enders who ‘enjoyed the company of male friends' were murdered in the inter-war years. The mother of one of my later girl-friends (her father had moved on shortly after her birth) cooked us bacon and eggs in Lots Road before she left to earn enough to support her family in the dark alleyways of Soho. And my own mother's mother, Eliza, had certainly achieved part of her early struggle for independence on the fringes of the profession when she worked as a barmaid at Dirty Dick's in Spitalfields. 

Any man who didn't work along the river or in the factories or breweries was almost certainly in the building trade – in or out of work. In the 1930s most World's End young men were only a generation away from field workers in Dorset or casual farm labourers in Kent or Essex. I once looked up my own family in Somerset House. No man or woman of our family name had been born outside the single village of Roxwell in Essex for a hundred years, or more probably a thousand years, before my paternal grandfather, Henry James Wheal, was abandoned in London by his widowed father and passed from orphanage to orphanage to end his childhood in a Chelsea workhouse. With no trade and only the skills of a country boy Henry James found the first job he could, inevitably as a labourer among the numberless army of men then building late- Victorian London. 

The woman he married (whether or not in haste I don't know, but most certainly to repent it in leisure) was a formidable streetfighter named Minnie Woodhouse. This grandmother, my father's mother, was a rough bully of a woman, a steady drinker rather than a drunk, whose sons, my father included, snipped holes in the knees of their Sunday suits to make them valueless at the pawnshop where she would hope to raise the wherewithal to pay the street bookmaker. Minnie herself worked as a cleaning woman, in Chelsea proper, for the artist and Director of the Tate Gallery, J. B. Manson. He and his wife prized her highly as a cleaner and perhaps as an amusingly belligerent personality. Minnie was quite unfazed by the illustrious writers and artists who visited the Mansons' home. She treated them all with a breezy contempt. The Mansons were good, liberal people though I'm sad to say that they knew only Minnie's version of her home life and held a dreamland belief that they had somehow tamed her into genuine friendship. I think they saw in her one of those ‘salt of the earth' figures the upper classes enjoyed believing they could cultivate. 

In fact, apart from her eldest son George, and possibly her drinking companion, Mrs Bashford, Ma Bash as she was known, Minnie didn't give tuppence for anybody. My mother inherited the job with the Mansons from Minnie, and could have told them that she was less than the amiable rough diamond she pretended to be. But that would not be my mother's way – although she kept in touch with the widowed Mrs Manson for years after she no longer worked for her. 

Sober, Minnie had intelligence but little discrimination. It's not an uncommon problem for working class people. If education offers anything, it's some ability to discriminate. Any amount of intelligence will not get any but the few over that barrier. An outstanding example of this was the issue that arose over my brother's bent, clearly bowed legs when he first began to walk. Minnie was recognised in the World's End as something of a medical authority and would happily pour scorn on the efforts of the occasional drunk and the few devoted (like Dr Glass on the corner of Tadema Road) doctors who practised in the area. When Keith, or Kit as he was known in the family, began walking on quite definitely bent legs Dr Glass suggested massage; Minnie insisted my mother take him to the bone breaker. His skill (he practised in Riley Street just round the corner from the King's Arms and had been known to hold surgeries in the public bar) was the breaking and resetting of rickets-damaged legs. Since my mother, even if it had meant starving herself and my father too, would have ensured Kit and I had the diet which was even then known to be necessary to avoid rickets, Minnie's was an arrogant, a preposterous suggestion flying in the face of Dr Glass's advice. But you didn't just ignore Minnie's solution to a problem. My mother went to see her, sat down with a cup of tea and calmly told her that she would break Minnie's arms sooner than Kit's legs. Nobody had ever spoken to Minnie like that. But this big, twentythree year old girl with the friendly smile when she spoke was something different. And Min, being far from stupid, recognised it. But she was not yet prepared to accept defeat. 

My mother had, in fact, already begun a six month daily course of massage for Kit's legs which would ultimately be highly successful. But the outcome was not yet known and the malicious drip drip of gossip from the King's Arms, the sagacious nods of agreement from Ma Bash, began to filter out into the World's End. 

Again, my mother reacted decisively. She took Kit down to the King's Arms. Standing him on the table, (he was a particularly healthy looking, big, yellow haired, round-faced boy), she faced her fearsome mother-in-law in public. 

‘Look at him,' she said to Minnie, Ma Bash and the lunchtime cronies, ‘does he look undernourished? Does your grandson look neglected?' 

‘I never said that.' 

‘It's what rickets means. It's what you saying he's suffering from rickets means.' 

Even Minnie was silent. 

‘Now Min,' her daughter-in-law said, ‘if I hear one more word from you about breaking his legs, it will be the last time you ever see your grandsons, either of them. Can we say we understand each other?' 

Minnie worked her toothless jaws (she'd had all her teeth pulled ‘for her health' at thirty). Ma Bash ruffled her shoulders to prepare a post-factum claim of having participated in the outburst she was sure would come from Min. But to everybody's astonishment Minnie nodded her head. ‘He's your boy, Phyllis. It's up to you to decide. Not me. Nor old Ma Bash here.' She cackled. ‘Now let's have a port and lemon, and a bag of crisps for the boy.' 

It's true she wasn't always that effectively faced down. I think of Minnie as a streetfighter because she had a reputation (in some ways admirable, of course) for an eagerness to defend any battered wife against the offending husband, often driving him off to the King's Arms with a series of the left hooks for which she was rightly feared. The problem was that Minnie was not always in a condition after a quiet Sunday session in the same King's Arms, to make a nice judgement of the offence, and was too often known to haul unoffending husbands from the public bar to fight her outside on the embankment. On these occasions, her weighty sidekick, she of the dropsical legs, Ma Bash, would be required to bear witness to the justice of the ‘good hiding' administered, which she did faithfully from an evenly balanced mix of fear and friendship. 

Such evidence failed to impress my Temperance grandfather, Henry James. Quiet, deliberate, miserly and acid-tongued, he never took his wife's side in these disputes. Sometimes, in frustration, she attacked him to make her point, once notably, à la Roald Dahl with a leg of lamb. He was knocked sprawling across the Sunday dinner table before she was disarmed by her three sons. But sober she feared her husband's scorn. 

In a curious way they admired one another for their differences. He was believed by many in World's End to have made secret savings throughout his life while Minnie openly threatened that anything that came to her she would hand to the bookmaker within six months of his death. She could imagine no more painful threat to him than to squander his money. In riposte, he claimed no saving was possible on his miserable earnings as a part time laundry porter at St Stephen's Hospital. Once he was gone, he jeered quietly, she would live and die a pauper. I remember hearing, though not clearly understanding until my father explained, several such exchanges, or barbed comments, which opposed the miser to the gambler. In this Aesopian contest, honours were evenly divided. Henry James's will revealed his savings amounted to a considerable sum for a working man of that era, £250. But Minnie kept her word. She treated Ma Bash and their cronies to many a port and lemon in the King's Arms, backed a loser several times a day – and died a pauper as her husband had predicted. 

I met my father, who paid for her funeral, four or five days after her death. As usual we drank a cup of tea together and brought each other up to date with family events. I had just come down from Cambridge with a wife and twin daughters and was finding it hard to earn a salary we could live on. He gave me sparse details about his health and turned to my brother's swift advancement to a managerial post in his company, Hallmark Cards. I asked questions. He answered them. We laughed at this and that. Then, as an afterthought, he said: ‘Did I tell you the old lady died on Tuesday?' 

There was nothing much I could say. It wouldn't have been appropriate to say I was sorry. He knew what my brother and I felt about her, though we never really knew what he thought. I wonder if he knew himself.
