Chapter One 

Sodomy and Synchronised Swimming 

Objectives: Attend and report on the Commonwealth Games in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, paying particular attention to synchronised swimming, ten-pin bowling and Scottish cricket. Also rioting. Try to avoid tropical storms, death by bus and arrest. Time allocated: three weeks. 

I woke with that sense of disorientation and time-slip that always accompanies long-haul travel. Morning or night? Morning. Morning in Kuala Lumpur, three days before the start of the 1998 Commonwealth Games. What a strange place to be. What a strange reason for being here. But this is what I do, now. For three years, working for a fine but underfinanced Sunday newspaper, I travelled around Britain learning to be a sports writer. I went on one or two long train journeys, occasionally stayed a night in a cheap hotel. I flew once, to the Isle of Man. Then I joined a daily newspaper with a bigger budget and things got a lot more complicated. 

I looked at my schedule one day not long after the World Cup in France. It had sprouted, unfanfared, a new assignment: ‘Commonwealth Games, Malaysia'. I rang my wife and said: ‘I seem to be going to Malaysia for three weeks. Is that OK?' 

She said: ‘It will have to be, won't it?' 

I felt elated, nervous, mean. Ingrid was pregnant with our second child. The first, Lucy, was fifteen months old. Very mean. 

I packed, in the chilly English autumn, T-shirts, shorts, sun-tan lotion. Ingrid loves sunbathing. This simply wasn't fair. I promised presents all round, which made Lucy very happy, and strode off to the Tube trying to look more confident than I felt. 

Now here I was: time to go to work. Time to get accredited. 

The majority of the foreign press covering the Games were accommodated in the Mint Hotel, a giant glazed cube not far from the National Sports Complex where many of the events were to be held. I vaguely recalled driving past the Mint during my taxi ride from the airport the previous night, and driving on much, much further to reach the Quality Hotel (City Centre) which was my billet. 

Among the pre-Games bumph I'd waded through on the flight, I recalled something about shuttle buses running from the city centre to the press-accreditation office at the Mint. In the lobby of my hotel half a dozen yellow-T-shirted Games volunteers scuttled around pretending to be busy, while two more sat behind a desk signposted ‘Enquiries'. 

I chose the less unattractive of the two young women. ‘Can you tell me anything about buses to the media centre?' 

‘You want a bus?' She was incredulous, delighted: jumped to her feet and called something in Malay to a male colleague, who immediately started jabbering into a walkietalkie as he headed for the hotel entrance. Action. 

‘Bus will be one moment,' the not-quite-so-ugly sister said. 

Her sibling (you could tell they were related by the design of their chins, which should probably have been sent back to the drawing-board) gathered various pamphlets from the desk and shoved them under my nose. ‘You must have some information,' she said. 

I looked at brochures for shopping centres and folk museums for ten minutes, while the Chin Twins sat in tense silence, grimly resisting the impulse to tell me that the bus would be here in one moment. 

Their friend with the walkie-talkie zoomed back into the lobby. ‘Bus will be here very shortly. Bad traffic!' he cried, and burst into peals of laughter. ‘Very bad traffic!' He scuttled out again. 

Ten minutes later, the uglier sister topped up my pile of leaflets. ‘Very bad traffic,' she murmured. 

Thirty-two minutes after I had first asked about this form of transport, a battered red bus, looking like it had earned an honourable retirement after a lifetime ferrying school children, wheezed on to the hotel forecourt. The walkietalkie man was beside himself with excitement. He escorted me to the bus door, accompanied me aboard, made sure I had the comfiest seat. 

‘Mint Hotel, right?' I reminded him. 

‘Min' Hotel, sure, sure,' he said, and scuttled forwards to enter into a deep discussion with the driver. This went on for some time. Other volunteers stepped aboard to chip in, then left again; walkie-talkie man pressed buttons and yelled into his device. Eventually he elected to stay aboard, and the doors closed. He and I were the only passengers. We passed at alarming speed down a multi-lane highway flanked with recent skyscrapers, walls of windows flashing in the sun. The bus had no air conditioning, and humidity and fumes rendered the air on board a toxic soup. Two patches of sweat radiated from my T-shirt's armpits, looking to rendezvous at my navel and head south. 

The driver, who seemed to think he was in charge of a taxi, or even a moped, suddenly swerved across two lanes of traffic and dived down a curving approach road on to an American-scale highway: five lanes each side, crammed with speeding, weaving vehicles. At this, the walkie-talkie man gave a terrible cry, and leapt out of his seat to berate the driver. I could make out the word ‘Min' occurring frequently in what became an intense discussion, conducted while the driver looked over his shoulder at his interlocutor and let the bus get on with steering itself. I yelped quietly at every near miss. 

Eventually the pair came to some conclusion, and the bus mercifully slowed and pulled on to the hard shoulder. That was the good news. 

The bad news was that it then began to reverse. 

Walkie-talkie man strolled down the aisle grinning at me. ‘We go right way now,' he proudly announced, before kneeling on the back seat to yell instructions to his pal at the wheel. 

Inspired with fresh confidence in his colleague, the driver put his foot down, and the bus shot back up the hard shoulder almost as fast as it had come down the motorway. Incredulous motorists honked, flashed and gesticulated as we weaved towards the blind curve of the access ramp and then, speed barely diminished, back up it. 

I will truly never know how the driver of the cement truck managed to miss us, because as his monstrous cab and horrified face loomed in the coach's rear window I finally managed to shut my eyes, something I had been trying to achieve ever since the bus had first set off. I shrunk into my seat, and tried to assemble my limbs into the bracing posture recommended on in-flight safety cards. 

Some considerable time later, I felt a prod on my shoulder. Walkie-talkie man grinned at me. ‘Min' Hotel, sir,' he said. 

Accreditation was a lengthy bureaucratic struggle, but I was too numb from the bus ride to complain. I was issued with a laminated press pass and a plethora of less useful kit: glossy folders on stadium construction and catering logistics, a T-shirt, a baseball cap, an enamel pin badge, a soft-toy orang-utan (the Games mascot, Wira) and a backpack in which to carry it all to the nearest bin. 

I could now gain free access to any of the magnificent arenas constructed for the Games. Just across the highway from the hotel, the National Sports Complex at Bukit Jalil baked its white bulk in the sunshine. I could hop on a shuttle bus and go and watch the preparations for the opening ceremony. 

Or I could have a lunchtime beer. 

It should have been no contest, but something very peculiar was happening in the Mint Hotel bar. It was full of journalists, as any bar should be, but few of them were drinking. 

‘What's going on?' I asked a pink-faced Australian. 

‘We're on strike,' he said. 

‘You mean you're refusing to write?' 

‘Nah, mate. We're refusing to drink. Know what these bastards have done? Doubled the beer prices to welcome the Commonwealth media. It's a rort.' 

Rort – the Australian term for an outrageous swindle – is an evocative word, and a number of the man's colleagues grumbled their agreement. One or two local television crews were starting to take an interest, and the strikers produced little placards identifying their organisation as PINT, the Press Institute for Non-Teetotallers. 

I had no wish to be labelled a scab, or televised in the act of strike-breaking. So I bought a mineral water and took it over to a corner of the airline-lounge-style bar where I had spotted a gaggle of British journalists. 

Dave, a tabloid man of traditional tastes, was not on strike. He was drinking a beer and holding forth. ‘It's disgusting,' he was saying as I walked up. 

‘What is?' I asked. ‘The beer or the prices?' 

‘Nah,' Dave said. ‘The beer's OK, and the price doesn't matter if you stick it on expenses, does it?' He looked at me – not for the first time – as if I was someone pretending to be a sports journalist. Which is how I sometimes felt. 

‘It's the tarts,' Dave said. 

‘The . . . tarts?' 

‘Slappers. Professional ladies. There aren't any. I am told,' he lowered his voice to a conspiratorial level, ‘that this place is normally one huge knocking shop. But where's the action now? Nowhere to be seen. It's disgusting.' 

Dave's expertise in these areas is a matter of legend among the British sporting media. He it was whose (now ex-) wife had thrown his laptop off a high-rise hotel balcony, having discovered him in flagrante with a chambermaid. He it was who had marched up to a startled female receptionist at a hotel in Stockholm to complain that the pay-TV pornography in his room was insufficiently hardcore. 

Dave had a theory, confirmed, or so he claimed, by a number of knowledgeable local taxi drivers, that prior to the Games the Malaysian Government had rounded up Kuala Lumpur's prostitute population and bused them out of town to some kind of camp, where they were being held under guard for the duration of the Games. 

‘It's a fantastic story, isn't it?' Dave said, wistfully. ‘If I can get a break from all this sports stuff, I'm going to find that camp. And I tell you what, when I get there, I'm not going to make my excuses and leave.' 

That evening the King of Malaysia, His Majesty the Yang Dipertuan Agong, declared the Commonwealth Games open in a ceremony even longer than his name. 

I am an anti-connoisseur of these events – I hate everything about them – but not even the most strenuous wriggling could relieve me of my duty to attend. The time difference back to the UK meant, as the Sports Editor oh so reasonably pointed out, that I could sit through the entire performance and still have plenty of time to write about it. 

It was purgatory. Six hours of marching bands, traditional dancers and those clever-clever ‘human pictures' made by thousands of students holding up coloured cards. A Malaysian pop duo, Wah Idris and Ella, a sort of southeast- Asian Sonny and Cher, sang a specially commissioned song called ‘Standing in the Eyes of the World', while I hummed a ditty of my own composition entitled ‘Sitting in a Pool of My Sweat'. 

I don't want to sound too bitter about this, since I was probably the only one of the 100,000 people in the stadium who wasn't enjoying it. The arena itself, it should also be said, was magnificent. A triple-tiered bowl that somehow managed to be vast, elegant, and ever so slightly Islamic, it made a loud statement about the country in which it stood. It said: ‘Can we have the Olympics, now, please?' 

Malaysia is the only country in the Commonwealth to have its own monarch, though I am not sure how the constitutional lawyers square this with having Queen Elizabeth as nominal head of state. Anyhow, Elizabeth's son Edward, who pretty much exists to be wheeled out for these events, was keeping a tactfully low profile that evening, as the Yang Thingumajig was driven slowly around the athletics track in a monstrous Mercedes, waving in a proprietorial manner. 

Next it was the turn of the Prime Minister, Datuk Seri Dr Mahathir Mohamad (the Datuk Seri bit equates to our ‘Right Honourable'). He was driven around the stadium waving modestly from the back of a Land-Rover – he's so humble, you see – before making a speech that was anything but. 

