I Loved
GOLLANCZ
london
DALEK
YOU
Nick Griffiths
Chapter One
Age 4–7
The Joys of Being
a Small Boy
‘Dreams are important. Never underestimate them.'
The Doctor, Snakedance
Welcome to January 1970.
The sixties are over. While a nation recovers from wearing
flowers in its hair, a small boy living at 63 Murray Road,
Horndean, Hants, is recovering from the excitement of
Christmas.
The events of 1969 have largely passed him by, which is
fortunate because they had involved plenty of warring and
turmoil:
America had remained ensconced in Vietnam, getting
nowhere. The alleged assassins of both Bobby Kennedy and
Martin Luther King had been up in court. Charles Manson
and his ‘Family' had committed bloody murder, British troops
had entered Northern Ireland and Richard Nixon had been
sworn in as the new President of the United States. Later,
history records, he would be hurriedly sworn out again.
Music had had its Woodstock and The Beatles had
performed their last, atop the Apple Building.

Oh, and man had landed on the moon.
Only one event of 1969 had deeply affected young Nickolas
[sic] Griffiths. In July, the halfpenny had ceased to be UK
legal tender. HOW ON EARTH WAS HE GOING TO
AFFORD ANYTHING NOW?
Happily, Christmases chez Griffiths have always been a time
of giving. What four-year-old me received that Christmas
of 1969, I really couldn't tell you – it was too many years
ago – but I do know that the presents would have stacked
impressively, because my parents/Santa were always generous
at Yuletide, and that these lovely freebies would have
arrived in a gaudily coloured, thick-paper bag, because they
always did.
I always thought that bag was absolutely enormous, until
I came across it in the loft one day, long after said bag and
my childhood had been dispensed with. When you're six
foot tall, it suddenly seems much less enormous.
Note to self: consider revising opinion of parents' generosity.
Being a child is a wonderful thing. At its start, people actually
wipe your arse for you. They applaud when you perform
even basic functions. For ages after that, they do everything
for you, and they buy you things. And for ages after that,
they applaud when you perform slightly less basic functions
(such as getting a job) and continue to give you cash, even
though you have a job but have spent all yours on booze.
Actually, I'm being a bit unfair here. When I said ‘people'
and ‘they' I meant ‘my parents'. ‘People' didn't wipe my
arse for me when I was two years old. I didn't toddle out
into the street and flag down passers-by, proffering my
soiled bum-crack.
Note to self: consider not revising opinion of parents'
generosity.

I was born in the south-coast naval city of Portsmouth in
August 1965, just a week after – though no one thought to
tell me – J K Rowling, and had been driven bawling back up
the M3 to the nothing-town of Horndean, where I would
lead the first seven years of my life.
My father, Norman, is an engineer, works manager at
Tri-ang, a subsidiary of the world's biggest toymaker but
which will decline into receivership, the people who make
Hornby trains and Scalextric cars; my mother, Lilian
(Lynne), is a housewife. They're into their forties already
and my four brothers, Max (actually Norman also, but you
can see why he changed it), Michael, Gordon and Brian have
long since left home. I am effectively an only child. Generosity
and expectations will be showered upon me. It will
suit me fine.
My Dad has noticeable ears, a kindly expression and a suit
for work. Sometimes people hear him speak and think he
is Australian. You might imagine my Mum as one of those
pre-war film stars, with her dark loose curls and bright
lipstick. She also looks a tiny bit like the Queen.
I like them a lot, which is handy since they are in charge
of me.
What was life in Horndean like?
I can see a back garden path framed by trellises about which
roses grow. I can see pine trees lined along the back, whose
branches I regularly force my way up through. I will spend a
lot of my childhood up trees and am gutted when those pines
are one day chopped down without my permission.
There's a muddied area out there somewhere, cordoned
off with wire netting, where I will one day be allowed to
keep a rabbit in a hutch.
On the patio, I will take apart a large robot which had
been given to me as a present, and I won't be able to put it
back together again.
In the kitchen is a table. Its legs are metallic white and its
top is yellow Formica covered in a bizarre pattern of black
lines and dots, with a black plastic trim. Sometimes I will
shelter under there with an empty pill bottle, mixing potions
in the hope of becoming a wizard, while Mum whistles as
she works at the sink. Except it's not really a whistle, more a
blowing through pursed lips. If you get up close, you can
smell the instant coffee.
I have a breakfast cereal plate which is plastic with a
colourful comic design in the centre and a rim at right angles
to the base. Presumably I am a messy sod. I remember first
eating Shreddies off that plate.
Murray Road itself is built on a hill, which is great for
cycling down at speed on one's blue-and-yellow bike with
wide white wheels. At the top is Merchistoun Hall where
I attend nursery school.
Please don't concern yourself that this book is going to
be filled with poo anecdotes, but my sole memory of those
nursery schooldays is of finally pulling my way up on to
the supporting crossbar of one of the swings, swiftly filling
my pants, recognising the hopelessness of my situation,
and having to ask a passing friend to get a teacher to
rescue me.
I remember being cleaned up – what wages were those
people on? – and being allowed to walk home down the hill
on my own, and my mother expressing surprise that I am
back early. I don't recall my excuses but I do recall the
washing machine going.
Other early memories? Weeing on the front lawn.
(Sorry.) Playing with my only friends from just up the
road, Peter and Stephen. Peter is my age, his brother is a
couple of years younger and I am wondering now how
exactly one plays with a two-year-old. And sitting on my toy
tractor in the middle of the road, while the heavens tipped
buckets on my head, wondering who I was and why I was
there: my first existential ponderings. I can still smell that
sodden tarmac.
And my favourite anecdote: I am playing on the small
triangle of unkept grasses beside the hedgerow that forms
the boundary of Merchistoun Hall. A stranger arrives beside
me, a small but older boy. He picks up a discarded rusty
metal bucket, stuffs twigs, stones and leaves into it, and
when he tips it out there is a ladybird among the rubble.
‘I've made a ladybird,' he announces.
For weeks after that, when I am allowed out to play, I will
return to the same spot and try to make my own ladybird.
Unsuccessfully.
If you are that boy and you are reading this, please do get
in touch. I'd like to punch you on the nose.
I've just looked at a Google map of Horndean, which has
brought memories flooding back. The town itself is famous
for one thing, a Gale's brewery that doesn't smell good: a
cloying, bitter-sweet hop-scent that carries on the wind.
Nearby is Cowplain, where my dentist dwells – a defiant
sadist with a syringe the size of a fire extinguisher – and
where a newsagent sells multi-coloured gobstoppers in a
glass dispenser, which I covet. One day my Mum will offer
to pay for one, provided I ask for it. I will battle my
debilitating self-consciousness and eventually walk away.
That personality trait has never left me. Try being nervous
of talking to strangers while holding down a career in
journalism. Every phone call I make, I first take a deep
breath.
These days, when we go on holiday, I do the ‘driving and
hiding', my wife does the ‘talking to strangers'.
My mother and I shop regularly in Cowplain or, if we are
feeling adventurous, further afield in Waterlooville, which is
bigger. There is a restaurant in the latter in which we often
take lunch, and I am obsessed by a certain dessert cake
which is a cube of sponge surrounded by chocolate wafers,
with a dollop of cream on top, into which are stuck, butterfly-
wing-style, two further chocolate wafers. I believe it was
called the Chocolate Box.
The only problem: I am petrified of the stairs up into said
eatery, which have gaps between each step, so one can see
the floor way below as one rises. As we have already
ascertained with the Christmas-bag incident, relative smallness
can make heights and distances appear deceptively
great. I have to crawl on my hands and knees up those
stairs, just to reach my dessert heaven.
Fear of heights is another trait that will never leave
me. Some 12 years later, I will find myself once again on
hands and knees, edging petrified along the ridge towards
Snowdon's peak.
What I am doing up there, fuck knows.
Crucially, into this carefree, only occasionally hair-raising
existence, one day enters a tall man with a noticeable nose,
wavy silver hair, friendly eyes and old-fashioned clobber,
going by the name of the Doctor.
The day is 3 January 1970, the time 5.15 p.m., on BBC1. It's
the first episode of Spearhead from Space, marking Jon
Pertwee's debut as the nation's favourite Time Lord.
Spearhead from Space, for the unfamiliar: Patrick Troughton has
regenerated into the Third Doctor (Pertwee). He's aided by companion
Liz Shaw (a boffin, though obviously rubbish compared to
our hero) and bossed about without effect by Brigadier Lethbridge-
Stewart (uniform, baton, moustache). The Nestene Consciousness
plans to take over the Earth (a recurring theme) by controlling
plastic – notably these shop dummies which come alive and are
known as Autons. The same aliens would battle Christopher
Eccleston's Doctor, to herald the show's triumphant return.

I had never caught any Troughton stories, presumably
having been deemed too young to handle the tension.
Presumably also, my parents had no idea how terrifying
the Autons would be. Boy, were they scary.
It had been my Dad's idea to plonk me in front of the
murderous mannequins. He had watched both Hartnell and
Troughton, while I slept, dreaming of bunnies or similar,
and had become a fan.
Doctor Who has always appealed to whole families. That's
one of its beauties. It gobsmacks me that at a time when the
BBC were reviving the likes of Blankety Blank, The Generation
Game (with Jim Davidson!) and Ask the Family, or airing
shows hosted by Ian Wright (clearly a former footballer),
they had no idea what impact the return of a well-produced
Doctor Who would have.
Indignation over.
My Dad – who is almost 90 but wears it so well that he still
has hair that isn't fully grey, albeit splendidly wispy – tells
me that his mother used to make sandwiches for the beat
bobbies (including his stepfather) back in the twenties, and
he had to race around after them, delivering the muchneeded
nourishment.
Often, he says, these bobbies would hole up in a police
box, exactly like the Tardis, where they could eat their
sandwiches in peace.
Spotting this blast from the past in a BBC television series
was one enticement for him to watch.
Mine was far less nostalgic. I had seen nothing of anything
that occurred in Doctor Who before. It was all utterly new,
a seismic blow to the mind, such a giant leap for my
imagination that I was instantly hooked.

