Perhaps it was the idea of shared experience; perhaps cycling allowed
him the silence he enjoyed when he was hunting, or fishing, or taking
watches apart and playing with the parts for hours and hours. This
blissful absorption, losing himself in time as he dissected some mechanical
device, perhaps mimicked his adored grandfather, bent over a
shoe, forcing a needle through leather with strong, accurate fingers.
Perhaps he simply forgot his shyness in the heat of competition. Either
way, Nicola Amaducci was right: cycling allowed Marco to break
through his chronic inhibitions and enjoy friendship, showing the
extroversion he could otherwise only achieve with his mother. It gave
him an outward persona, a mask he could use to face the world. It also
gave him deep bonds with other boys – bonds which would survive
him. But if, in one direction, cycling set Marco free, in another, it added
to Tonina's burden of anxiety, which lives on in her memories, liberated
by the years from chronological order: ‘For me, the anguish was continuous,
every time he went out. If I met him at the crossroads, I'd turn
the other way in fear, because he was a bit reckless. Every time he went
out, I was afraid. Because, many things had not yet happened, but . . .
after the first accident, the second, the third, the fourth, that is – and I
remember one day I went to work, and he was going out with two or
three other boys; I was on my bike going to work, and I said, “Helmets
for those boys!” and my husband said, “Go away!” When I got home
to the condominium, the other boys asked me, “How's Marco?” I said,
“Why, where is he?” He was in hospital because he'd been hit by a car.
He had been descending; the car was coming up the other way.'
In 1983 Sotero had part-funded Marco's first racing bike, which would
supplant the model loaned by the Fausto Coppi. To do so, grandfather,
father and son visited the Vicini factory in the outskirts of Cesena,
founded by the 1939 champion of Italy, Mario Vicini, known locally as
Ghaibera Vicini. Paolo told me: ‘We wanted to buy a bike we'd already
seen. But Marco saw this “Tour de France” bicycle, twenty or thirty
thousand lire more than the other. Itwas dark red, bull's blood, metallic.'
At a distance of two decades the cost is still imprinted in Paolo's memory.
‘The other bicycle was 260,000 lire.We paid 290,000 lire' – ¥145. ‘Two
or three years later, when Marco had to ride a team bike, we sold it to a
mechanic.'
Marco learned to dismantle and reassemble his bike with great
expertise; and, later on, as Tonina recalled, ‘He always went training
with an Allen key in his pocket, because he analysed his position. A bit
higher, a bit lower, a bit here, a bit there. He almost alwayswent training
alone. He often told me he heard voices. He never told me whose voices
they were. They were his affair. Even when he dropped Tonkov at
Montecampione, he threw away his glasses and everything, and he
heard voices. Perhaps it was his grandfather.'
Initially, it was not Marco's father but his uncle Dino who accompanied
him to races. Dino also lived onViale dei Mille, in the Condominio
Gabbiano – the ‘Seagull Condominium' – a hundred metres away. A
timber-yard hand during the week, Dino was passionate about cycling.
In the newspaper, he always lingered over the cycling pages, and rode
himself, although not competitively. Even today Dino cycles two or
three mornings a week. For the past twenty years he has taken part in
recreational events all over Italy and France. We met in a bar near the
railway station where Dino plays cards each afternoon, like his father
before him. ‘We were the ones who put him on a bike. Sotero gave him
his first bike, but we were the ones who went with him every Sunday.
Paolo didn't want to follow. He used to play football, until we put him
on a bike. People were always saying, “Where did you get a son like
that from?” I was always replying, “I'm not his father, I'm his uncle.”
Because I was bald, they thought I was his father – until Paolo started
shaving his head.' But that was not for a decade yet.
Given the circumstances, for young people on the Riviera, German or
English were more use than Romagnolo. Like the other holiday resorts
of the Adriatic Riviera, from upmarket Riccione and swaggering Rimini
further south, to the nightclubs of Milano Marittima halfway to
Ravenna, Cesenatico was thriving on tourism, especially West German
tourism, as early as the 1960s. The Deutsche Mark bought comfortable
accommodation, good food, brilliant sunshine, golden beaches, at a
favourable exchange rate.Acheap family holiday for the Germans, then,
and for the locals, initially at least, an eye-opening tide of temporary
revellers from a more emancipated world. And some German girls, of
course, had (and still have) a fantasy about Italian men which made
them easy pickings for smooth-talking beach boys. For a local boy with
a little charm, the odds have always been favourable: in summer the
seafront is crowded with beautiful girls in bikinis, some of whom have
certainly come in the hope of meeting a Latin lover. The massive and
continuing internal migration of the early 1960s, the liberalisation of
sexual habits, the diffusion of contraceptive devices, the divorce and
abortion laws, all created a decisive break between the generations.
The tourist industry here did little to combat the idea of the Riviera
as a place of sensual, if not downright sexual pleasure: even today, in
perhaps more conservative times, the postcards depict young temptresses
baring breasts, and sometimes more, and gazing alluringly out
at you. The models are mostly blonde, not at all Italian-looking: they
depict local identity loss – or, perhaps, though the idea feels forced,
identity gain.
Mario Pugliese looks back with affection at the adolescence he and
Marco shared: ‘We went to school together from when we were eleven
to when we were fourteen or fifteen. We were close friends, together
every day. Actually, there were three of us; they called us the “MPs”:
Mario Pugliese, Matteo Panzavolta and Marco Pantani.We were hyperactive,
and we were always being called into the headmaster's office
after getting caught doing something wrong. Marco had an innate
intelligence that allowed him to get by in school without ever doing
any work. He'd arrive half an hour before school and copy our homework,
but he was the quickest copier. He had the art of getting by –
something typically Italian. But we were thirteen-year-olds, full of
hormones, and we sometimes went a bit too far with respect to the girls
in our class. Don't get me wrong: they liked it, but we weren't very
elegant. If there was a girl in a miniskirt, we'd pick on her and make
sure it got lifted up. Nothing disproportionate, nothing that wasn't
essentially healthy.
‘Marco was attractive enough as a twelve- or thirteen-year-old; but
by the time he was fifteen, he was already losing his hair. It was a big
problem for an adolescent, especially in those days. Today, baldness is
fashionable to some extent, in part, thanks to Marco himself. But in
those days, losing your hair was a problem; it meant trying all sorts of
treatments. It was anti-aesthetic. Adolescence can be difficult enough
for everyone, especially for a boy of extraordinary sensitivity like
Marco. With a balding head, ears that suddenly stuck out . . . We're
moving from facts into opinions, here, but a person who is extremely
shy, extremely introverted, closed within themself, will develop a
greater sensitivity. He'll learn to listen to himself much more, and
refine his sensitivity – quite different from someone who has absolutely
normal social interactions; and he was extremely sensitive.'
Marco's incipient hair loss took place in a nation in which a deeprooted
passion about appearance, style and fashion had assumed the
traits of the consumer culture of the 1980s and 1990s: a 1992 survey
showed no less than 37 per cent of Italians claimed to wear designer
labels. As in other southern European countries, spending on pharmaceuticals
was unusually high. Sales of aftershave lotions and antiwrinkle
creams were rocketing. Italian youth was obsessed with the
word bello – ‘beautiful'. To be a bel ragazzo or a bella ragazza – the
adjective before the noun signifying beauty that is surface deep – meant
peer-group acceptance and popularity; hair loss was not part of the
type. Marco spent a great deal on scalp treatments and hair-restorers –
to no avail.
Isolated from the common experience of Cesenatico's youth, he went
out into the nearby hills alone to ride hundreds of kilometres. It was a
simple defensive strategy. Pugliese continues: ‘In adolescence, when
others were having their first relationships with girls, for him it wasn't
so easy. This no doubt increased his introversion.
‘As an eleven-, twelve-, thirteen-year-old, he was expressive. Then
things changed. Hewas a little taciturn, although obviously it depended
on the company. But I think here iswhere a gap opened between Pantani
the athlete who sits in the saddle and acquires charisma, security, and
can impose his will very persuasively, and Pantani in plain clothes, not
on the bike, who finds it harder to impose his charisma, and finds it
harder to be secure.'
This teenaged insecurity built on a fragile possessiveness Marco
had shown as a young child. Tonina recalls: ‘He attached himself to
[Guerrino], like another grandfather. He was so attached that when
Guerrino's real grandson visited, Marco would hit him, because he
didn't want him there. The other boy's grandfather belonged to Marco.'
A school friend recalls that, as a teenager – his temperament already
showing a terrible sense of hurt – Marco would not take part in playful
wrestling like other boys: ‘He would hit you in the face. He wasn't big,
but it wasn't normal for a thirteen-year-old, and the other boys were
slightly wary of him.' Only with the prop of cycling could he achieve
togetherness.
Many years later, his manager Manuela Ronchi would find, ‘On the
few occasions I embraced him, he became rigid, and blushed. He wasn't
used to receiving displays of affection.' In this most tactile of cultures,
it was a noticeable eccentricity: great warmth with an inner circle of
same-sex intimates, and a wary coldness with others. Nonetheless,
success would camouflage this and, perhaps, other conspicuous character
traits. In later years, Ronchi continues, ‘Because he was very
reserved, and had a forbidding charisma, people who wanted to show
him affection perhaps held back.'
The quality of the group that included Marco led the club to look for
expert help, so in 1984 the Fausto Coppi called Vittorio Savini, a former
technical director of the amateur Giro d'Italia and the brother of a
journeyman professional, Claudio Savini. Savini had been to school
with Marco's father Paolo at Villalta when they were both ten, although
they'd had no contact since. Savini told me: ‘They said, “We've a group
of youngsters who show promise, and you're the only one here who
knows anything about cycling.” I didn't really have time to get involved,
but I told them I'd go along and take a look, and from the day I did, a
Sunday I'll never forget, I fell in love with them all; not just Marco, but
the whole group – kids who were trying so hard.'
Busy, intense, slightly bullying, Savini reminisces in the office of
the Renault dealership he manages in Cesenatico: ‘Marco wasn't the
strongest of them. At that moment there were two or three boys who
were as strong and, in the sprint, perhaps stronger: Anthony Battistini,
Andrea Agostini and Francesco Buratti, a powerful rouleur who won a
lot as an amateur. He could do sixty kilometres an hour on the flat, but
he was a very poor climber. All in all, it was an exceptional group of
boys, and wherever we went to compete, our group scared the hell out
of the other riders.'

