The more objective eye of the camera shows a small, slightly-built
man of brooding aspect, not unlike Isaac in later photographs.Rather
than a pedlar Barnett looks more like the scholar he claimed to have
been and longed to be again. (His third child, Annie, described him
as ‘a student, a “Yeshivah Bochur”', coming from a ‘bookish family'.)
The only indication of his trade is the walking-stick he rests between
his knees. Though Isaac himself would cherish no scholarly ambitions,
which in any case his limited education would have ruled
out, he was to educate himself in the English poets with great
determination after leaving school. Temperamentally he was much
nearer to his introverted, rather isolated father than to his lively,
extrovert mother. (When he made friends later on, they would note
first his reserve.) For Barnett, it was essential that he should be able
to bear, even enjoy solitude for long stretches: a more gregarious
man might not have been able to endure the often lonely life of the
pedlar. For Isaac, the ability to study, write or paint for many hours
alone must have contributed significantly to his development as a
poet and painter.
This aspect of father and son must not be exaggerated, however.
Barnett's seriousness, like Isaac's, would be punctuated by unexpected
bursts of humour. (Zangwill refers in Children of the Ghetto
to the ‘flashes of freakish fun found in the most earnest of Jews'.)
It was their absorption in art and learning that would make them
both appear preoccupied, even self-centred at times. Yet Barnett,
whatever Anna believed, was a dutiful father – and son, as Isaac
would be. If Barnett's earnings alone were not enough to support his
family, it was not just that peddling had become less lucrative by the
end of the nineteenth century, or that he was lazy, as his wife claimed;
he was also sending money to Lithuania to help his own father, an
activity Anna tried to curtail by hiding Rosenberg senior's pleas from
her husband.
In addition, and strange as it may seem nowadays when the term
‘traveller' has largely negative connotations, further traits Barnett
shared with his son were his pride and independence. According to
his daughters his choice of occupation had been made not just
because he loved solitude and the countryside, but from a scorn of
shoemaking and tailoring. Though his situation, like Isaac's later on,
allowed him few opportunities to exercise this pride and independence,
yet both of them had that ‘self-reliance' and ‘jealous
independence of spirit' noted by Laurence Binyon in the son.
Anna accused her husband of being ‘gullible', ‘lacking in ambition'
and ‘weak and resentful',?? and these are all charges that would at
times seem true of Isaac. He was to have few worldly ambitions, and
would gleefully leave a secure but dull job at the age of twenty to
devote himself to the precarious pursuit of art and poetry, where his
na?¨vete´ would make his life even more difficult. And when frustrated
in his aims, largely through lack of education and money, he could,
like his father, appear self-pitying, however understandably.
Which if any of these characteristics came down from father to son
is impossible to say with any accuracy. Less speculative is Barnett's
influence on Isaac with regard to poetry. He must have devoted both
time and energy to his passion, especially during the winter months
at home. Since he taught himself with some effort to write English
later on, so that he could send letters to his children, he was clearly
a communicator. It seems natural therefore that he would have
continued his dialogue with them at home. And the fact that Isaac
loved poetry from a small child suggests that he was introduced to
it by his father. This would account for that anxiety ‘to establish an
understanding between his father and his poetry' referred to by
Leftwich in relation to his translation of some of Isaac's poems into
Yiddish.
It is also very likely that Barnett told his children stories of his
escape from Russia, events he wrote about in an autobiographical
fragment. Though at least two of his daughters suspected that his
account was exaggerated, it was bound to have a powerful effect on
the imagination of a child of Isaac's heightened sensibility. He
referred on several occasions in later life to his Russian roots, which
formed such a strong contrast to the world in which he grew up.
Isaac spent the first seven years of his life in or near the small house
in Adelaide Place where he was born. His family moved at some
point, first to Victoria Square in the Temple district, then back to
the Cathay district of his birth, to Harford Street, but all well within
the Jewish ghetto. The area is, in effect, an island created south of
the Floating Harbour by the New Course of the River Avon, and a
first glance at a contemporary map suggests a situation as romantic as
the names Cathay andTemple evoke. But by the time the Rosenbergs
took up residence there, a large railway bisected the area, ending in
a grimy, teeming station, arrival place of further floods of immigrants
as poor as, or poorer than themselves. The reality, therefore, was an
overcrowded area of numerous alleyways and narrow, irregular streets
which would, over the next century, be redeveloped by the city
council and nearby businesses, or destroyed by bombs. These were
Isaac's surroundings during his first impressionable years.
It was not all depressing, however. Bristol itself was a lively,
bustling city. Though it had declined by the end of the nineteenth
century from its peak of commercial prosperity before the revolt of
the American colonies, the abolition of the slave trade and the rise
of Liverpool as a larger, more active port, it was still a thriving centre
of industry. With the enlargement of its docks between 1887 and 1880 in the decade before the Rosenbergs' arrival, there had been a
rapid increase in the population. Its industries covered a wide area,
ranging from shipbuilding and all its associated trades to chocolate,
shoe and tobacco factories, as well as coal mining.
None of these appealed to Isaac's father, apparently, who carried
on work as a pedlar, the only difference being that he now hawked
his wares in the more congenial climate of theWest Country. Close
parallels have been drawn between Barnett Rosenberg andZangwill's
fictional sometime pedlar Moses Ansell, in Children of the Ghetto.
It is true that Barnett, like Moses, was a ‘passionate student' of
Hebrew literature and experienced the ‘strenuous inner life' of
Zangwill's deprived ‘travellers'. But while Moses lived chiefly on
dry bread and black tea on the road, to avoid breaking Jewish
dietary laws, the less strictly religious Barnett was prepared to eat
non-kosher food when travelling.?? In addition, he seems to have
preferred reading the Bible and other Hebrew poetry to that
elaborate body of Jewish lore pored over by Moses, the Talmud,
and would eventually present his eldest son with the King James's
version of the Bible – which included of course the New Testament
– because of the poetry of its language. These are important
points, because Barnett's lack of strict orthodoxy helps to explain
Isaac's own later attitude towards Judaism.
There is no mention of Barnett in the records of the local synagogue,
though this was conveniently close to him in Temple Street.
(Newly arrived Jews often preferred to gather at much smaller meetings
– chevras – with their fellowimmigrants.) But more importantly,
as far as Isaac's life is concerned, Barnett did keep a kosher home
and observe all the main religious festivals of his faith. Each week
would end with the celebration of the Jewish Sabbath on Friday
evenings, when, if Barnett was not on the road, the whole family
would gather round to enjoy the ritual food and drink prepared for
the occasion. Similarly the Rosenbergs' year, like that of their Jewish
neighbours from whatever country, would be punctuated by the
major festivals of Pesach (Passover), Yom Kippur and Rosh
Hashanah, marking respectively the liberation of the Israelites from
Egyptian bondage, the Jewish New Year and the Day of Atonement,
 ‘high holidays' occupying a role roughly equivalent to a traditional
English family's Easter, Christmas and New Year.
Since Isaac was ‘fervently religious' as a child according to his
eldest sister, there is no doubt that these rituals and festivals of his
traditionally Jewish family made a deep impression on him. And
at the age of about five he was also introduced to another facet of
an orthodox Jewish upbringing, Hebrew classes, one of only two
activities he refers to from his Bristol years. (‘I have some vague
faraway memories of the name of Polack in connection I fancy with
Hebrew classes and prize-giving' he wrote to a friend from the
Western Front.) He would continue to find his race's observances
and language culturally significant long after their religious impact
had been lost to him, writing nostalgically to his father in 1917, for
instance, of ‘a beautiful poem [by Heine] called “Princess Sabbath”
. . . where the Jew who is a dog all the week, Sabbath night when
the candles are lit, is transformed into a gorgeous prince to meet his
bride the Sabbath'. And at relevant times of the year his thoughts
would turn towards his Jewish upbringing, prompting him to a rare
use of Hebrew phrases: ‘I hope you admire my Yomtov [holiday]
energy' he wrote to his father as Yom Kippur approached in October 1917; and to his brother Dave in March 1918: ‘I do hope you get your
leave for Pesach.' Both references occur long after he had rejected
orthodox Judaism.
The effect on his work is even clearer. Two of his earliest extant
poems, written at the age of fifteen, are religious in content and,
judging from a letter written to his father about them by a helpful
local librarian, so were the verses which accompanied them (now
lost): ‘I trust,' the librarian, Morley Dainow, wrote, ‘you will use your
influence over him (which I think is profound) to emancipate him
from the bonds of tyrannical orthodoxy.' Whether as a result of
Barnett's response to this plea or not, his son's poetry during the
next decade would become largely secular in theme. But towards the
end of his short life, as the war encroached more and more on
his imagination, he would return to the Jewish mythology of his
childhood in his struggle to give form to his ideas.
Apart from being ‘fervently religious' in his Bristol days, Isaac is
also described by his older sister as ‘sad and discontented'. She
portrays an isolated, introverted little boy whose main outdoor activity
was drawing on the city pavements. Yet Isaac's own description
of his time in Bristol as ‘wild little pick-a-back days' conjures up a
more congenial picture of him rushing round the streets clinging to
Minnie's obliging shoulders. It is a contradiction his friends would
note in later years, one that suggests a less limited personality than
is often depicted. And his habit of collecting small toys when he
grew up implies not just a lack of them as a child but someone, too,
with a sense of fun and love of play. Though he was not yet attending
regular school by the time his family left Bristol in 1897, it is reasonable
to assume that he was joining in the boisterous street games
of children everywhere, however poor.
What can be said with certainty is that Isaac passed a far from
isolated childhood. Apart from his parents and three sisters, he had
his paternal uncles Peretz and Max Jacob with their families living
nearby. And his later reference to his cousins (Peretz's boys') and
their liveliness indicates both familiarity and involvement with them.
Another reference to ‘our Russian cousins' shows a similar sense of
family connections.

