5 MONTHS EARLIER
NOVEMBER 15, LONDON
The expedition taking me and my little band of fellow-adventurers across
perilous waters was inspired by an ancient family riddle. It concerns my ancestor
Samuel Stephenson – otherwise known as Salty Sam, an entrepreneurial master
mariner from Rotherhithe, London. In 1821 he set off from Java aboard his
trading ship, the Rosalie. His plan was presumably to trade along the old spice
route in the Indonesian archipelago, a well-beaten but nevertheless hazardous
sea trail established by the British and Dutch East India Trading Companies. But
he never made it back. 
Some of Sam's crew mutinied and seized control of the Rosalie with all its
cargo. My great-great-grandfather was apparently thrown overboard and never
seen again. After a sole survivor had returned to Java to tell the story, three years
passed before Sam's only son – Samuel Junior – came of age and was able to set
off for the Far East to try to recover the ship and assets. He failed, however;and
still smarting from the loss of his inheritance, Samuel Jr eventually took passage
for New Zealand. There he established a trading post at Russell in the Bay of
Islands, married my great-grandmother Hira Moewaka and settled down to a
harsh but ultimately rewarding life in the Colony. 
All of the above I accepted as family history, until last summer, when I
happened to be visiting the Maltese island of Gozo during festa time. I'd stopped
by for a drink one evening at Rosina's Bar in the village of Sannat. From the
shadowy depths of the smoky, cave-like salon, a complete stranger suddenly
addressed me. 
“It wasn't a mutiny!”she barked. I stopped dead and blinked in the candlelight
at her intense, sun-touched face. 
“One of my ancestors was aboard the Rosalie, ” she continued. The hairs on
my neck became erect. 
“I‘m sorry … ?”I managed. But the Englishwoman was on a roll. 
“They were pirated, ”she insisted. “In the Sunda Straits. ”
I fell into a seat beside her. “What makes you think that?”
She looked at me intently. “I inherited a tapestry of the ship. ”
Now, I had recently written a biography of my husband, Billy, in which I'd
briefly mentioned the loss of the Rosalie, so it wasn't impossible that a stranger
might recognize me and refer to it. But here I was, in the same bar, at the same
time, with a woman bearing this two-hundred-year-old secret. I ask you, what
are the chances of that? And if this woman's story was true, the veracity of my
entire Stephenson family history was in question. 
“Show me the tapestry, ” I challenged. We hurried down the street to her
house, where this woman, whose name was Trudy Prior (née Adam), unveiled a
faded, wooden-framed sampler dated 1861. It had been sewn in red, blue, yellow, 
brown and green thread on a beige background by Elizabeth Valentine Adam, a
sixteen-year-old from the Scottish port of Stonehaven. The girl had depicted the
Rosalie as a three-masted wooden trading ship lying in harbour and flanked
by two Chinese junks. The ship's name was embroidered above (spelled Rosele), 
and below in large letters were the portentous words: ‘HOMEWARD
BOUND'. 
“I believe that was wishful thinking, ” said Trudy. “She'd probably lost her
grandfather in that pirate attack, and the family had suffered ever since. ”
Across the top was the sad little comment ‘My Parents Dear Paid For This That

I Have Got. When Friends are Gone and Funds are Done, Learning is Still Most
Excellent'. The sampler was decorated in fine, fancy stitching with baskets of
English red and white roses, several birds, rabbits, dogs, and trees. There were
other symbols that I could not interpret, and anyway, my head was spinning. 
From that moment I was caught up in a fascinating, two-centuries-old intrigue. 
You see, this new chink in my universe is too big to be explained by
forgetfulness, prejudice or some other human foible. If Trudy's story is true, there
has been a sizable cover-up. Did Salty Sam die by Captain Hook or by onboard
crook? Either way, my great-great-grandfather was the victim of a foul deed, in
the days when no crime-scene investigator was going to leap into the fray with
a DNA sample kit. It's as if Salty Sam had reached out to me over the years, from
the bottom of the spice-tinged sea and, through Trudy, channelled his dead-man's
wish: that I uncover the truth and lay him finally to rest. And why me? It's
obvious. Because I'm the wild one. The one who two years ago set out to roam
the seas. The one with the sailboat and the means to travel. The tenacious, 
do-or-die adventurer – just like Salty Sam himself. 
Here's my plan: to trace Samuel Stephenson's voyage along the Spice Route, 
so that I can try to solve the mystery. Moreover, I'm drawn to know more about
the character of my great-great-grandfather, along with the thrilling story of his
time in history. What kind of man was he? Brave, reckless, or a total bastard? Was
he pragmatist, poet, lout or lover? Eventually, don't we all long to understand our
generational past, because it tells us more about who we are?
No matter what we encounter from now on, I hope at least to learn the
truth about some aspects of Salty Sam's life, his struggles, successes and
disappointments. And perhaps at the end of it all, I will have a plausible answer
to the question:“Murder by pirates? Or mutiny?”

NOVEMBER 16
I woke early with my brain racing. Drinking Lapsang Souchong tea and
languishing in a chic hotel bed in the dull winter light, it occurred to me that it's
an absurd idea, launching an expedition into the pirate-infested Far Eastern
waters to find out what happened to a man who's been dead two hundred years. 
“But I am absurd, ” I told myself. “My teenage children will vouch for that. 
And anyway there can be no logic to a striving of passion. ”
Urgently, questions went on presenting themselves:Was it piracy? Was it
murder, or mutiny? Who survived? Did my great-great-grandfather ever set foot
on land after being thrown overboard? Then again, was he thrown overboard?
What happened to the Rosalie and her cargo? What happened to the rest of
the crew?
By the time I had showered, dressed and inhaled a double espresso, my powers
of critical thinking had kicked in. How shall I go about this? First I must gather
as many documented facts as possible:archival information about the history and
background of seafaring and trading in the 1820s. I began to make a list:British
Library, Maritime Museum, National Archives. Also, shortly before he died, my
father collaborated with my cousin Brett on a book about Salty Sam's son. 
Is there a copy of that at home in Scotland?
By teatime I'd figured it out. My husband and I are lucky enough to own
a wonderful sailboat, the Takapuna, which is waiting in Australia for me, in
Brisbane, already seaworthy and crewed up. I had planned to sail her to the
Mediterranean for a spot of easy cruising – but that will have to wait; instead
she must be fully prepared, with provisions, spare parts and the relevant nautical
charts, ready to enter the tricky Java Sea. 
The notorious waters of the Indonesian Archipelago are still known as one
of the worst places in the world for pirate attacks. It would be prudent, therefore, 
to engage a security team, kit out the boat with protective devices, and provide
piracy training for everyone on board. After searching for clues in the old Spice
Islands (once the Moluccas, now Moluku), we will head for the Javan capital, 
Jakarta, formerly Batavia – and from there, anywhere our research leads us. 
By bedtime I was even visualizing the Takapuna's triumphant return to my
great-great-grandfather's old stomping ground, the River Thames. Yes, by the
time we reach Rotherhithe, then we should have some answers about the fate
of Salty Sam. 
NOVEMBER 18, CANDACRAIG, SCOTLAND
A bracing walk in the Scottish highlands prepared me for today's task. First, 
I located my father's booklet about Samuel Stephenson Jr. There's not much
in it about Salty Sam, and of course my father had never heard of the piracy
story, but at least it provides some dates, places and company names that I can
follow up. 
From my father's book:
Captain Samuel Stephenson was a Master Mariner. In 1821 he sailed on a
voyage from the island of Java in a ship called the Rosalie, going to the Molucca
Islands and intending to return to Batavia [now Jakarta]. In the course of this
voyage, a part of the crew rose up against the rest, killing several and taking
possession of the ship and cargo, which were afterwards never recovered. One of the crew succeeded in getting back to Batavia, where he gave the foregoing
account. He furthermore related that “when confined below they heard a
scuffle upon deck and a noise as if someone had been thrown overboard, 
which they believed to have been Captain Stephenson, as he was never
afterwards seen or heard of “. Unlike Captain Bligh who, in the case of the
mutiny of the Bounty, was given a sporting chance by being cast off in an open
boat, Captain Stephenson was apparently just thrown overboard. Whether he
was first killed, or knocked senseless, or very much in possession of his faculties
at the time, is anyone's guess. 
When news of the 1821 mutiny reached England, there were some obvious
difficulties for [his wife] Ann Stephenson and the two children, although they
seem, at least initially, to have been well provided for financially. At the time, 
Samuel Jr was 17 years of age and Mary 15, and therefore unable for some years
to take an active role in the legal complications that followed. Captain Samuel
Stephenson had actually made a Will in England on December 23, 1815, and
shortly after the news of his fate reached England, his executors … applied to
the Consistory Court of the Archbishop of Canterbury to have the Will
proved… Power of Attorney was granted to the English Executors…
On behalf of the English Executors, Mr Henry Gardner then wrote to
Miln, Haswell &amp; Co. , who were Captain Stephenson's agents in Batavia. 
The English Executors then learned, no doubt to their horror, that Captain
Stephenson had made another Will, witnessed by seven people, in the offices
of J. Jessen &amp; Co. , his agents in Surabaya, before finally leaving the island
of Java. He furthermore gave Messrs Jessen &amp; Co. Power of Attorney over
his affairs as well as instructions. He apparently
walked away from the Surabaya offices with
the Will, according to Messrs Jessen &amp; Co. , 
and this Will was never found. Complications
immediately arose, with English Law being pitted
against Dutch Law, and various legal opinions
being sought in England and Java. 
Captain Samuel Stephenson was a well
established ship-owner … and at least for a
number of years prior to his death he had been
involved in the shipping trade between
London, Java and the Isle de France [Mauritius]. 
Moreover, the Rosalie was owned by him and, 
after the mutiny in 1821, his agents in Batavia
and Surabaya reported that they were between
them holding a total of close to 80, 000 Java
florins of his money. No wonder the son, 
Samuel, who turned 21 on June 21, 1825, and
became legally eligible for his share of the Estate, 
made tracks for Batavia. He was not looking for
his father, who was widely presumed dead, but
trying to get the frozen assets of the Estate
released… However, he was not successful in
expediting the release of assets. The Javan agents
wanted security in the form of a Bond of
Indemnity before they would be willing to remit
funds to England. After all, there was no body, and they were concerned about what their position would be if Captain
Stephenson were to turn up on their doorsteps one day. 

