CHAPTER 1 
Born smiling 
When I was nine or ten, playing football in the Cubs' team in Halesowen, Birmingham, before the start of every football season my mum and dad would unveil a brand- new, shiny pair of football boots and a spotless ball – awesome gifts. I used to take them tenderly up to my room at night, tuck them under the covers, settle down and sleep with them. I think it was love. 
My dreams, as I grew older, were never very complicated: I was going to be a footballer. I spent secondary school playing for teams in the year above, and doodled through lessons practising my autograph. That meant I left without an O-level to my name but, I thought, with all the skills I'd need. My mum used to worry: ‘What are the chances,' she'd say, ‘of you really being a professional footballer?' She wanted me to have something to fall back on, in case it didn't work out. I didn't give that much thought, and my dad backed me up, which was surprising, because he was always the safe, steady one, more cautious by nature than my mum: ‘Someone's got to be,' he used to say. ‘Why can't Lee be one of the few? He's good enough.' She used to 
shake her head, worry about her boys, lost in fantasy. 
I daydreamed about stepping out for one of the big clubs at the great grounds, the stands packed with passionate fans, roaring their team on, chanting my name. I don't think I was ever stuck on the idea of ‘winning things' – of hoisting a cup above my head, carrying a medal home, finishing top of the league; I'm not sure I ever gave that stuff a thought. My imagination was dazzled by the game itself: scoring goals, skipping past full-backs, using the natural pace I always had as a boy, going on mazy dribbles, breathing the joy of the crowd and celebrating with them. I'd be in awe of the games they showed on TV, wingers in full flow, strikers banging in goals, and I loved the little cameos they'd play over and over again on Match of the Day, those quirky moments: Alan Birchenall of Leicester and Tony Currie of Sheffield United falling in a heap, then giving each other a little kiss before they stood up; players suspending hostilities for a second to give each other piggy backs, cuddle a ref, climb on a wall to celebrate a sweet bit of play. Stealing a bit of time to laugh and enjoy themselves. 
I ended up supporting Aston Villa – it was a case of siding with my granddad, my mum's dad, who supported the Villa and got me to support them too as a put-down to my dad. He was always needling my dad, starting with size, because my granddad was a huge man, a lorry driver, 6' 4”, while my dad's only 5' 8”. My dad's a Birmingham City fan and he did take me to a few games at St Andrews, but my granddad said: ‘You're not supporting the team that duck egg supports! You'll support the Villa.' 
So I thought, cool, I'll support the Villa, if Granddad does. I never went to many games, though; I was born on 25 May 1971, so when I was fourteen, fifteen, football
supporting age, it was the mid-1980s, when there was a lot of trouble at matches, and my mum was never keen on me taking the three-bus odyssey from our house to Villa Park with mayhem and madness kicking off everywhere. I was ten when Villa won the League Championship, and eleven when they won the European Cup the following year; magical performances, so unexpected, and at that age I took it all in like a sponge. Even then, I was a Gary Shaw or Tony Morley fan, loving the trickery and skill, rather than an admirer of Ken McNaught's prowess as a stopper, or Des Bremner fetching and carrying in midfield. For me, football was Trevor Francis, not John McGovern; Kenny Dalglish, not Joey Jones; the showmen, not the workhorses. And, along with being a dazzling football superstar when I was older, I naturally thought I'd have a good standard of living, a nice house, flash car, girls fluttering around – I was never the most difficult soul to please; not then, not now. 
Birmingham in the 1970s might not evoke a picture of heaven for everybody, but it was for me growing up, a happy, wonderful childhood. I had a warm, loving family, my mum and dad could not have done more for us, I always had good mates and our estate was a playground, full of laughs and endless, flowing games of football. It might not have been the same toothy grin which, for some reason I can still never work out, would later drive so many football managers to distraction, but I think I was born with a smile on my face. 
My mum and dad – Gail and Leo – were school sweethearts really; they married at nineteen and had me, their oldest, at twenty-one. I was born in inner Birmingham but when I was tiny we moved out to a semi-detached three-bedroom house on a newish estate in Blackheath, 
Black Country territory. My dad was – still is – a metal- spinner, an old, skilled, Brummie trade, which he's done since he left school at sixteen. He worked for years for a big company locally, then, when I was ten or eleven, made the big, brave move of setting up on his own and having a few blokes working for him. He called his company ATOL Spinnings, for A Touch of Luck, so he must have been fingers-crossed about it at the time. My mum is the more adventurous type – they reckon I take after her more than my dad with my freewheeling, what-will-be-will-be approach to life. She stayed at home when I – and my younger brother John and sister Nicola when they came along – were kids, but she always had work or her own little business ventures on the go: industrial cleaning, ironing on some incredible scale. Years later, she'd have her hands full running the Lee Sharpe fan club for thousands of besotted adolescent girls, but we'll get to that. 
We weren't rich but we were reasonably well off. They always looked after us kids. We were well dressed, never had ripped clothes or shoes hanging off us. I don't remember ever going short of anything; we always had what we wanted at Christmas and birthdays. When I was still only eighteen months old we moved to a different estate, which became my stamping ground as I grew up. One of my main muckers there, Ross Hadley, is still my mate now, and by the time we were six or seven Ross and I would be roaming all over the estate. It wasn't massive, and it was safe; my mum just used to tell us to be careful as we went out to play in the morning, and she wouldn't see us again until teatime. Sometimes our mums would make us a packed lunch and we'd cycle round the estate pretending we were travelling round the world; we'd stop and say we 
were in a different country, and eat a sandwich or two to celebrate our arrival, toast it with a can of Coke. 
We played anywhere, sledging down a bank at the back of the estate when it snowed, leaping off a low wall on our bikes down by some garages, and I had plenty of time to act out my football dreams, in the streets or on grass verges, mammoth games, lasting hours on end, till the dark was creeping over us and our tummies were nagging us to finally take them home. We played football wherever, developing a feel for the ball, a taste for tricks, going past or beating the lad trying to stop you, smacking a goal in without a thought, having marathon skills competitions out in the park by a tree: who could keep it up longest, who could volley, shoot, score. I'm not sure tracking back or man-marking played any part in those magical sessions, but imagining ourselves performing heroics, basking in the roars of the crowds in the great grounds of the Midlands, certainly did. 
I played my first proper match, for the Cubs, at eight. Couldn't wait. Could hardly sleep. So nervous beforehand, as I always would be before matches, at any level. We lost 10–1. I don't think I was too bothered about that; we played a team older and bigger than us, so we got slaughtered. More important to me was the thrill of putting my first proper team kit on: bright red top, red shorts, yellow socks, yellow numbers on the back. Quality gear, right from the start. With the kit on, I felt a foot taller, stronger, faster, a proper footballer. Within twelve months, our team had grown up, a few decent players joined us and soon we were the best in the area, beating everyone. My mum and dad shipped us everywhere; they grumbled about being a taxi service taking me and, later, John to football, 
Nicola to dancing or gymnastics, but they loved it really. They were always there, always encouraging, always proud. Mostly, though, at that early age, I'd be staying with Nan and Granddad at weekends, and my granddad would take me to the Cubs football on Saturday mornings. 
I idolised him, loved, worshipped him. Looked so far up to him it hurt my neck. I was a granddad's boy, as I think a lot of little boys are. I spent so much time with them when I was growing up, I've found out in recent years it caused a few rows between Mum and Dad because my dad complained he hardly saw me. It started when I was only six or seven; they were helping my mum out really. She used to take me to the edge of the estate on Fridays and put me on the bus to Halesowen, the next town along, about five miles away. Nan and Granddad would be waiting for me at the other end, standing there with a little present, a new Action Man outfit or a couple of toy cars, and we'd go up to the Labour Club or the social club where they'd play bingo, watch a cabaret, have a few pints and I'd run around and play hide-and-seek with some of the other kids outside. When I was a little bit older, we kids all used to traipse round the streets, down a gully to a chippie, get roe or fish and chips, ask for them to be wrapped in newspaper, then walk back and eat them together sitting outside the club, like a real, proper posse. 
Granddad used to drive his lorry to supermarkets, delivering food around the country, so I used to go with him in the holidays sometimes, sit up in his cab like a grown-up, like his mate. Mum would get me up early and walk me to the edge of the estate. He'd roll up in his wagon at six o'clock and they'd throw me into the cabin. He had a bed made up for me in there. I'd go straight back to sleep, 
then wake up hundreds of miles down the road, unloading cargo somewhere up north, or in Wales. 
His nickname was the Duke – he looked a bit like John Wayne – and he had plenty of aggression to match his size; he used to get road rage before they invented the phrase. Loved a pint, too. In the days before the clampdown on drink-driving, he'd have twelve or fifteen pints in an evening, then drive home. God knows how many cigarettes he'd smoke, woodbines with no filters. 
