Barbara Baker is working here in a long tradition of an extremely useful product--the interview with the artist. This is certain to be an enterprise appealing to many of us, because the advent of the creative writing class and course has meant that there are thousands of aspiring writers who want to know the secrets of success. Clearly, there is no formula for that, and many of the writers speaking here are far more concerned with the daily discipline and the methods of gathering material than fretting about 'success', whatever that is.
There have been collections of interviews with writers on the market before, notably the series of Paris Review interviews done by George Plimpton, but useful as those volumes were, they did contain a large proportion of academic discourse and self-indulgence, so that many of them would have been enjoyed by devotees of a particular writer and few other readers who persevered with the whole texts.
The Way We Write is unusual in this category of book because the writers Barbara Baker talks with represent far more than the usual, rather exclusive respondents who wish to talk about the tedious detail of research or technique. For instance, on the one hand we have the established novelists, such as Graham Swift and Margaret Drabble, but on the other, we have less well-known but very interesting characters, such as Harry Mathews and U.A. Fanthorpe. In addition, we have children's writers included, and in that respect, Michael Morpurgo has some very wise words to give on the subject of where ideas and form come from in storytelling.
Some writers are very much enmeshed in the ups and downs of their careers, and Julian Fellowes is in that group. That is not so useful or absorbing as the kind of insight we have into creativity from Ursula Fanthorpe, for example, who is less concerned with prizes won and career moves made than with the actual daily practice of her craft. She says, 'I revise infinitely ... when you have got it basically there you just have to tinker. I love the tinkering process. I could go on forever'. That statement finds agreement in all us writers, as we find the gathering and thinking process to be largely great fun, particularly over a coffee and a chat with a fellow scribbler.
In contrast, the editor's questions also tease out the more enduring and tough issues of different ways into a story or a poem. Mr Morpurgo understands the dichotomy of 'planner and doer' in this respect, as he explains his modus operandi in this way: 'I am a very lucky writer, I tend to wait until the good idea happens, and when it does, the voice comes with it or just before it ... I don't plot or plan: I tend to dream things out and trust to my instinct when I sit down'. He is struggling to explain what many storytellers know--that the best tales grow from a mix of drama and authenticity. For him, the authentic feel comes from his certainty that the voice for the teller is the right one.
Some of the writers here take a more cerebral approach to their explanations of success and many enjoy explaining the benefits of failures and false starts, but overall, Barbara Baker has taken care to assemble a mix of practitioners who will offer something for almost every variety of novice writer, and it has to be said that even established writers would learn something from her book. A perfect example of this is the sheer off-beat but fascinating words of Benjamin Zephaniah, the poet and novelist who has taken writing into places previously untouched by the creative word. He says at one point, 'I am a very physical person in that I do a lot of jogging, and kung fu and boxing. Sometimes, because these things involve rhythm, poems can come to me while I do them. For instance, I remember a poem I wrote about money that came to me while I was jogging, and as I think of it now, my feet are going, the rhythm is still there'.
The Way We Write is arguably one of the most successful and accessible volumes of writer interviews we have seen, with just the right balance of analysis and sheer individual and absorbing explanations of the craft of writing. It should be read and used in creative writing courses across the country and beyond. I have already made use of it in my own writing group.
That Neutral Island: A Cultural History of Ireland during the Second World War

Wills is not concerned with the Republic's less than honourable position vis a vis Germany and Italy (at least in British eyes) as with the cultural life this neutrality produced. While sympathetic to the Irish position she describes this period as 'the strange, ghostly existence both in and outside the war'. The Republic was inevitably part of the war but not in the war. Observers were, as it were, neutered by the Republic's neutrality. Prof. Wills is as concerned with the lives of individual people as with the reactions of writers and political leaders. In the short term the isolation made Irishmen more Irish whilst British, Empire and American sacrifices secured the Republic's untroubled survival. Prof. Wills adds a new dimension to our approach to a subject which will continue to attract and divide historians. (A.C.T.)

George III: America's Last King

This latest biographical study is largely concerned with Catholic 'emancipation' and the American rebellion because the author sees these as the two great issues and touchstones of the reign. 
They also provide, he argues, the two best insights into the strengths and weaknesses of George III. Prof. Black claims his is 'the most extensively sourced biography'. He rightly emphasises the King's belief in moral government, his wide-ranging interests in cultural and scientific topics and his strong religious beliefs. (Here the author informs readers that he writes 'as an atheist'. The determination of non-believers to testify to their non-belief is always rather amusing. One wonders why it matters.) The King was, he writes, 'neither grand nor great, but good'. Like many moral people he 'found it difficult to rely on others having satisfactory sentiments' if they disagreed with his own. Sometimes obstinacy is good in a politicial figure; sometimes it is not. In George Ill's case it was his greatest weakness. This is a welcome addition to the published works on George III. (A.C.T.)
Leni: the Life and Work of Leni Riefenstahl

Whilst she was alive (she died in 2003) it was virtually impossible to get at the truth of her life. He traces her rise from her working-class Berlin upbringing to the fame she achieved through directing films which glorified the Nazi movement and regime and finally, in old age, to her re-invention of herself as a recorder of native African life. She was, he concludes, unrepentant about her Nazi past and her work. While she was innovative, clever, and 'inspired', she was also 'corrupted'. Mr Bach has given us an insight into an important aspect of life at the centre in Nazi Germany. Another liar has been put to rest. (T.A.L.)
Pompeii Awakened: A Story of Rediscovery

The only thing that excels the history of Pompeii is the history of its rediscovery. As the author writes, the 'dead city has never lost its uncanny power to fascinate'. 
She traces its rediscovery from the 1750s--it was 'the birthplace of scientific archaeology'--and the influences of Lord Lytton's 1834 novel, The Last Days of Pompeii and the sermons of C.H. Spurgeon. She shows that the city is our best introduction to Roman life but more importantly, she shows how our understanding of that life has developed alongside the rediscovery of the city itself. Judith Harris is not an archaeologist but a journalist. Her aim is to introduce the history of Pompeii and of its discovery to general readers through a mastery of the academic literature about it. Her presentation is enhanced by her own long passion for the place and by an ease of writing that makes this book a delight to read. (J.T.D.R.)
Garibaldi: Invention of a Hero

Every radical movement needs a hero and Garibaldi was, like Mussolini later, a natural. He was an extra-ordinary man, if not extraordinary. The intelligentsia loved him--the Che Gueverra of his age--and no one could possibly doubt the rightness of Italian unification although he had doubts about a monarchical Italy under Savoy. After 1860 he grew more radical and more disillusioned but his cult grew. It was only after 1945 that it really began to decline as the monarchy was overthrown and governments rose and fell. Now many doubt the very raison d'etre of a unified Italy. This book is a re-examination of Garibaldi, man and myth. He was not a simple-minded son of the people but an intelligent strategist and self-promoter. His role in the Risorgimento was crucial: a 'moral' movement needed a larger-than-life hero of epic proportions. Garibaldi had, or was said to have, 'charisma'. Lucy Riall is concerned not to praise or belittle but to examine the 'Garibaldi Cult' in Garibaldi's lifetime. To a degree he was a hero because proponents of a secular, unified Italy needed a hero. She has a great deal to say about his later career and about the very foundation of the Italian state. This is an excellent study, an 'essential read' for students of modern Italy. (T.B.)

Bomber Boys: Fighting Back 1940-1945
This history, devoted to the pilots who flew in Bomber Command, is the sequel to the author's Fighter Boys which told the story of the pilots of the Spitfires and Hurricanes. 
While the former pilots were and are universally praised, those in Bomber Command have had a mixed, and often, hostile treatment both during the war and later. Mr Bishop reminds readers that of 125,000 men who flew the bombers, 55,000 were killed. His aim is to treat these men's work objectively and therefore fairly and to rescue them from the current opprobrium attached in some circles to British bombing of German sites. He uses a wide variety of archive material combined with recollections of survivors to reconstruct not just the work of Bomber Command but the daily lives of the crews. He has given us a balanced portrait and if it errs on the side of the bombers, it also avoids the wisdom given by hindsight. The debate will carry on but at least we have now heard the voice of those who actually did the flying. (T.B.)
Lloyd George and Churchill: Rivals for Greatness

To many contemporaries 'L-G' and Churchill were, at least in their earlier years, regarded as 'bounders' yet each emerged from the fringe of party politics as great war leaders. 
Lloyd-George's trip up the greasy pole was arguably easier than Churchill's who constantly slipped back down before 1940. This is not the first book in recent years to investigate the friendship and rivalry between these two men but it is the most carefully researched and informed. However some of Mr Toye's judgements are rather harsh, to say the least: to write that 'each was a non-Christian' is damning without any evidence. Who sees fully into another man's soul? Where the book excels is in showing how the friendship and rivalry mirrored the profound social and political changes of the twentieth century. Mr Toye compares their roles as war leaders, examines why LG's fame has almost disappeared whilst Churchill's remains, and makes many interesting points along the way. (T.B.)
By Hook Or By Crook: A Journey in Search of English

Between 2002 and 2005 David Crystal acted as linguistics consultant to a BBC series called Voices, which aimed to 'record and celebrate the whole range of present-day British English, accents and dialects'. 
That experience combined with his reading of W.G. Sebald's novel, The Rings of Saturn, inspired this 'journey in search of English' which takes him not just throughout Britain but to Europe, the United States, South Africa, India and Australia. 

