Hotspots of radicalism and hotspots of honour-based violence – the
Forced Marriage Unit have a lovely map on their wall and it
basically identifies where most of their referrals are from and, if
you went in the Special Branch of the Terrorist Unit and looked
at their map, you would see significant links, significant correlation.
So, maybe there is something about . . . extremism, the way people
think around those issues, that links in with what happens with
women in their families too. There was one case where I could actually
evidence it, so how many others are there . . . I have been talking
to ministers for the last few months. I mentioned radicalismhotspots
and the map of honour-based violence hotspots – then they really
listened!
Nazir Afzal, a director of the Crown Prosecution Service,
22 November 20061
This extract from a speech – linking forced marriage, ‘honour killings' 2
and terrorism – reflects many of the current concerns of the British
state: the pervasive preoccupation with terrorism; the use of women's
oppression to legitimise immigration control, policing and surveillance,
as demanded by ‘national security'; and the politics of fear with its
‘hotspots' of ‘extremism'. In this speech, moreover, these aspects are
highlighted by the middle-class and Muslim identity of the speaker
himself; the subtext is that here is an enlightened ‘expert' on all those
‘uncivilised others' in the communities. In what follows, I will use the
experiences of South Asian women to explore the debates which surround
these areas, looking briefly at the nature of the state's ‘concern'
for the plight of South Asian women and the racism which is inextricably
linked with it.
South Asian women's struggles against domestic violence
In Britain, the South Asian women's movement has created a unique
network of refuges that perform the crucial task of providing support
and safety to women facing violence, often the most acute and lifethreatening
violence. These refuges have been built up by grassroots
feminists with enormous effort over the last thirty years. However,
over the last four years, these organisations have faced a particularly
difficult phase. Often operating on a shoestring, they have had their
funds slashed and a number have been ‘decommissioned'. New
Labour's neoliberal welfare agenda, bolstered by the monocultural
policies of ‘community cohesion', has meant that the needs of South
Asian and other minority communities have been defined away.
Moreover, the ironically named Supporting People (SP) programme,
a restructuring of welfare services introduced by the government
in April 2003, has led to further cuts to the budgets of women's refuges by moving away from a rights-based system of funding to one
in which a single cash-limited pot is administered by local authorities
and controlled by central government.3 Safe places for women resisting
violence are being closed as a result of the funding cuts associated with
the SP programme,4 despite its claim to offer ‘vulnerable people the
opportunity to improve their quality of life by providing a stable environment
which enables greater independence'.5 The services and ways of
working which have been fought for and established over three decades
are being brushed aside as irrelevant, and many refuge managers are
being asked by SP consultants: ‘Why, in this day and age, do you
need Asian women's refuges? Why don't you merge with generic
refuges?' The answer to that question is the same as it was when
these refuges were first set up: that generic (essentially white) women's
refuges neither provide for the cultural needs of South Asians nor offer
a racism-free atmosphere where deeply traumatised women and
children can recover.
As refuge workers point out, experiences of racism in this situation
are particularly devastating. The director of an Asian women's refuge
told me, for example, of the comments of a young woman whom she
was being forced to evict:
This young woman had been abused from an early age. She had no
concept of danger either to herself or others, so we were forced to
evict her. When I was making arrangements for her, she told me:
‘Please don't send me to a white refuge.' She was unable to stop talking
about what she had been through. She said when she talked to
the other women here, they took it on board but, in a mainstream
refuge, the women used to be racist and stereotype her and her
culture. She found that unbearable.6
I was involved in documenting similar experiences in Northamptonshire
in 19997 and now, with escalating anti-Muslim racism, things
are clearly worse. A woman who had grown up in Britain and had
no language problems had told me of the problems she had faced in
a generic refuge: ‘I felt so alone. All the white women were together;
they didn't speak to me. I wished that there was another Asian girl
like me there. I would have had someone to talk to.' Another woman
described her experiences of sharing kitchen facilities:
Everyone cooked in the same kitchen. There was no possibility of
keeping halal things separate. The English women made it worse if
I complained. They would use lard even more and spread it
around. Those women were racist inside; outside they were nice.
In the Northamptonshire study, we found deep-seated racism in service
provision on a remarkable scale. An Asian woman worker had told us:
‘Racism exists in one form or another in all services . . . this can take the form of lack of cultural awareness and understanding, racial stereotyping,
as well as direct racist and discriminatory practices.' Much
has been written about how black women's voices have had an
impact upon the discourses of feminism but these experiences suggest
that, on a day-to-day level, they have had very little influence on the
practices of many white-dominated women's organisations.
While places of safety, and related women's organisations which
provide routes to safety, are closing down, legal services are also
being substantially cut and these developments are accompanied by
an increasing privatisation of the welfare sector. The underlying
rationale of these policies is clear enough: vulnerable people are costing
the state too much and, increasingly, they will be abandoned. The ideological
message of the SP programme is that the withdrawal of the state
from all responsibility is actually empowering for individuals, even if
their survival is threatened. It is against this background, of welfare
policies which are doing away with long-established safety nets for
women facing domestic violence, that the British state's policies and
laws which affect South Asian marriage are being enacted. Couched
in an increasingly hysterical language of concern for women facing
violence, they have, right from the start, been about the control of
minority populations – South Asian, African and Middle Eastern,
either those coming in or, increasingly, those already here.
South Asian patriarchy and British immigration controls
The most longstanding of these policies are the immigration rules that
apply to those coming to the UK to join spouses. Until 2003, persons in
this category were denied permanent residency in their own right for a
probationary period of one year; in 2003, this probationary period was
extended to two years. Under this ‘two-year rule', a woman who is not a
British citizen, married to a man settled in this country, must remain
married for two years after her arrival in Britain. If the marriage
breaks down, she faces deportation back to her country of origin.
For those experiencing violence within the marriage, the only route
to permanent residency is to appeal against the deportation by proving
the marriage broke down as a result of domestic violence. But during
the period of her appeal, which can vary from several months to several
years, she will have ‘no recourse to public funds' – no benefits of any
sort (which means that few women's refuges will be able to admit
her) and the chances of her winning are often quite slim. As a result
of the two-year rule, the shadow of deportation hangs over every
marital conflict right from the start. Because women in this position
can be, and often are, threatened with being ‘sent back' for the most
minor disagreement, the rule has, in this way, heightened the power relationships between men and women within this particular cultural
setting.
The two-year rule has been, and continues to be, the focus of
sustained campaigning by black and minority ethnic women's groups,
led by the high-profile South Asian women's group Southall Black
Sisters. It affects a significant proportion of South Asian women in
Britain – all those who have entered the country by virtue of their
marriage to men settled in this country. However, the racism of the
Home Office, the shameless lies told by its officials to the women
who are caught up in the rule, and the suffering and human rights
abuses it continues to cause, are subjects rarely discussed in the
media or commented on by the ‘concerned' liberal establishment.
Over the years, there have been, in response to campaigning, some
minor changes to the rule but, in its present form, it still forces many
women to either remain in violent marriages or relationships or face
deportation to their countries of origin – where often, blamed for bringing
shame on their families and falsely accused of adultery, they face
humiliation, violence and possibly death. In theory, a woman who
faces the risk of violence or death in her country of origin should be
granted asylum by the courts – but rarely do they do so.8
The determinations of court adjudicators and rulings by the secretary
of state in these cases not only tell us a lot about British state
racism but also blatantly ignore the government's own declarations
about violence against women. For example, from October 2001
onwards, British politicians frequently asserted that the British and
American forces were bombing Afghanistan in order to rescue Afghan
women from the ‘barbaric' Taliban. But, at the same time, the Home
Office routinely tried to send Pakistani women back to villages in
those very parts of Pakistan (such as the North West Frontier Province,
NWFP) which had been the support base of the Taliban and were still
largely under its control. A typical case is that of ‘Sadia', whose mother
is a widow living in a small village in the NWFP. Sadia was married to a
man based in the UK, whose family was powerful in her village. Soon
after she arrived in Britain, she discovered that her husband had a
number of girlfriends. When she challenged him, he became extremely
violent. Her father-in-law – a powerful figure in the community in
Britain, a ‘community leader' – took his son's side and blamed Sadia
for causing ‘problems' in the marriage. When she eventually managed
to escape from the house, he accused her of being unfaithful and publicly
threatened to track her down, take her back to Pakistan and have
her killed. Sadia found temporary refuge in a hostel for South Asian
women and appealed to the Home Office to be allowed to stay in the
UK but she was turned down. The secretary of state did not think
Sadia would be in any danger if she were returned to her village in
the NWFP.

In a long legal struggle with the immigration authorities, Sadia's
solicitor pointed out the extremely high number of women killed in
the name of ‘honour' in the region, the threats made by her fatherin-
law and the fact that accusations of adultery usually lead to feudal
punishments inflicted on women; she pointed out that there is in
Pakistani law a rule known as the Hudood Ordinance, which sanctions
death by stoning as a punishment for adultery; and she pointed out that
all of these issues have been discussed and documented extensively.
Sadia eventually won her right to stay in the UK. But many others in
her situation are not so fortunate. The laws and their interpretation
by the Home Office force such women to either continue to live in
violent relationships or be deported back to South Asia to be persecuted
and possibly killed. 

