Fat cat accountants
Mike Rake, who stepped down as head of the UK
operation in October, earned £3.6 million, including
£800,000 as a reward for his job as the firm's
worldwide head.
KPMG is the last of the big four accounting firms
to report its profits. The four collectively made
more than £1.5 billion.

Foreign direct
investment 2005
Direct investment abroad by UK companies (outward
investment) dropped to £46.0 billion in 2005,
a decrease of £3.7 billion on the amount invested
in 2004.

The fall in the total for 2005 reflects a decrease in
investment in the Americas, Asia and Australasia
&amp; Oceania. This was partially offset by an increase
in investment flows to the rest of Europe and Africa.
The level of foreign direct investment (also called
the international investment position) by UK companies
at the end of 2005 was £713.4 billion, a rise
of £67.6 billion from the end of 2004.
Earnings from foreign direct investment by UK companies
amounted to £77.9 billion in 2005, £15.4 billion
higher than the figure for 2004.
In 2005, foreign companies invested £106.5 billion
in the UK (inward investment), an increase of £76.0
billion from 2004.
Investment from Europe increased from £29.9 billion
in 2004 to £81.6 billion in 2005. There were also
increases from the Americas and Australasia &amp;
Oceania of £23.3 billion and £2.0 billion respectively.
Investment flows from Asia dropped from £4.1 billion
in 2004 to £2.9 billion in 2005.
The level of foreign direct investment in the UK
rose from £363.4 billion at the end of 2004 to £482.8
billion at the end of 2005. Earnings of foreign companies
from foreign direct investment in the UK
increased by £7.2 billion to £33.1 billion in 2005.

Average weekly
earnings
Since June 2005, the official government statistician,
the Office for National Statistics, has been
producing an experimental measure of average
weekly earnings on a sector and industrial basis.
Figures are given on a monthly and quarterly basis.
The figures also give a breakdown for bonuses
and pay arrears.
The latest estimates of average weekly earnings
figures on a sector basis for October 2006 are
shown below.

The economy
Manufacturing output in the three months to
Ocotber rose by 0.3% compared with the previous
three months with a significant increase in output
of 1.7% in the machinery and equipment industries.
Manufacturing output in the latest three months
was 2.2% higher than the same period a year ago.
Industrial production was 0.3% lower than the quarter
before, but was 0.7% higher than the same period
a year ago.
National output Industrial production, together
with agriculture and construction, now accounts
for just over a quarter of the economy.
Output of the service sector, accounting for nearly
three-quarters of the economy, rose by 0.8% in the
third quarter of 2006 compared with the previous
quarter, and was 3.7% higher than a year earlier.
The economy as measured by gross domestic product
(GDP) grew by 0.7% in the third quarter of 2006
on the previous quarter. GDP was 2.9% higher on
the same period 2005.

Forecasts The economy is expected to grow by
between 2.4% and 2.7% in 2006, according to estimates
for GDP from around 40 forecasters collated
by the Treasury. The average (median) for GDP
forecasts is 2.6%. The Treasury forecast given in
Chancellor Gordon Brown's Pre-Budget Report was
a revision upwards to 2.75% growth. Forecasts for
2007 range from 0.8% growth to 2.9% with an average
of 2.4% growth.
Inflation forecasts, as measured by the Retail
Prices Index, range from rises of 2.7% to 4.1% with
an average of 3.8% for the fourth quarter 2006. The
range for the same quarter 2007 is for rises of between
1.8% and 3.9% with an average of 2.9%.
Forecasts for average earnings growth range from
3.8% up to 4.7% with an average of 4.1% in the fourth
quarter 2006. The range for the same quarter 2007
is for rises of between 3.2% and 5.2% with an average
of 4.2%.

UK statute law
For the first time an official, authoritative online
database of revised UK primary legislation is available
free of charge to the public, the Department
for Constitutional Affairs (DCA) has announced.
The Statute Law Database has been developed by
the Statutory Publications Office, part of the DCA,
and contributes to the department's aims for improving
access to justice.
DCA minister Baroness Ashton said: "I hope it will
be welcomed as a useful tool for professionals who
need to keep up with changes to the law ass well
as those who simply have an interest in historic
and current legislation.
The database offers users a range of advanced
search and navigation functions across over 30,000
items of UK primary and secondary legislation. The
database contains primary legislation that was in
force at 1 February 1991 and primary and secondary
legislation that has been produced since that
date.”
So anyone can now access online the Statute forbidding
Bearing of Armour 1313 as well as the latest
Finance Act for 2006, which puts into law the
Budget's proposals.

Spending on
consultants
Government spending on consultants has come in
for criticism from the public finance watchdog the
National Audit Office (NAO).
Central government spent around £1.8 billion on
consultancy in 2005-06, according to new figures
published by the NAO. Total public sector spending
on consultants is estimated at around £2.8 billion
for 2005-06. There have been improvements
in using consultants, but there is some way to go
before good value for money is achieved overall.
The new figures show that there has been a slight
decrease in central government spending on consultants.
This decrease can be attributed to three
departments — the Department for Work and Pensions,
the Department for Trade and Industry and
the Ministry of Defence — rather than a wider trend
across government.
The biggest spenders are the Department for International
Development — £255 million; the Ministry
of Defence — £213 million; the Department for
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs — £160 million;
the Home Office — £129 million; and the Department
of Health — £126 million.
Spending on consultants across the public sector
has risen by a third between 2003-04 and 2005-06.
And over the past three years, the services most
consistently bought in by central government have
been programme and project management and IT.
The NAO said it was not possible to make an overall
assessment of the benefits that have resulted
from the money spent on consultants, partly because
departments rarely collect information on
what has been achieved.
It also found that departments, for the most part,
do not:
? make a proper assessment of whether internal
resources could have been used instead of consultants;
? collect adequate information on their use of consultants,
such as performance reviews, to improve
their buying decisions and understand better the
benefits they bring;
? actively engage with key consulting firms to understand
how they work;
? regularly plan for and carry out the transfer of
skills from consultants to internal staff to build internal
capabilities.

Sir John Bourn, head of the NAO, said: “Departments
need to think ahead about what skills they should
have, so they don't have to rely on consultants year
after year. They should examine whether they really
need to use consultants quite as much as they
do, a move which could release substantial sums
for frontline services.”

Balance of payments
The current account recorded a deficit of £9.4 billion
in the third quarter of 2006. This compares with
a revised deficit of £8.3 billion for the second quarter.
The current account deficit with EU countries narrowed
to £6.6 billion, against a £9.0 billion deficit in
the previous quarter. The current account deficit
with non-EU countries was £2.9 billion in the latest
quarter, compared with a £0.7 billion surplus the
previous quarter.
The deficit on trade in goods in the second quarter
of 2006 was £20.5 billion, compared with a deficit
of £20.9 billion in the previous quarter. Exports
fell by £10.9 billion, while imports fell by £11.4 billion.

Low-risk fat cats
Being a chief executive of a major company is a
relatively low-risk job in comparison with many
other sorts of work, a new paper argues. Therefore,
the old arguments about risk and reward traditionally
deployed by those seeking to justify growing
chief executive pay cannot be sustained.
In a new paper, published by the independent research
organization the Work Foundation, Nick

Isles presents research that shows that FTSE 100
chief executives (CEOs) suffer little more risk of
being fired and made redundant than the average
worker. In addition, they will tend to live longer and
are cushioned from falls from grace by large pension
pots and sizeable pay-offs.
Isles said: “People instinctively understand the difference
between risk-taking entrepreneurship and
able stewardship of an organisation. What the paper
shows is that the levels of risk borne by CEOs
are actually quite modest.”
The paper analyses data from a 12-month period
and compares the labour market outcomes of the
CEOs of the FTSE 100 in that period with wholeeconomy
labour market data.
For the year to summer 2006 average CEO remuneration
packages increased by 28% against inflation
of 2.8% and average wage increases across
the whole economy of 4%. Average FTSE CEO remuneration
topped £2.4 million — up from £2.1 million
the year before. Performance related pay made
up 55% of the total — up from 46% in 2003.
Isles said: “Reward should go to the talented, the
able, the entrepreneurial and the wise. But let us
not base arguments about reward on myths about
risks that are not actually present. The basis for
paying such large and inflationary pay increases
to CEOs is a perversion of market principles. Growing
pay inequality corrodes the basic concept of
fair reward that underpins a thriving society — and
may also damage the performance and long-term
success of organisations as staff become cynical
and disillusioned."
In addition to progressive taxation to put a brake
on excessive pay, the paper calls for a High Pay
Commission to be established — on the model of
the Low Pay Commission. This would set reliable
benchmarks and make public recommendations
to company boards. Representation on those
boards should include workers and other
stakeholders.

Global super union
British, American and German unions are to forge
a pact to challenge the power of global capitalism
in a move towards creating an international union
with more than 6.3 million members.
Amicus, the UK's largest private sector union, has
signed agreements with the German engineering
union IG Metall and two of the largest labour organisations
in the US — the United Steelworkers
(USW) and the International Association of Machinists
— to prevent companies playing off their
workforces in different countries against each
other.
The move is seen by union leaders as the first step
towards creating a single union that can present a
united front to multinational companies.
Derek Simpson, general secretary of Amicus, said:
“Our aim is to create a powerful single union that
can transcend borders to challenge the global
forces of capital. I envisage a functioning, if loosely
federal, multinational organisation within the next
decade.”
Simpson added that multinational companies
“trade off countries and workforces against each
other” and that forging such solidarity agreements
as have been signed with German and US unions
is the best way to combat such practices.
With the newly merged Amicus and T&amp;G having
around 2 million members, and IG Metall's membership
of 2.4 million added to the USW's 1.2 million
and the Machinists' 730,000, the global union
would have some 6.3 million members.

Trade unionists
honoured
Five trade unionists have been recognised in the
New Year Honours List. Brian Orrell, general secretary
of the union for maritime professionals
Nautilus UK (formerly NUMAST), receives an OBE,
as does Debbie Coulter, deputy general secretary
of the GMB general union.
Liz Snape, director of policy and political affairs at
public setor union UNISON, gets an MBE for services
to diversity as does Margaret Hazell. for services
to the trade union movement in Wales.
Roswyn Hakesley-Brown, president of the Royal
College of Nursing gets a CBE for services to
healthcare.
