Understanding why people vote for one party rather than another has long been a fundamental concern for political scientists. In the initial phases of the inquiry, most were content simply to explore the association between vote and a wide range of explanatory variables. As the research programme matured, the focus shifted from mere description to explanation. This transition was initially frustrated by the inherent limitations of survey data. In particular, political scientists lacked the ability to carry out controlled experiments and were forced to rely on cross-sectional studies. Nevertheless, the increasing availability of panel data, which contained a crucial temporal element (Miller, 1999), together with the application of the rules embodied in ‘the logic of causal order' (Davis, 1985), has enabled analysts to produce models that approximate the processes by which voters acquire their attitudes, opinions and evaluations. Some models have specified complex causal relationships between variables (Jackson, 1975). Most, however, are simply the product of a ‘statistical shootout' in which all variables are assumed to be temporally and spatially coordinate, but only those found to be ‘statistically significant' are assigned explanatory credit.
Whatever the inherent limitations of the data, the competitive struggle between models has brought considerable advances. In particular, it has compelled political scientists to clarify assumptions about measurement and causal order. Improvements in ‘model specification' have permitted analysts to estimate the unique impact of variables. Continual refinement of models and measures has, moreover, led to improvements in data quality. Analysts have therefore gone some way to solving the mystery of why people vote for one party rather than for another.
In spite of these advances in understanding, the competitive struggle between models has often obscured issues about the way variables influence the vote. Just about every model has, for example, assumed that voters (1) place the same weight on considerations and (2) think about the vote in the same way or arrive at their decision by the same ‘route'. It has therefore been supposed that voters with identical characteristics will vote for the same party. Such ‘homogeneity' assumptions have been justified by the proposition that ‘simple theories have higher prior probabilities' or Occam's dictum that assumptions should not be multiplied unnecessarily (King et al., 1994, p. 20). Yet, while the application of either principle can promote clarity, both are ‘ambiguous' and are ‘subject to misuse' (Campbell et al., 1960, p. 19). The belief that simpler theories tend to be correct could represent an empirical proposition (that might be incorrect) or a metaphysical belief (that is incapable of proof). Moreover, there is precious little guidance about what constitutes a ‘necessary' assumption, and all models trade off realism and accuracy (Fiorina, 1975, pp. 138–9). It is therefore wiser to suggest that any ‘theory should be just as complicated as all our evidence suggest' (King et al., 1994, p. 20).
In this paper, I argue that voting behaviour is rather more complex than supposed. In particular, there are reasons for believing that voters place different weights on considerations (‘type one heterogeneity') and/or that they think about politics in different ways (‘type two heterogeneity'). I illustrate these propositions using two examples. To simplify matters, I assume that there are two parties (A and B), two voters (V1 and V2), three explanatory variables, a constant (X1) and two others (X2 and X3), and finally, that only those individuals who have a predicted score greater than 0.5 will vote for A, while all others vote for B.
The vote model is given by a simple additive equation (1). This is also summarised in Figure 1, which contains the same information, but underlines the crucial assumption that causality runs from X1, X2 and X3 to the vote.
(1) 
Preliminary analysis estimates the coefficients (causal weights) in an additive model for b1, b2 and b3 as being 0.1, 0.05 and 0.1, respectively. Thus, if both voters score 7 on X2 and 4 on X3, both vote for A, because the predicted vote is greater than 0.5.
(2) 
The predicted vote is 0.85 (0.1 + 0.35 + 0.4). However, if V1 really places no importance at all on X3 (b3 =0), then the predicted vote falls to 0.45 (0.1 + 0.35 + 0), and V1 would vote for B. Furthermore, if V2 places no weight on X2 (b2=0), then their vote falls to 0.5 (0.1 + 0 + 0.4) and is unpredictable. The additive model produces incorrect predictions and misleading estimates of causal effects in either case (Rivers, 1988, p. 740).
In the second case, assume that there are again two parties (A and B), two voters (V3 and V4) and three explanatory variables (X1, X2 and X3). Suppose that both score 10 on X2 and X3, and that the model estimates that the coefficients for X1, X2 and X3 in a simple additive model are 0.1, 0.3 and 0.5, respectively.
(3) 
Thus, both V3 and V4 have a predicted score of 0.9 and would vote for A. Now, suppose that V3 and V4 differ in the way they think about the vote. In particular, assume that V3 has no ‘real' opinion on X3. Rather than report that they have no opinion, however, they make up an opinion on the spot using their vote decision to ‘impute' an opinion on X3. This model is summarised in Figure 2.
Although this suggestion may seem artificial, such rationalisation is quite common in surveys (Schumann and Presser, 1996). Many have a desire for consistency and tend towards ‘balanced' attitudes (Heider, 1944). Accordingly, they eliminate the ‘dissonance' resulting from having voted A, but having ‘pro-B' opinions by reporting ‘pro-A' opinions (Festinger, 1957). One of the causal arrows in Figure 2, therefore, runs from Y to X3 (as indicated by the dashed line). In the present case, if V3 actually places a weight of 0.8 on X2, then the voter has the same predicted score (0.9). Equation (3) predicts the vote accurately, but the only ‘real' causal relationship is between X1 and Y, and X2 and Y. Moreover, there are good reasons for believing that voters will follow other decision rules. Individuals have little incentive to acquire information or to think deeply about politics and are likely to be cognitive misers who focus on specific considerations. They might, therefore, use various ‘rules of thumb' or ‘heuristics' in order to decide how to vote (Downs, 1957; Popkin, 1993).
It goes without saying, therefore, that Figure 2 represents merely one among many plausible models. Indeed, the electorate may be made up of millions of voters, each with their own decision rule (RePass, 1971). While some claim that an additive equation indicates the ‘average effects for the average voter', this is only plausible where heterogeneity is uncorrelated with explanatory variables, a condition so unlikely as to be inconceivable (Rivers, 1988, pp. 741–2).
As some analysts have recognised, heterogeneity can matter a great deal (Fiorina, 1981; Rivers, 1988). Let us assume that type two heterogeneity is present and that the electorate is divided into two groups. The first thinks purely in terms of policies which, for the sake of simplicity, are reduced to preferences on tax and spending. The second thinks purely in terms of choice between leaders. Two voters, with otherwise identical policy and leadership preferences, might cast their vote differently, depending on which group they belong to. Moreover, the balance of ‘policy' and ‘leadership' voters in the electorate might well alter the outcome of the election itself. Heterogeneity thus raises questions about the electoral message. Do elections provide leaders with authority to cut or raise taxes or to simply ‘be themselves'? (King, 2002).
If type one heterogeneity (arising from differences in causal weights) is suspected, the problem can be solved by the addition of ‘interaction terms' to capture non-additive effects. All that is needed is an indicator of the differing weights that voters attach to variables. If type two heterogeneity (arising from different causal orders) is suspected on the other hand, then no single equation can summarise the processes involved. Unfortunately, as I will now demonstrate, there are good reasons for believing that both types of heterogeneity are present in large electorates. If there is to be any departure from homogeneity assumptions, it is clearly useful to work within an appropriate theoretical framework in order to ‘maintain intellectual control' (Dunleavy, 1998, p. 286). To date, however, no one has yet produced a ‘general theory of heterogeneity', and it may well be that the task is not possible to date. Nevertheless, a review of the literature reveals widespread interest in the effect of ‘political awareness' or ‘political expertise' on voters (Krosnick, 1990; Zaller, 1992). ‘Awareness' here denotes thought or attention either to a specific issue or to politics in general and is indicated by variables such as interest, discussion, knowledge and media usage (Zaller, 1992). Analysts have found that such variables influence information processing (Fiske et al., 1990), attitude structure (Converse, 1964), stability of opinions (Feldman, 1988), policy voting (Andersen et al., 2002) and whether voters punish governments for calling early elections (Blais et al., 2004).
The reason why ‘awareness' is associated with type one heterogeneity is obvious. Few would be surprised to hear that some people have stronger attitudes towards certain objects than others and that they place more importance on those when they vote (RePass, 1971). Yet, despite the very ‘obviousness' of the point, few political scientists allow for this possibility in their models. This appears to be in part a result of the crude concepts that were developed in early studies, such as the sharp distinction between ‘real attitudes' (based on a great deal of thought, knowledge and discussion) and ‘non-attitudes' (based on little more than a mental coin flip) (Converse, 1964). These studies appeared to demonstrate that most voters did not have genuine attitudes on issues that were the subjects of intense debate at an elite level. It is now realised, however, that real and non-attitudes represent boundary conditions (Converse, 1995) and that most attitudes can be placed on a continuum according to their stability or accessibility in memory (Krosnick and Petty, 1995). Moreover, it has also been established that the more familiar an individual is with an issue, the more likely they are to develop efficient ways of organising related information in accessible forms (Boninger et al., 1995; Fazio, 1989; Judd and Krosnick, 1989).
The ways of organising information have variously been described as ‘schemas' (Fiske and Kinder, 1981; Hamill et al., 1985; Lodge and Hamill, 1986), ‘predispositions' (Zaller, 1992), ‘pictures in our heads' (Lippmann, 1997) or ‘mental models' (Denzau and North, 2000). However, the precise language used to describe these structures is not of great importance. What is important is that organisation influences the accessibility of information from memory (Fazio and Williams, 1986). Just as it is easier to find an object when it is stored according to some rules, so it is easier to access structured information. The more accessible attitudes are, the stronger the relationship (1) between related opinion statements and (2) stated opinions and behaviour (Krosnick, 1991, p. 223) will be. Voters who are more aware of economic issues, for example, tend to have consistent attitudes about such issues and place more weight on them when they vote (Hibbs et al., 1982). Parties, of course, are well aware of this and seek to ensure that both the media and the voters focus on those issues on which they enjoy an advantage. Indeed, most campaigns attempt to increase the salience of issues rather than attempt to change minds on issues (Norris et al., 1999).
The reasons why awareness may be associated with different ways of thinking are somewhat more speculative. Moreover, the implications of type two heterogeneity are more radical than type one, and so we must exercise some caution before concluding that a single non-additive equation is insufficient. Nevertheless, it is plausible that differences in political awareness are also associated with different ways of thinking: whether voters focus on ‘substantive' issues such as ideology and performance or ‘non-substantive' matters such as the personal qualities of the party leaders.

