It is an old maxim of British politics that while the Conservatives always assassinate their leaders, Labour never does. This aphorism is usually taken to imply a cultural difference between the parties, with Labour members instinctively loyal to their leaders, whereas the Tories ruthlessly evict failing incumbents. Such value differences may exist, but if that is all there is to it, nothing of general applicability can be learnt by analysing these parties. However, in line with recent developments in political science, this paper contends that ‘institutions matter' (Shepsle, 1989; Tsebelis, 2002) and that the key to the aphorism lies very much within the parties' internal structures.
The principal focus is on the ease with which intra-party selectors can remove incumbent leaders. A party has no option but to seek a new leader when its previous one resigns or dies. Challenging an incumbent is a matter of choice, and those who do it or support it are indicating their dissatisfaction with the status quo. If intra-party principals are to hold leaders to account, they need ways of removing them. Eviction procedures are thus a fundamental aspect of the leader–follower relationship (Laver, 1997, pp. 78–80). However, although there is a literature on parties' leader-selection rules, it devotes less attention to eviction than to other issues, such as the identity of the selectorate.
Selection institutions make it easier or harder for intra-party actors to evict incumbents. They are not the only consideration when assessing a leader's security of tenure: popular leaders will survive under liberal rules, whereas unpopular and incompetent ones are rarely saved even by protective systems. Leaders' standing among the electorate at large and the political balance of forces within their own party are paramount in deciding their fate. Nevertheless, eviction rules can be crucial for incumbents whose predicaments are awkward but not necessarily terminal. Leaders who wish to shore up their positions often seek to change the selection rules, making it more difficult to challenge incumbents.
Formal leadership challenges are infrequent in British parties: since 1945, there have been three in the Labour Party and five in the Conservative Party.1 More often, leaders depart of their own volition, especially after election defeats, although also because of poor health (and two Labour leaders died in post). However, the frequency of challenges is not a reliable indicator of the impact of eviction rules: under challenger-friendly rules, incumbents may change course on policy to avert a challenge, but that does not necessarily imply security of tenure. The more significant effect of rules is in the way they shape actors' incentives.
This paper utilises an institutional-costs approach to examine the two main British parties. That framework and the justification for using it are set out in the next section. Although the comparison is intra-national, the conceptual framework is applicable to parties elsewhere. However, there are two advantages in restricting the study to British parties. First, all political-system variables (electoral system, executive–legislative relations, etc.) can be held constant. Second, there are no ambiguities over who counts as party leader, as there are in countries where parliamentary leaders vie with organisational leaders.2 The following three sections analyse Labour's electoral college, the Conservatives' parliamentary ballots and their new hybrid system in terms of their protection for incumbents. Other effects of selection systems, such as their enfranchisement of groups that are more likely to support radical/moderate candidates, are left to one side. The concluding section questions whether the trend towards tougher eviction rules is in the parties' long-term interests.
To facilitate the analysis of eviction rules, we need a model of decision-making for would-be challengers. In contests for vacant posts, decision-making is straightforward: all serious candidates wish to stand for the post, unless they have arranged deals with others to step aside. Otherwise, the contestants will not believe that their candidacies could incur sanctions from other actors. In contrast, formally challenging an incumbent leader who wishes to remain in post is much riskier. Winning the leadership will increase the challengers' payoffs, both in terms of policy outcomes and job status, but a failed leadership bid could seriously harm their interests. Defeated challengers who hold front-bench positions will often lose them, and in some cases, it could spell the end of their political careers.
Let Bji be the benefit accruing to a potential candidate, j, under the leadership of candidate i (who could be any member of a set of candidates that includes all challengers and the incumbent). Bji is the estimated present value of inter-temporal utility from policy outcomes and patronage benefits. It is positively correlated with i's leadership skills and electoral appeal, because they increase the party's chances of winning office where policies can be implemented and patronage payoffs are higher. Let pi be the probability of i winning the contest. The magnitude of pi is endogenous to the contest, because it can be raised by campaigning. Finally, let Cj be the total eviction costs to j of the challenge which include all information and mobilisation costs before and during the contest (see below). In the simple case of a single challenger, j, to the incumbent, k, two sets of possible payoffs can accrue to j under k's leadership: Bjk, which defines the status quo and is associated with no leadership challenge, and Bjk', which is j's payoff under a re-elected incumbent (Bjk? Bjk' because unsuccessful challengers are rarely rewarded, and are often punished, by incumbents). Candidate j expects to benefit from a leadership challenge to k if:

In other words, the expected benefits minus the costs of the challenge must be greater than the benefits j accrues under the status quo.3 One problem for j is that while Bjj (the payoff that j receives under j's own leadership) is high, Bjk' is probably low. Therefore, j must believe that pj is sufficiently high before embarking on a challenge, or that it could be raised during the course of the campaign. Complicating matters is the possibility of other candidates joining a contest precipitated by someone else. The likelihood of that happening must be estimated, together with j's estimated benefits under the leadership of each. Moreover, challengers will fear that even ideologically close selectors may refuse to back them for instigating ‘unnecessary' contests. This bewildering array of permutations ensures that would-be challengers' uncertainty about their ability to mobilise support is a major reason for the infrequency of challenges to incumbent leaders. Such calculations are less of a feature of contests for vacancies, because there is no status quo to which expected benefits must be compared (Bjk, Bjk' and pk are all zero).
This cost-benefit analysis is a guide – no more – for candidates contemplating challenges. Indeed, the experience of British parties is that challengers sometimes enter contests expecting to lose, but that does not make them irrational. We must distinguish two basic types of challenger: (1) serious candidates, who have a chance of winning; and (2) signal senders, who do not expect to win but wish to signal to the incumbent their dissatisfaction with the status quo. Signallers aim to force a change in policy or to weaken the position of incumbents, leaving them vulnerable to a future serious challenge. Some signallers are ‘stalking horses' who seek to draw other candidates into the contest. For signallers, Bjk is usually low, although Bjk' may be considerably lower (for example, they could be deselected as parliamentary candidates).
Party selectors must also perform an approximate cost-benefit analysis when deciding whether to back a challenge. They will consider policy and patronage benefits, and estimate each candidate's eventual probability of victory. On the cost side, selectors must take into account the harm inflicted on the party by a leadership challenge. Party costs are the damage done to the party's electoral standing during the contest, and they come in three main forms: (1) decision costs, arising from the time and effort diverted from devising policies and attacking opposing parties; (2) the financial costs to the party of running contests (for example, balloting expenses) and (3) ‘disunity costs', which arise from rival candidates publicly attacking each other, damaging the party's public image – it is conventional wisdom in British politics that voters punish divided parties. Selectors and candidates alike must internalise party costs, as electoral failure keeps them out of government where policy and patronage payoffs are highest. Members of Parliament (MPs) in marginal seats and those with expectations of high office will be particularly concerned with party costs. However, if candidates believe that they have a good chance of winning, all costs are heavily offset by expected benefits. Party costs for selectors are outweighed when a change of leader offers big gains in policy and patronage payoffs.
Institutions and Costs

Eviction rules impose costs on candidates seeking to challenge incumbents. The notion of ‘eviction costs' is appropriate, because selection systems differ in the ease with which they permit challenges – even restrictive systems usually make it costly, rather than impossible per se, to challenge leaders. Eviction costs are distinct from eviction rules: the former include all the costs to candidates of collecting information and mobilising allies to comply with the requirements of the latter. Even if the same rules exist for challenges to incumbents and contests for vacancies, the costs are higher in the former, because it is usually more difficult to mobilise allies for a challenge, reflecting the risks for selectors in being associated with challengers, for example, the loss or denial of patronage by a re-elected incumbent.
Eviction costs fall under the heading of ‘transaction costs', which are the costs of measuring and enforcing agreements and include information, commitment, mobilisation and agency costs (North, 1990, p. 362; see also Horn, 1997; Williamson, 1985). Reducing such costs can enable beneficial exchanges to occur, but political actors may want to increase them for their opponents, making it harder for the latter to collect information, organise allies and enforce decisions. As Charlotte Twight (1994, p. 193) observes, ‘[t]o its beneficiaries, transaction-cost manipulation is thus an autonomy-enhancing strategy'. This approach is useful for analysing leader-selection systems, because it provides a medium of comparison for assessing different rules, whether the latter are common or specific to one party.
The most significant type of candidate-level cost that selection systems bear upon is that of mobilisation costs, which are the time, effort and money expended by candidates lobbying selectors for support. Mobilisation costs can be divided into entry and campaign costs. Entry costs are incurred by candidates trying to instigate or join a contest (for example, by surmounting nomination hurdles) and play an important role in determining whether an incumbent is challenged in the first place. Campaign costs are sustained as candidates seek to increase pj. Selection systems impact on them by specifying who has to be mobilised (MPs, activists, etc.) and by influencing selectors' receptiveness to challengers' appeals (for example, non-secret ballots may deter supporters of challengers). The resources that candidates expend on winning support usually display diminishing marginal returns, as it becomes harder to win each extra vote. Further resources must be devoted to retaining support already won, as rivals try to convert each other's less-committed backers.
Candidates' entry and campaign costs are affected by party costs, because selectors are harder to mobilise if a contest threatens lasting damage to the party. Selection systems can be crucial. Thus, decision, financial and ‘disunity' costs are all minimised in systems that restrict voting to MPs, because contests can be completed quickly and cheaply. These costs are much higher in systems involving mass- membership ballots, because the campaigns usually last longer, involve candidates using the media to appeal to selectors and to attack opponents, and necessitate mass balloting that can cost hundreds of thousands of pounds. Party costs are not a consideration in contests for vacancies, because these elections occur out of necessity, whereas challenges need not. However, if a candidate challenges the incumbent, the costs can be lowered for others waiting in the wings, because party costs are incurred regardless of what the others decide. This calculation underlies stalking-horse challenges.

