This article considers Laforgue's ‘Solo de lune' in the light of the Symbolists' claim that their free verse was inspired by music. After referring to the views of two contemporary poets on the subject (that Laforgue's free verse was psychologically rather than musically determined) and outlining Laforgue's position with regard to music and his counter-claim, his practice is examined in two areas: first, ‘Solo de lune''s double narrative and consequently contrapuntal structure, alternating free verse with an approximate ‘quatrain populaire'; second, the use of other musical features which work against the random nature of free verse (parallelism, modulation, innovative phonetic repetition). The article argues that Laforgue's musical aspirations influence both the structure and the detail of the text. Finally, Laforgue's interest in connecting the three art forms — music, Impressionist painting, and liberated verse — and his awareness of a parallel modernity, are briefly illustrated. 

Free verse began under the auspices of music. In his influential ‘Préface sur le vers libre' of 1897, Gustave Kahn wrote: ‘je cherchais à trouver en moi un rythme personnel suffisant pour interpréter mes lyrismes avec l'allure et l'accent que je leur jugeais indispensables.... Dans un affranchissement du vers, je cherchais une musique plus complexe'. Mallarmé also conceded that a rhythmical impulse underlay the desire of the young poets of his day to liberate verse: ‘vers libre, modulation (dis-je, souvent) individuelle, parce que toute âme est un noeud rythmique'. The ‘crise de vers' of his period reflected the instability of society which led to attempts at individual self-expression rather than to reliance on the verse forms of the past. Novel harmonies were the goal of the poets who broke away from establishment Parnassian verse. Since prose poetry had recently become a recognized form, Kahn explained the situation with reference to this: ‘L'ancienne poésie différait de la prose par une certaine ordonnance, la nouvelle [poésie] voudrait s'en différencier par la musique'. 
But, if this was the general tendency, neither Kahn nor Laforgue's friend Edouard Dujardin, who in 1922 published the general survey Les Premiers Poètes du vers libre, felt that Laforgue was really implicated. In their eyes, he was drawn to free verse in order to portray more faithfully his complex intellectual and emotional world: ‘Ce n'est point pour mieux se réaliser en musique ou en plastique, que Laforgue est arrivé au vers libre, mais pour serrer de plus près, pour entourer plus délicieusement sa pensée'. Kahn, whose experiments with free verse took place at about the same time as those of Laforgue, was of the same opinion: ‘Laforgue s'inquiétait d'un mode de donner la sensation même, la vérité plus stricte, plus lacée, sans chevilles aucunes, avec le plus d'acuité possible et le plus d'accent personnel, comme parlé'. These goals were not those of either Kahn or Dujardin. Kahn's Les Palais nomades (1887) is conventionally harmonious, while Dujardin explored the inner regions of the self chiefly in prose. Laforgue's first free-verse poem ‘L'Hiver qui vient', the most discordant of the Derniers Vers, must have struck them as deliberately unmusical. Indeed Kahn published it in La Vogue in Roman type, suggesting that he thought it was a prose poem rather than a verse composition, and this despite the fact that it makes insistent use of the kinds of sound patterning that he particularly championed in verse. 
It is important to note first of all that Laforgue did not consider his verse to be unmusical. After the Complaintes were published, when he was accused of imitating Corbière, he distinguished his verse from that of Les Amours jaunes on the grounds of its rhythmical qualities: ‘Corbière ne s'occupe ni de la strophe ni des rimes (sauf comme un tremplin à concetti) et jamais de rythmes, et je m'en suis préoccupé au point d'en apporter de nouvelles et de nouveaux: — j'ai voulu faire de la symphonie et de la mélodie'. This statement is not at all surprising. Laforgue's life in Germany at the court of the Empress Augusta was steeped in music: it involved regular attendance at concerts and operas. Laforgue quickly became thoroughly familiar with a number of works of Wagner and saw them repeatedly. Scarcely a day passed without his listening to music, as he mentioned to Charles Henry in 1882: ‘Je ne passe pas de jour sans entendre de la musique'. His closest friend in Berlin was the younger brother of the violinist Eugène Ysaÿe, whose ambition was to be a concert pianist. Since they spent long hours together, Laforgue writing poetry and Théophile practising the piano, Les Complaintes came into being to the backgound of music. In Paris, where he went in the summer vacations, he met the growing French Wagnerism, inspired in part by Baudelaire's defence of Tannhäuser. The Revue wagnérienne was founded in February 1885, and even Mallarmé, whom Laforgue revered, was drawn into contributing to it and into acknowledging an affinity between the two art forms. 
There was another influence which was perhaps even more important to Laforgue, and which went back to the early 1880s, a philosophical one. He claimed to be a disciple of Schopenhauer and this probably meant that he had read Théodule Ribot's work on Schopenhauer, which was published in 1874 and in which Chapter V was concerned with aesthetics. Edouard von Hartmann's study of the Unconscious, which came out in a French translation as the Philosophie de l'Inconscient in 1877, was a closer companion. He responded so wholeheartedly to these writers' faith in the ‘Unconscious' as the motivating force in human behaviour that Arthur Symons observed wrily: ‘He sees what he calls l'Inconscient in every gesture'. In the eyes of these philosophers, the art-form that was most intimately connected to the Unconscious was music and, since Laforgue's aim was to reveal in his poetry those hidden, unacknowledged forces that govern human behaviour, he regarded music as an ally. 
In 1886 he abandoned the volume he had been writing, which was to be called Des Fleurs de bonne volonté and which consisted of self-searching poems, composed fast, using a variety of metres and pointing in a number of directions. In August of that year, in a letter to Kahn, he announced his determination to break with traditional metre altogether. He listed the techniques that he no longer intended to adopt as a series of negative actions: ‘J'oublie de rimer, j'oublie le nombre de syllabes, j'oublie la distribution des strophes, mes lignes commencent à la marge comme de la prose. L'ancienne strophe régulière ne reparaît que lorsqu'elle peut être un quatrain populaire'. In this dramatic statement it is interesting to note the one element from the past that he planned to retain, the ‘quatrain populaire'. On the one hand there was to be a main narrative in free verse: contrasting with this, but running simultaneouly with it, was a narrative which adopted a somewhat trivial form of verse, usually used for popular consumption and frequently set to music. 
Among the Derniers Vers, number VII, ‘Solo de lune', a poem which implies a musical intention in its title, provides the clearest example of the play of the ‘quatrain populaire' in opposition to and in alliance with the main free-verse narrative. Laforgue had employed a similar contrapuntal technique from the time of the Complaintes. Now the juxtaposition was to be more radical. Octosyllabic quatrains using rimes embrassées tell of a past love and treat it initially with ironic distancing. They are in fact based on four quatrains from ‘Arabesques de malheur', a poem intended for his earlier volume. Laforgue repeats one of the stanzas from ‘Arabesques', altering it in the process, and provides new elements in the quatrain style. 
The main narrative, characterized by an à la dérive quality of imaginative freedom, is the part of the poem in which the ‘nouveaux rythmes' chiefly appear. They are supported by a number of frames of reference: that of the aesthete, the writer, the lover, the solitary, which ensure a plurality of voices and the chambre d'échos effect which is musical in its impact. In addition to these a matter-of-fact reportage provides details of the journey at each stage (‘On a dépassé les filatures', ‘Voici les relais') and a cynical auto-ironie punctures aspirations to emotionalism (‘Je n'ai que l'amitié des chambres d'hôtel'). The structure of the poem, liberated to a degree that was not envisaged by any other poet writing at this period, rests on the juxtaposition of these intermittent and contrasting voices, each of which runs through the entire text. Were it not for the connections between them, the poem would remain what it appears on the surface, a series of seventeen fragments, with the ‘peigne aux dents cassées' character of later free verse. By their calculated placing in meaningful relationships, the varied stanzas acquire a superior order which replaces that previously provided by traditional versification. 
It was no doubt partly from a sense of the loss of such an order that free-verse poets of this period vociferously claimed music as a model, since music was the art-form that most obviously had the power to produce just such mobile, interconnecting structures. Since they were bent on liberating traditional form and had therefore sabotaged the literary model on which previous poets had relied, they could no longer claim with Baudelaire that prosody was inborn. They could no longer appeal to that ‘prosodie mystérieuse et méconnue ... dont les racines plongent plus avant dans l'âme humaine que ne l'indique aucune théorie classique'. Nor, however much they maintained that the individual poet's task was to listen to his ‘inner ear', could they abandon form altogether. For, as André Guyaux observes with reference to Rimbaud, ‘Si la discontinuité des formes ne retrouve pas, à un degré supérieur, une certaine continuité, c'en est fini de ce qu'il est convenu d'appeler le style'. 
Laforgue achieves this continuity in his interrupted narrative by the ‘musical' reliability with which he treats his juxtaposed voices. The contrast between free verse and the ‘quatrain populaire' provides the basic structure of ‘Solo de lune'. The stanzas in quatrain form represent a throw-back to an earlier time. The ‘note aiguë' of Laforgue's youth is mocked for the obviousness of its rhymes and the repetitiveness of its rhythms. Free verse allows the poet to recount his journey with constant rhythmic variety. Line lengths are extremely diverse, ranging from three to sixteen syllables. Stanza lengths are equally varied, their length in each case dictated by the nature of the utterance. With the exception of the tercet, every line number between two and ten occurs and, on one occasion, Laforgue is drawn to the thirteen-line stanza, which is clearly, like all the others, intended to be read as a unit. As the journey continues, it becomes clear that the original self-parody of the quatrains is little more than skin-deep. The two initially contrasting strains, which were set in a dialogue with each other at the start of the poem, come by the end to meet in a common emotional, if still ironized, plea of regret. This is obviously parallel to the resolution of dissonance experienced at the close of a contrapuntal composition. 
We can see the beginnings of this process if we consider the first two quatrains which Laforgue dislocated by the additions I have italicized: 
Nous nous aimions comme deux fous, 
On s'est quittés sans en parler, 
Un spleen me tenait exilé, 
Et ce spleen me venait de tout. Bon. 
Ses yeux disaient: "Comprenez-vous? 
"Pourquoi ne comprenez-vous pas?" 
Mais nul n'a voulu faire le premier pas, 
Voulant trop tomber ensemble à genoux. 
(Comprenez-vous?) 
Whereas the addition of ‘Bon' introduces a dismissive irony, ‘Comprenez-vous?' in brackets is a direct appeal to the reader's sympathy. Across the poem, the transition from distancing to involvement owes much to a growing receptiveness on the part of the main voice to the intrusions from the past. They spring from the changing landscape of the poet's journey and are carried by metaphor: the cold night air arouses fears for the girl's wellbeing; pine forests inspire fantasies of secluded love-making. 

