The other target of Damisch's critique is that band of theoretically minded film and art theorists of the 1970s, mainly Marxists and feminists, who attacked perspective construction as embodying a particular male, bourgeois, individualistic ideology (pp. xiv–xv). I personally would have liked to see Damisch undertake a more serious critique of that body of film theory, because, like his book, it draws on Lacanian psychoanalysis and uses the linguistic terminology of ‘dispositif' and ‘enunciation.' Apparatus theory, as it is called, proposed an analogy between the set up of the cinema (spectator, projector, screen) and that of perspective, crediting both with powerful ideological and psychic effects. The key text is Jean-Louis Baudry's ‘Ideological Effects of the Basic Cinematic Apparatus' published in 1970. Baudry founded his critique of the cinematic apparatus on its inheritance of Quattrocento perspective construction, which, he claimed, constitutes a viewing subject as centre and origin of meaning. Cinematic camera movement only serves to augment the viewer's feeling of power and control. For Baudry, the spectator identifies less with what is represented on the screen, than with the apparatus that stages the spectacle. The crucial illusion that cinema fosters, then, is not so much the illusory world represented, as the fantasy it engenders of a ‘transcendental subject.' Just as the infant in Lacan's mirror stage assembled the fragmented and uncoordinated body in an imaginary unity, so also the imaginary transcendental self of cinema unites the discontinuous fragments of film into a unified sense. 
Damisch's implicit critique of this position is that it denigrates perspective as a tool for interpellating subjects for the ends of Capitalism or Patriarchy, rather than seeing it positively as an extraordinary idea – a cognitive achievement like the invention or discovery of geometry. This is a spectacular instance of art thinking, which, for Damisch, implies the impossibility of maintaining any sharp distinction between art historical method and its objects. The ‘impatience' registered by Damisch in his Preface was prompted, then, by both old-fashioned empiricist art history and what we now call visual culture. Together these created for him an impasse that required the recoil to the rubble of apparently more primitive approaches. What I propose to do is to examine the main fragments of that rubble, Panofsky's essay and structuralist psychoanalytic theory, in order to discover what assumptions and implications are latent in the new paradigm. 
While I am sympathetic with Damisch's general sense of impasse and encouraged by his attention to the fundamental philosophical questions of art history, his book poses for me a serious difficulty, for I find myself drawn to its Lacanian moments but wary of its enthusiastic reception of Panofsky's essay. By combining the two, he seems simultaneously to affirm the ideas of perspective as symbolic form and perspective as symbolic order. I want to probe the stresses and strains this conjunction puts on Damisch's book and, at the same time, try to drive a wedge between its Panofskian and Lacanian moments. It is not very difficult to discern what kind of art historical practice is embedded in Panofsky's essay, but what kind is implied by importing Lacanian psychoanalysis into that paradigm? 



   Panofsky 

 
Although Panofsky's ‘Perspective as Symbolic Form' purports to be a history of the development of single point perspective construction and the various conceptions of space implied by that history, it is in fact structured around a basic binary opposition between two strikingly different sorts of perspective. Antique and Renaissance (or Modern) perspectives stand at the opposite poles of an evolution and all the intervening moments are presented as hardly more than strategic moves and reversals that enable the history to get from A to B. What we understand as systematic perspective construction is the culmination of a long history and implicit in this history is the development of the idea of space as we now understand it. Perspective announces or anticipates the modern conception of space, which is homogeneous, infinite extended substance. This is not something given to perception or immediately intuited. The conception of space implied by Renaissance perspective involved taking the raw material of sense perception and systematically modifying it, organising it and unifying it around a single vanishing point. The first section of Panofsky's paper is devoted to arguing just how far perspective departs from ‘actual' perception, for, paradoxically, our modern perceived reality has become so thoroughly conditioned by perspectival forms of representation, including photography, that we are likely to miss the point, which is that modern perspective abstracts fundamentally from basic human psycho-physiological perception, which is obviously not monocular or static or strictly geometrical. 
Panofsky's account of Antiquity's conception of space and its axial system of perspective aims to show that both are ‘essentially unmodern.' In Antiquity, space exists only in so far as it is conceived as dimensions adhering to corporeal objects inhabiting a void. This idea he borrowed from Riegl's Late Roman Art Industry. Yet, for Riegl, Antiquity's Kunstwollen, its aesthetic ideal, was to suppress space as for as possible. For him, artistic representation is not thought of as conforming to general perception or ideas of space, but of modelling an ideal sort of object. According to Panofsky, insofar as Antique painting does attempt to represent perspectival space, that is, foreshortenings and diminution of size in depth, it sticks closely to actual psycho-physiological effects or the subjective optical impression, such as the central bulging and curvature of verticals, particularly at the edges of the field. When Christopher Wood notes that, for Panofsky, ‘Antique perspective is more faithful to the truth of perception than Renaissance perspective because it attempts to reproduce the curvature of the retinal image,' he is right, but his emphasis is wrong because this so-called ‘truth,' based on ‘an immediate sensory impression,' is unreflexive, pre-Kantian, in short, primitive.12 Compared with the rationalisation of represented space accomplished by Renaissance perspective construction, pre-modern perspective assumes a naively mimetic, ‘pre-critical' perceptual relation to the world. 
For Panofsky, then, central perspective construction is the embodiment of the crucial recognition that visual representation is not properly mimetic but constructive. It rationalises space, which now no longer clings to substantial things. Instead, ‘bodies and gaps between them were only differentiations or modifications of a continuum or a higher order.'13 Instead of immediacy, abstraction from sense experience. Instead of bodily sense impressions, geometric systmaticity. Art is no longer regarded as a mimetic depiction of objects seen; rather, it reflexively includes the acknowledgment that it is a highly formalised kind of performance aimed at a spectator. Although Panofsky claims to favour modern perspective because it occupies a middle ground between the claims of the subject and the object, this is not the crucial point. The point is that art since the Renaissance embodies the essential reflexive, critical insight that representations (mental and artistic) do not just copy objects, they produce objects structured in a particular way. The difference between Antique and Modern perspective is, then, somewhat like the distinction Schiller drew between Naïve and Sentimental poetry: whereas the poet of Antiquity, being closer to nature, creates instinctively, the modern poet always ‘reflects upon the impression that objects make upon him.' 
Because, for Panofsky, perspective is a model that relates vision to its objects, constitutes them, in this highly reflexive way, post-Renaissance art has the freedom to choose between types of representation that either stick closely to the objective character of things or to the subjective, visual conception of them. The key term here is ‘choose.' Although this is not spelled out, in the context of Panofsky's other writing, it is clear that perspective implies the possibility of human agency and free-will. It therefore has an ethical dimension, which is amplified by the idea of a balancing objectivity against subjectivity, and so promoting an art practice that embodies an Aristotelian mean between extremes. 
Panofsky's conception of the crucial distinction between Antique and Modern perspective is over determined, but one proximate influence on his thinking was the philosophy of Ernst Cassirer. Cassirer wrote a history of symbolic forms, such as myth and language, as a history of their progressive spiritualisation. Like Panofsky, he attempted to combine the incompatible positions of a progressive, teleological history with a relativist typology. Yet it is not difficult to find unambiguous passages where he declares, for example, that the languages of primitive peoples are ‘still entirely rooted in immediate sensory impressions,' while more advanced languages ‘display great freedom and abstract clarity in the expression of logical relations.' In my view, Panofsky naturalises Antique perspective as mimesis of the optical impression so that it can serve as a dark cloth against which the constructive and rational character of Renaissance linear perspective sparkles like a gem. 
Since Panofsky adopts Renaissance art as an authoritative viewpoint, perspective, for him, encompasses both itself and its other. After the Renaissance, there can be no non- or even anti-perspectival art – only swings between the polarities of its two-sided significance: ‘it creates room for bodies to expand plastically and move gesturally, and yet at the same time it enables light to spread out in space and in a painterly way dissolve the bodies.'17 He is probably thinking here of the difference between Italian and Northern Baroque painting and sculpture. However, because of the epistemological status of perspective, the question of the right balance between these tendencies must be determined: measure and proportion must be balanced against the distorting effects of point of view. It would seem that in Panofsky's view, post-Renaissance art that differs substantially from its norm is doomed to err on one side or the other, guilty either of being too coldly mathematical or objectivising, on the one hand, or too warmly expressionist or too eccentrically impressionistic, on the other. In other words, an a priori aesthetic norm is implicit in the system and it is backed up by epistemological and ethical norms. Although there is some residual Rieglian relativism in the essay with suggestions, for example, that modern perspective has only relative validity and could be coming to an end in our post-Euclidian world, these are mainly confined to the footnotes and overwhelmed by a sense of its constituting a permanent and legitimate paradigm of representation that enables fairly wide variation, the limits of which are the limits of a humanistic art. 
The privileging of the Renaissance has certain consequences for the model of art history implicit in Panofsky's essay. In it and his other early writing, he deforms Riegl's conception of art as a history of the Kunstwollen. As Christopher Wood says, ‘In granting Renaissance linear perspective special status Panofsky moved away from Riegl.'20 While Riegl and Panofsky share the same Hegelian inheritance, including the idea that a particular world view is formulated in works of art, Panofsky was interested primarily in discovering an absolute viewpoint. Riegl, however, appreciated Hegel's sense of the way the historian of art is situated in a particular moment that determines what objects can come into view and be salient for us and what questions can be asked of them. He could acknowledge, for example, that his interest in late Roman art has something to do with the emergence of Impressionism. In other words, the art historian inevitably participates in his contemporary Kunstwollen.21 In contrast, Panofsky's sense of the historicity of art historical thinking ends with the attainment of a quasi-transcendental perspective. In his 1920 essay, ‘The Concept of the Kunstwollen,' he argued that concepts proposed by Riegl, objective/subjective, haptic/optic, and so on, provide the art historian with a point of view outside the phenomena, ‘a fixed Archimedian point.'22 Panofsky later questioned the value of these concepts, but retained his quest for a method that allowed one a detached, distanced point of view. 



   Damisch 

 
Damisch is clearly attracted to some of the implications of thinking perspective as a symbolic form, although certainly not all the ones I have just detailed. He does, however, particularly stress the epistemological status of perspective. That he conceives of perspective as embodying a different epistemology will soon become clear. 

