Such complexity of attachment is of the essence because it is the key to the cathartic affect, brings us closer to the familiar riddle of our ‘enjoyment' of the tragic— ‘sweet violence' as Terry Eagleton has recently called it—and indicates more fully how Samson Agonistes qualifies as a tragedy rather than a morality play, for there are more primary elements in our identification with Samson, operating at less conscious levels. For example, in his apparent rejection by God, Samson is cut off from his familial inheritance and has lost his raison d'être, the motivation of a Superego—enacting our basic fear of ontological meaninglessness. At the same time, he has alienated himself from his core social group (the tribe) and offended his father—enacting, in symbolic form, the Oedipal sin of parricide. Finally, in the apparent absence of his own mother, he has twice chosen taboo women, enjoyed their forbidden embraces and finally rejected them—playing out, in terms of symbolic substitution, two primal phantasies: marrying one's own mother, and finally rejecting her as ‘bad breast'. However, this last act leads to the terminal nightmare of the Unconscious: an entropy of life-force (Eros), the embrace of Thanatos and a suicidal annihilation of the self 's world in murderous destructiveness. The figure of Samson operates, then, as a compound symbolisation both of readers' (especially male readers) profoundest desires and their deepest fears. On the emotional plane, he acts as a scapegoat for all that is most mixed-up in the reader's own psyche. In dying, he expiates our human incapacity and guilt, freeing us—after the aesthetic experience—to go about our normal lives. 
However, our dramatic experience also includes aspects of ethical judgment. What does the play's ending tell us about justice and the will of God? This is not a question which can simply be referred to the morality of Judges, Christian tradition, seventeenth century theology or even other writings of Milton. It must be confronted in terms of what the play itself seems to say. And this involves a further question—which characters in Samson can we fully trust? For in drama, we have to gauge arguments not only in themselves but in terms of who is uttering them and why. The one fully trustworthy character is surely the Messenger. He merely reports what he has seen— ‘this so horrid spectacle'. All other speakers in the play manifest degrees of unreliability. Of the most likely other contenders, as has been shown, the Chorus can alternate between wisdom-discourse and sexist or chauvinistic reactions, Samson, even in his tribulations, is overhasty in equating his impulses with God's will, and Manoa varies between fatherly concern and patriarchal pride and prejudice. In short, the Messenger describes a disaster: the hero has caused it; Manoa and the Chorus celebrate it; the Philistines are devastated by it. Our hero becomes a mass-murderer—that is the ethical problem that must divide our sympathy from our moral responsibility. 
It is unlikely that we can ever know Milton's own ‘intention' in this regard. His most certain and clearly articulated intention was to create a tragedy. He achieves this in the catharsis occasioned by the climax, but leaves readers with the suspicion that they have had the experience, yet missed the meaning. If, as in the traditional view, God wills the mass destruction of the Philistines, where quite is the tragedy? Much depends here on whether we detect irony, ambiguity and open-endedness within the structure and texture of the play. It has been suggested where these lie, and it would be salutary to have a twenty-first century radio production of Samson, employing the same liberty of inflection that current Shakespeare productions use. The result could be very different from the somewhat po-faced and reverential reception suggested by so much of the standard commentary. The poet has provided plenty of subtleties to work on—Samson's arrogance, the Chorus's mood-swings, Manoa's fussing, Dalila's sexual allure, Harapha's body-builder narcissism—to suggest a more dynamic and complex text than a verbal version of Handel's Baroque musical monument. It is less, then, that Milton's God is too small than that much interpretation has been too timid. For the play offers us interpretive freedom. The second half of the title—Agonistes—suggests exertion, tension and contestation. That the reader can participate in these is part of the text's genuinely tragic nature. 
A ‘postmodern' reading, then, would acknowledge what might be called Milton's ‘radical unorthodoxy'. It would also be more in tune with what may well have been tensions in Milton's own situation at the time of publication—old, blind and suspect in Restoration England. Be that as it may, the play inevitably becomes richer and subtler if its subtextual possibilities are foregrounded. What, for instance, is Samson's tragic ‘flaw'? His hamartia may well not be what he thinks it is (his weakness with women) but the deeper sin of hubris—equating his own whims with God's will. And the action of the play, in fact, tends to tempt readers with the same error, while allowing them possibilities of better discernment. The catharsis, then, satisfies our emotions at a profound psychic level but leaves our intelligence free to judge—a kind of sorting the wheat from the chaff. In the end, the play searches out our own moral values—probing what kind of morality we are committed to. The choice is ours sub specie aeternitatis. In short, the tragedy of the play is our tragedy as emotional and error-prone creatures in a world of oppositionality and suffering. We are not mere spectators, but involved players. 
In effect, if the traditional interpretation remains normative, then Milton (and a central text in English literature) is committed to the same principle as the Islamist suicide-‘martyrs'. God—in whatever religious tradition—demands, at times, that his ways require dedicated, ascetic representatives to surrender their lives to Thanatos in order to annihilate collective ‘others' who are seen as in opposition to His Will. This principle is almost invariably founded in a selectively literalistic reading of holy writ, with personal (or collective) ‘intimate impulse' in terms of its interpretation and applicability to a particular situation at a particular time. It comes, too, attended by claims of intolerable ‘oppression' by one grouping against another, which, in detail, may command considerable empathy for the particular condition of suffering. By such emotional appeal it can easily lead us to provide excuses for the indefensible. In Samson Agonistes the atrocity reported by the messenger is indefensible. The main question is, then, whether Milton's play constitutes, as in the still-normative view, a triumphant indication of a vengeful Jahweh or a challenge to the vengeful view of God's interventions in human history. It is, surely, wholly in line with Milton's overall theology to suggest that the play gives the reader not a chosen prescription but a choice. We can identify with Samson in his suffering, but we must retain our God-given capacity for ‘secondary process' thinking. Milton has given enough clues to suggest that the conventional reading is, at the least, both over-easy and too crude, and to suggest a more forward-looking alternative. 
In all this, the last words of the Chorus have especial weight—both in their placement and in what they have to say. After the climax they are no longer reacting to immediate events, but endeavouring to sum up in familiar wisdom-mode. ‘All is best', they tell us: the conflict has been resolved. As we might expect, they persist in a tribalistic version of events. While ‘highest wisdom' remains ‘unsearchable', God's ‘uncontrollable intent' has worked so that the ‘best is found in the close'. However, the ‘close' of this last speech has its own ‘New Testament' resonance: 
His servants he with new acquist 
Of true experience from this great event 
With peace and consolation hath dismissed, 
And calm of mind all passion spent 
    (1755-8, emphasis mine) 
Carey's note here dutifully acknowledges the Aristotelian concept of catharsis. However, the alert reader will also find another, even more significant, allusion. It is to the ‘Nunc Dimittis'—‘now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace' (Luke 2: 29). 
Simeon's recessional prayer not only signals his own imminent demise but also heralds the birth of Messiah and the inauguration of a whole new moral order—the ‘kingdom of God'. At this crucial moment, then, we are strongly reminded of the limitations of the old dispensation and the promise of the new—the dispensation the reader is still presumed to be situated in, and which Milton has celebrated throughout his work. 
Looking back from this end-point, we become aware of how much of the mythic power of the play has depended on parallelism between the stories of Samson and Jesus. In the Bible the figures of both are based on the same narrative model. Both Judges and Luke record the appearance of an angel, a promise of deliverance, a particularly pious upbringing and the launch of a divine mission. At times, even the phrasing is similar: ‘and the child grew, and the Lord blessed him' (Judges 13: 24); ‘And the child grew ... and the grace of God was upon him' Luke 2: 40). At the beginning of their stories both Samson and Jesus are Messianic figures; and at the end of their careers, both are brought face to face with a public death. 
At the same time, the stories are profoundly antithetical, as the play hints. Samson is made to stand for tribalism, religious exclusivism, violence and vengeance; Jesus, as sub-textual ‘double', indicates the way of patience, truth and reconciliation. In Paradise Lost, it is Satan and his crew who think and act like Samson; in contrast, the ‘Son' of Paradise Regained embodies the same patience-in-resistance which the Chorus urges Samson to adopt. Agon, then (like Jihad), can be expressed either as aggression or as self-possession. Milton's strategy is to frame the play in such a way that aspects of the Jesus story cast a suggestive light on what Samson does. This is effected by concentrating on the last day of Samson's life and structuring events so that, almost subliminal allusions point to the Passion of Jesus. Thus Samson's ‘station' on the shaded bank reminds us of the Garden of Gethsemane, and his first soliloquy, are an anticipation of Jesus' brief, anguished prayer ‘take this cup from me'. In the Gospel accounts of the Passion, the isolation of Jesus is emphasised by stories of the disciples falling asleep three times, leaving the hero to his own suffering. The equivalent period in the play is taken up by three visitations which reflect aspects of the hero's past. Finally, the arrest of Jesus to be haled off for public judgment is evoked by the arrival of the Public Officer, who threatens to have Samson taken away in shackles. This is not to suggest any consistent, allegorical mirroring at work; rather it is a matter of allusive suggestion, providing an uncanny sense of déjà vu. The fate of Jesus is strangely akin to that of Samson, but to very different moral effect. 
The reader, then, is confronted by moral dilemma in Samson Agonistes. Samson's role as deliverer is similar to that of Jesus, but he rejects the ‘Jesus option' when the Chorus or Manoa recommend it. In effect, the Old Adam prevails. The question then becomes: should the reader endorse his choice? The traditional reading clearly does. Overlooking any irony or ambiguity in the text, it reinforces emotional satisfaction with a revenge-morality: in the end, Samson fulfils God's will—and God's will is good. The ‘postmodern' reader will also participate in emotional satisfaction; but s/he will query the morality involved. Does a ‘Christ-like God' deliver annihilation to the collective ‘Other'? The play is a tragedy, then, because it implicates us in the need to transcend mere emotional consummation. Samson Agonistes demonstrates how religious conviction can make even suicide and mass murder appear justified: but it offers us the choice of ‘patience' and ‘Christ-like' discernment to see Death Instinct as moral defeat. That is how ‘true experience' may lead to a genuinely ‘new acquist'. And its implication for the emotionally excited admirers of suicide-‘martyrs' is self-evident. 

