The ‘Deutscher' entry thus returns us to the issue of the projected finale, or ‘letzte[s] Stück'. The most obvious implication of the inscription might be that Beethoven conceived this German dance as an episode within a larger structure (compare, for example, the finale of the String Quintet in C, op. 29);51 alternatively, a looser interpretation might allow that the entry was a planned main theme for an alla tedesca finale. But this speculation should for the moment be set aside in deference to renewed consideration of what else Nottebohm had to say. 
The casual reader of Nottebohm's brief account of the sketches for the F minor Trio is likely to get the impression that the sketches for the first movement precede those for the movement in 6/8 which Nottebohm first calls the ‘third' and then the ‘last' movement of the projected composition; the incipit for a B major ‘drittes Stück', noted above but ignored by Nottebohm, suggests on the other hand a four- rather than a three-movement conception. Characteristically, Nottebohm did not specify the exact location of the sketches from which he chose to quote. Contrary to the order of their presentation in his essay on Scheide, the first-movement sketch is actually one of the very last entries for the work, and can be found on p. 107, staves 1–3 (see Example 5(e) above); that for the 6/8 movement, by contrast, is extracted, not altogether accurately, from the very first entry, made in a mixture of ink and pencil at the top of p. 86 (compare Nottebohm's transcription with that in Example 11). 



 
If there is much about Beethoven's conception of the first movement that remains unclear, all the more is this so in the case of the movement in 6/8. Following the entries on p. 86, including several lower down that page, the movement largely disappears from view in Scheide and its related leaves until Add. MS 29997 fol. 19, which stood originally before the present p. 93.52 Then, beginning on the lower half of Scheide p. 93 and continuing through the whole of the following page, there is what amounts to the longest continuous extant entry for the movement. What emerges, following a number of false starts, is essentially a continuity draft that connects the opening tonic-key material shown in Example 11 to a modulatory passage leading to the dominant major, which is defined by a jaunty new theme; but the major mode is subsequently replaced by cadential semiquaver passagework in the minor, which itself then yields to the dominant ‘curtain' seen at the beginning of Example 11, at which point the draft breaks off.53 Further disconnected sketches appear on p. 95, and on the upper staves of p. 97; but thereafter the pages of Scheide were put to other uses. 
The point of tracing the various entries and exits of the 6/8 movement in Scheide and related sources is to give a clearer idea than did Nottebohm of the frankly limited extent of the material that survives for it, particularly in relation to that for the first movement. Indeed, broadly put – though this is no exaggeration – the sequence of work in Scheide suggests that Beethoven simply abandoned the 6/8 movement in favour of the relatively more successful first movement, which seemed to hold his attention for longer. The point is made more dramatically – although here, admittedly, one must beware exaggerating the evidence – by the gathering that constitutes fols. 15–18 in Add. MS 29997, which Beethoven appears to have taken up for the purpose of preparing an Urschrift of the 6/8 movement;54 but that undertaking, presumably parallel in its intent to the preparation of Grasnick 29, petered out after only 18 bars (see Example 12). A few more pencil sketches for the movement were added on fol. 15r and at the top of the verso; but then, reverting to ink, Beethoven began the long draft for the first movement (Appendix 2) discussed above. To be sure, the character of the 6/8 movement, as much as it can be discerned from the evidence, certainly suggests a finale; but Beethoven's general practice was to work on the movements of multi-movement structures in order, excepting the notation of ‘concept' sketches as necessary.55 It is legitimate, therefore (not least given the absence of explicit evidence to the contrary) to question Nottebohm's unsupported assumption that the shortlived 6/8 movement in F minor to which these entries bear witness was intended as the last (third) movement of this piano trio. If it was, it seems odd, for example, that no reference to it recurs following p. 103 of Scheide, the point at which Beethoven began to plot the later movements, as also that he seems not to have explored on paper the way in which the ‘Deutscher' episode (if that is indeed what it would have been) might have been incorporated into the larger structure. Could the 6/8 movement itself have been conceived as a first movement, but then rejected? 







   Contexts (i) 

 
Any assessment of the F minor Trio in relation to Beethoven's finished compositions is of necessity seriously compromised by the many uncertainties attendant upon its fragmentary state. That said, there are various broad but none the less defined contexts within which the extant evidence for the trio can be considered: the corpus of instrumental compositions in F minor; Beethoven's previous piano trios; and the immediate context of the sketches in Scheide, which is essentially to say the continuing work on what became the Piano Sonata in A, op. 101. All three of these contexts overlap in one respect, in that Beethoven's engagement with the F minor Trio and the piano sonata coincided with his ongoing dealings concerning the publication in Vienna and London of a series of works including the String Quartet in F minor, op. 95, and the ‘Archduke' Trio, op. 97.56 It is the string quartet and, to a lesser extent, the ‘Archduke' Trio that are the main focus of the following remarks. 
These two chamber works, composed in 1810–11 but witheld from publication until 1816, offer various points of comparison with what we can know of the F minor Trio.57 Beethoven had always tended to conceive of the piano trio as a ‘symphonic', four-movement genre, with the slow movement placed second. Of the piano trios with opus numbers, only the ‘Ghost', op. 70 no. 1, breaks the four-movement mould, while op. 70 no. 2 does without a slow movement altogether. The ‘Archduke' transposes the order of slow movement and scherzo; but, as we have seen, the sources for the F minor Trio seem not to record a final ordering of the four-movement plan, nor do they convey anything of substance concerning a possible slow movement. Both the ‘Archduke' and the String Quartet op. 95 employ the expanded, five-section scherzo and trio form which Beethoven tended to adopt in the later part of his middle period; equally characteristic is the presence in each of run-on movements (in the ‘Archduke', the slow movement connects to the finale; in the quartet, the two inner movements are connected by an attacca subito). Again, it cannot be known whether either of these features was envisaged for the F minor Trio. 
One feature of the projected trio that is both unequivocal and distinctive, however, is the substantial slow introduction that was to open the first movement. One of the most obviously symphonic elements of the design, this introduction distinguishes the F minor Trio from the ‘Archduke' and the quartet, and from most of the other piano trios.58 In fact Beethoven generally eschewed first-movement slow introductions to minor-mode Allegros: of the piano sonatas composed prior to 1816, only the ‘Pathétique', op. 13, comes into question (Beethoven would later repeat the procedure in op. 111); of the violin sonatas, only the ‘Kreutzer', op. 47; of the cello sonatas, only op. 5 no. 2; of the minor-mode string trios, string quartets, piano trios and symphonies, none opens with a slow introduction, while several major-mode ones do.59 One precedent here – and in F minor too – might be the ‘Egmont' Overture, though the expansiveness of the F minor Trio introduction more readily calls to mind the opening of the Symphony no. 7. Implicit in this comparison is also the assumption – and it can of course be no more than that – that the introduction in the trio would have functioned in the same way as that in the symphony, setting up the Allegro and then appearing no more. Certainly, there is nothing in the sources for the F minor Trio to suggest that Beethoven was contemplating a return of the introduction either later in the movement (as in the ‘Pathétique' and the Piano Trio in E flat, op. 70 no. 2) or later in the work, as in the case of the Cello Sonata in C, op. 102 no. 1, composed in 1815, in which the initial major-mode Andante not only precedes a minor-mode Allegro vivace but recurs just prior to the finale. Indeed, op. 102 no. 1 may be seen to inaugurate a trend pursued in a series of later works – the Ninth Symphony and the String Quartets op. 127, 130 and 132 – in which Beethoven repeatedly interrogates the status of the formal category ‘slow introduction'.60 With the sole exception of op. 111, the Seventh Symphony stands as the last example in his published output of a ‘conventional' slow introduction to a first-movement Allegro in a multi-movement work. 
Turning from large-scale formal planning to issues of tonality, parallels with and divergences from the ‘Archduke' Trio and the F minor String Quartet again arise when we compare what can be known of Beethoven's choices in relation to the F minor Trio. The first movement of the trio shares with the string quartet (and, to look ahead, op. 111 and the Ninth Symphony) the choice of the submediant, here D major, as the second-group tonality. The ‘Archduke' Trio explores the same relationship, though the need there to maintain the major mode introduces the chromatic relationship B major–G major.61 And chromatic relations are played out on a larger canvas in the string quartet as Beethoven opts for the raised chromatic submediant, D major, both for the slow movement and for the Trio sections of the Scherzo. By the time he began sketching the F minor Trio, Beethoven had already fixed on the tonic-flat submediant (A major–F major) relationship between the first two movements of the Piano Sonata op. 101, and had also planned for the same pairing within the second-movement March itself. 62 
The tonic-flat submediant scheme of op. 101 had been prefigured in the Seventh Symphony: tonal (as opposed to modal) contrast is provided by the third-movement Scherzo, set in F major. And since the finale of that symphony begins on a dominant harmony, the tonal plan of the entire work can be conceived of as composing out the cadential progression I–i– flatVI–V–I: a progression that also serves to bind the slow introduction to the first-movement Vivace. The naturally occurring semitone between dominant and submediant in the minor mode means that motion between scale degrees 5 and 6 lends itself well to compositional exploration in this context, and the first movement of the String Quartet op. 95 is something of a textbook example.63 The emphasis in bars 9–15 on d flat''–c'' and d flat '''c''', as well as the vertical dominant minor-ninth harmonies, already establish the sensitivity of this particular semitonal pair, which is subsequently explored in the cello part especially when Beethoven uses the open-string low C as leading note to D flat, whether in an immediate or a longer-range setting (compare, for example, bars 25–6 and 34–43; the relationship is reversed in the final four bars of the movement when D flat three times acts as upper neighbour to low C functioning as V).

