Cassiano was a client in the Barberini circle of patronage and was at the centre of an élite academic sphere that included scholars from the Roman academies, most notably the Academia dei Lincei.7 He was also part of the ‘Republic of Letters' corresponding with many of the major thinkers of his time—Mersenne, Doni, Kircher, Pieresc, Naude, Gassendi, Galileo and so on. He held a secretarial position in the entourage of Cardinal Francesco Barberini, and was not therefore in the same league financially as collectors such as Francesco Barberini himself or Vincenzo Giustiniani, but he had a zeal for scholarship, and from around 1620 he assembled a library and museum that included thousands of items. After Cassiano's death in 1657 the collection continued to grow under the guardianship of his brother Carlo Antonio, until the death of the latter in 1689. The museum housed items ranging from live fauna and flora to coins and small objects, but most importantly, drawings: drawings of natural history, architecture, mosaics, clothing, coins, sculpture and so on. This collection became known as the museo cartaceo or Paper Museum. 
The evidence presented in this article suggests that Cassiano's collection was in use as a scholarly resource for a substantial part of the Seicento. His audience appears to have been one that was concerned with critical documentation and academic study. While it was by no means unique—there were a number of other collectors such as Athanasius Kircher, Manfredo Settala, Cardinal Massimi and Francesco Gualdi, all of whom amassed large museums—Cassiano's Paper Museum was more than just a curiosity for the wealthy on their Grand Tour. After the death of Federico Cesi in 1630 Cassiano also preserved the library and much of the literature of the Academia dei Lincei, the first scientific academy. The wealth of scientific material in the collection is only now being fully assessed.8 
Among the volumes of drawings of classical reliefs, sculptures and small objects from Cassiano's Paper Museum that have survived in the Royal Library, Windsor Castle, there are more than 170 images that include musical instruments. Instruments also appear in some of the drawings located in the British Library, but these have not been included in this article. Of the Windsor drawings, a significant number are lyre-type instruments portrayed in a variety of contexts, and including one detailed study of a kithara, the source of which is a sarcophagus of the Muses, most probably either the Mattei or Farnese sarcophagi, both of which are represented in other drawings. The smallest group of instruments represented is the trumpet type, which appear only in military contexts and are largely drawn from monumental reliefs, principally Trajan's Column. One volume that contains illustrations of Bacchic rituals is rich in images of the tibia9 and various percussion instruments. 
Some of these drawings are of little use to the music historian or organologist and it is unlikely that they were ever intended to document the technical aspects of musical instruments. Rather they were commissioned as a cultural record, to show reductions of large, usually sculpted, scenes in small-scale drawings. The nature of the drawings from Trajan's Column, for example, depicting busy military scenes, means that details of accessories such as musical instruments are tiny, and of little use. Only two trumpet type instruments appear, the cornu and the salpinx. These images only confirm the use of these instruments in the military context, rather than extending our knowledge of their shape, dimensions or playing technique. Their simple structures are easy to reproduce in two dimensions, and there is little argument about their characteristics.10 The typical shape, especially of the cornu, is reproduced consistently throughout the period under discussion. 
The depictions of other more complex instruments also suffer from sketchy treatment and missing fundamental elements, although the contexts and functions of the instruments are evident. There are, however, some drawings in the collection that show details from larger originals and are extraordinarily careful studies. Very few are larger than a folio page, and the majority are much smaller, being set into folios, the page acting as a frame. Even with these limitations, there is a significant number of drawings that are worthy of close attention, not simply as organological drawings, but as sources for a series of publications that seem to use and re-use the same images. These publications include those of Bianchini, Hawkins and Forkel. 
Bianchini divides the instruments he discusses into three groups—pulsatile, tensile and inflatile, that is, percussion, string and wind respectively—a division that is broadly derived from Porphyry's 3rd-century Ptolemai harmonica. This is the categorization that will be used in this article, as it is the one most common in 17th- and 18th-century sources, even though it is not strictly representative of ancient taxonomies.11 Other categorizations of instruments may be inferred from classical literary sources, for example, the association of the stringed instruments with Apollo, and the wind with Dionysus. Literary and iconographic evidence suggests that certain instruments such as the aulos are played by professionals, others by amateurs; some instruments are more usually associated with women, others with men, and so on.12 The drawings in the Paper Museum in many cases underline the function of the musical instruments of each group, thus some are unequivocally associated with rituals, others with theatrical, domestic and military functions. This information is useful in itself, as it increases the body of available evidence on Graeco-Roman instruments. 
Images of the lyre are common in 16th- and 17th-century art. Perhaps because of the association with Apollo and with Orpheus, depictions of the lyre from at least Raphael onwards are drawn with surprising accuracy, using known antique artefacts, such as gems and coins, but especially the Mattei Sarcophagus of the Muses, and paintings from the Domus Aurea in Rome. Later discoveries of Roman paintings such as the ‘Aldobrandini wedding' fresco discovered in 1604 were far less influential.13 Palisca, in his exhaustive study of the sources for Giovanni Battista Doni's Lyra barberina,14 has shown that the original drawings intended by Doni for publication, and now in the Bibliothèque Nationale, are carefully studied copies of images from Cassiano's Paper Museum and other known antique artefacts such as gems, and they therefore have a measure of musical and archaeological credibility. 
The aulos or tibia, in myth discarded by Athena, but taken up by Marsyas, becoming the instrument of his demise, was historically associated with orgiastic cults such as those of Dionysus or Bacchus, Cybele and Isis. It has a somewhat negative image in 16th- and 17th-century art.15 Perhaps because of this, wind and percussion instruments do not receive the careful scrutiny accorded to the lyre, and even into the 19th century are depicted inaccurately and often without credible sources. This article will therefore focus on the inflatile and pulsatile instruments,16 and attempt to clarify the sources and the transmission of these images. 
A single drawing from the Paper Museum makes a striking comparison with the printed pages of Bianchini, Forkel and Hawkins, both in terms of content and layout. RL 10241 (illus.4) is a page showing a compendium of musical instruments. Each is annotated with a name but not a source. It is a drawing not mentioned at all by any of the classical scholars who have worked on the collection. Although RL 10241 depicts wind and percussion instruments without a context, they all have an association with the cult of Dionysus. These images may well have a common earlier source, but are themselves likely sources for later published pictures. The tibia, second from left in the upper row, has equal pipes, while the picture in the centre is a tibia impares, with pipes of unequal length. This latter type is apparently a Roman derivation of the Greek aulos with equal-length pipes. The tibia in Mersenne's plate of ancient instruments (illus.5)17 is probably an elaboration of the first of these drawings and is subsequently copied exactly by Kircher.18 The angle of the pipes is copied faithfully, as are the fipple-type holes at the mouthpiece end and the brace between the pipes at the top. There are two significant differences: one is the number of finger-holes; the other is the fanciful brace between the lower parts of the pipes. 
The additional decoration is not uncharacteristic of Mersenne's other illustrations. On this same page, three of the lyre-type instruments are drawn from the Mattei sarcophagus of the Muses. Mersenne's illustrations are accurately drawn in outline and shape, but as they are drawn from a relief sculpture, the floral detail on the kithara and the clearly visible striations of the horn arms and tortoiseshell base of the lyre are not visible on the original object. It is possible that the artefact may have already been in a damaged state, and the artist simply provided the missing details, or that the engraver did not wish to have a plain illustration, so filled in details to prettify the image for publication. Once published, they became the models for later copies such as those by Kircher and Bianchini, and the additional details are useful aids to identify sources. This tibia is, for example, unmistakably the same as the one illustrated in the Diderot–D'Alembert Encyclopédie under ‘Instruments anciens et etrangers' as figure 1 on plate 1. Other examples of copies appear in both Forkel and Hawkins (illus.1 and 2 above). 
Illustrations of the tibia as seen in the above examples for the most part show the instrument without any reference to context that would explain its size (and therefore pitch), manner of playing and so on. Neither early books illustrated with woodcuts, such as Michael Praetorius's Syntagma musicum,19 that pre-date the musical and archaeological scholarship of the 17th century, nor later ones illustrated with engravings, such as Bianchini's De tribus, give the reader much clue about how these instruments were used or what they might have sounded like. 
There are many images of the tibia in its various forms among the drawings of reliefs and sculptures from the Paper Museum. These drawings provide a range of contexts for the instrument, from the ritualistic to theatrical, and provide the source material for a study of the tibia that should stand alongside Doni's Lyra barberina as a document of 17th-century musical archaeology. Caspar Bartholin's De tibiis veterum published in Rome in 1677 became one of the most important sources of organological information for the next 60 to 70 years. In his book Bartholin included just three plates of illustrations. These were then copied by scholars such as Jacques Spon, Frederick Adolphe Lampe, Filippo Buonanni and Bianchini (later copied by Forkel and Hawkins). Although Bartholin's book provides a wealth of information drawn from classical literary sources, it relies heavily on the Paper Museum for illustrations. The first plate (illus.6) uses primarily published sources—Boissard, Bellori and Gruterus are acknowledged by Bartholin—but three of the images on the second plate (illus.7) can be traced to drawings in the Paper Museum, now in the Royal Library. Some of them are acknowledged in the text as given to Bartholin by Carlo Antonio dal Pozzo. Item i on plate 2 is a copy of RL 10192, item ii is from RL 1028 and item iii is from RL 8684. The first image on plate 3 is also from the Paper Museum (RL 8401). 
The first illustration on Bartholin's plate 2 suggests his importance as an intermediate transmitter. Bartholin's image is taken from a small statue, a drawing of which is found in the Paper Museum RL 10192 (illus.8). The angle at which the pipes are held, and the position of the square protrusions, known as kerata,20 resemble the instrument represented without context as item 11 on plate 1 of Bianchini's De tribus (illus.3 above). Given the context, we can conclude that these pipes are long. 
