What does quality look like?
Kate Lyons ‘Change through Peer Power'
Kate Lyons, 23, created and led a peer education project to
change young people's attitudes to climate change. It was run
by a group of young people aged between 13 and 23. As Kate
says, “It was all peer-powered!”
The young people ran events that they felt would attract and
be relevant to their peers; they took a roadshow to music
festivals with interactive tools like a pedal-powered smoothie
maker, ran their own club nights and held their own festival
on Clapham Common.
Kate feels that she took a lot from the project,
“I really enjoyed moving things forward and identifying
problems. Sometimes you can finish up talking around stuff
and not doing anything. I learnt that I had to encourage the
group to work as a whole. Sometimes it can be difficult to
keep groups balanced and it's easy to get caught up in your
own ideas, rather than incorporating ideas from everywhere,
and therefore end up with a project everyone's happy with.”
And her advice to young people inspired by this story to act
themselves is,
“If anyone else was going to begin a project like this I'd say you
have to identify your aims – you must be really clear on what
you want to achieve and you must really understand your
group.”
Kate's project and leadership has been nominated for an
award from the Young Achievers Trust.

CASE STUDY

Ataf Sabir ‘Radio Ramadhan'
At the age of 17 Ataf Sabir created a community radio station,
Radio Ramadhan, to defuse tension amongst the Muslim
population in Dudley which had risen following the attacks
on New York in September 2001. Radio Ramadhan was an
immediate success; as well as developing the skills of the
young people involved, it raised money for local projects and
received positive feedback from the local community. Ataf's
achievements were celebrated on national radio and he also
gave a presentation about his experiences to MPs.
The Radio Ramadhan project was supported by the young
people's charity Changemakers and Ataf says that the success
of the project was because Changemakers promote:
‘‘a bottom-up approach which means that the
communication's good and everyone understands that they
have to take ownership of the project, so the success really
reflects on the volunteers. We had the freedom to create
along with the security of the boundaries and framework they
gave us, which meant we were not running around in chaos.”
Ataf is now working with Green Light, a non-profit voluntary
organisation set up to help empower Muslim young people,
promote a better understanding of traditional Islam and build
better community relations and believes that he has brought
with him a key message from leading the Radio Ramadhan
project.
“I learnt that managing effectively means not trying to mould
everyone into yourself, but letting them develop their own
skills and talents”.

Where are we now?
We are committed to improving outcomes for all young people,
and to making sure that they have access to the opportunities
and support they need to enable them to succeed in life.
We have already made an unprecedented investment in
programmes to empower young people and it is now hard
to find a community where inspirational professionals and
volunteers have not helped young people to unlock talents they
did not know they had and used them to make a positive impact.
In July 2007 we launched Aiming high for young people: a ten
year strategy for positive activities. It builds on the good progress
we have made so far, making over 50 commitments aimed at
empowering young people and giving them access to more
leisure time opportunities, activities and support services.
Amounting to an investment of over £670 million in services and
positive activities for young people over the next three years, the
commitments include:
n the expansion of the Youth Opportunity Fund and
continuation of the Youth Capital Fund to give more young
people control of budgets and decision-making about
positive activities and facilities. Over 9,000 young people have
already been involved in decision making on these funds;
n investment in established schemes such as Positive Activities
for Young People and Youth Inclusion Programmes, which
re-engage the most disaffected young people through
structured positive activities that help build their confidence
and skills;
n support for third sector organisations that have developed
effective approaches to empowering young people to
engage their peers and work together to influence local
services;

investment in third sector organisations that support young
people to set up their own social enterprises to provide
positive activities to other young people; and
n unprecedented plans for new and improved youth facilities,
with additional money announced in the Children's Plan
to create a total new investment of around £200 million.
Young people will actively participate in the design, use and
governance of these facilities.
In 2007 we introduced new legislation which for the first
time requires local authorities to take young people's views
on the positive activities available in their area – including
leadership opportunities – and to take account of what they
say. But in Aiming high we went further and set out our long
term aspiration that, by 2018, young people could actively
shape decisions on 25 per cent of Local Authorities' budgets
for positive activities. Applying this approach to youth service
spending alone would amount to over £100 million across
England being devolved to young people's control.
Alongside Aiming high and following the white paper ‘Care
Matters: time for change', we committed to fund local authorities
to develop Children in Care Councils to ensure that children and
young people in care can shape and influence the services they
receive, and develop skills in doing so.
Leadership opportunities in education are now widespread
with citizenship a compulsory part of the National Curriculum
since 2002, providing students with opportunities to play
active roles within the life of their communities. Over 90% of
secondary schools develop pupils' entrepreneurial skills through
the provision of enterprise education at Key Stage 4 and over
95% of schools now have school councils giving pupils real
opportunities to lead in developing and influencing school
policies.

And through the Governance of Britain green paper, which
highlighted the importance of engaging young people as
citizens so they are able to take an active part in society, we
pledged to establish a Youth Citizenship Commission. The
Commission will consider how to increase young people's
participation in politics; the development of citizenship amongst
disadvantaged groups; how active citizenship can be promoted
through volunteering and community engagement; and how
the political system can reflect the communication preferences
of young people. It will also consider whether the voting age
should be lowered to 16.
Many more leadership opportunities are made possible by the
dedication and innovation of our third sector partners and local
children and young people's services. Whether in partnership
with Government or pursuing their own initiatives they are
transforming young people's lives. We believe they deserve to
be celebrated:
n The Jubilee Sailing Trust (JST) Youth Programme is a
unique leadership challenge for 16-25 year olds that takes
place on one of the JST's two tall ships – the Lord Nelson and
the Tenacious. The Youth Leadership members become part
of the crew and learn to sail and take part in problem solving
and team working activities to develop decision making,
leadership and team skills.
n At a national level over 500 young people have been elected
to the UK Youth Parliament (UKYP). Run by young people
for young people, UKYP provides opportunities for 11-18 year
olds to use their energy and passion to bring about social
change. Members include young men and women from a
variety of ethnic and cultural backgrounds and with physical
and learning disabilities.

The Football Association Young Leadership programme
ran a week long course in 2007 covering a wide range
of football disciplines and leadership skills for boys and
girls from a variety of backgrounds and abilities. Four of
the young leaders attending the course were selected to
travel to Malawi to support the International Placement
programme and support and run festivals for children in
Africa. In February 2008 some of the young leaders joined
with previous years to share and discuss ideas for this year's
course.
n Haringey Youth Leadership Programme is a new
initiative from the Peace Alliance which offers an inspirational
leadership programme for boys aged 8 or 9 and 14 or 15. The
programme is funded by the Haringey Safer Communities
Fund and offers young people the chance to take part in a
week-long summer camp, develop practical life skills and
benefit from after school support, learning and cultural trips,
parental support and Saturday school.
n The TUC Organising Academy places trainees within one of
the TUC's departments or partners and helps them develop
the skills of union organisers. The Organising Academy
Training programme, supported by Newcastle College,
provides organising related training for new and experienced
organisers; union officers involved in wider union activity and
lay reps and officials. All courses are accredited by the Open
College Network and are delivered free of charge.
n Since 2006, the volunteering charity v has been working
towards its target to engage 1 million new young volunteers,
building on the success of Millennium Volunteers. v will
be investing £75 million from April 2008 to create more
volunteering opportunities for young people.

In 2006, 800 young people, including a large number
from disadvantaged backgrounds, took part in residential
leadership programmes run by the Brathay Hall Trust.
13% of those taking part had a disability.
And there are many other such examples across the country.

CASE STUDY

Cambridgeshire Youth Parliament:
empowering disabled young people
Speaking Up is an award-winning national organisation which
helps people of all ages with learning difficulties, physical
disabilities and mental ill health to have a voice and create
change in their lives. It has set up the Cambridgeshire Youth
Parliament, to empower disabled young people to become
active citizens by influencing activities, services, and youth
strategies in their community.
Sean Anderson, 19, is a young man with learning difficulties
who has been elected by his peers to the Parliament. His
role is to find out what people with learning difficulties
and disabilities think about their services and campaign for
positive change.
Sean was really concerned that his local council planned to
sell off the only local hydrotherapy pool to developers. He led
a campaign to challenge the council's decision, took part in a
local debates, met his local Westminster MP to put forward the
Parliament's case and with the support of the Parliament team
made a petition to the council. After a sustained campaign
the decision was reversed and young people are once again
enjoying the facility.
Sean comments “I just like to speak up and make things
happen for the young people I represent”.

CASE STUDY

The Refugee Project: Volunteering and Mentoring
The Refugee Project, a student-led volunteering project at
University College London, was founded in 2007. Students
work with refugees and asylum seekers at a refugee centre
and help them build confidence and language skills through
weekly mentoring and group activities.
Wing Yi Kan, from Hong Kong, first became interested in
volunteering after a stint as a Young Envoy for Unicef. She is
now part of the leadership team for the Refugee Project.
“I would say doing things with passion is the most important,”
she says. “A leader's work is to inspire others to work for the
common good. Projects can only be sustainable if others
are inspired to do the work too. The most difficult thing is
retaining volunteers when they are in school. It's so hard to
keep the momentum going and the enthusiasm levels up.
I think I have a passion for volunteering so that is how I can
inspire my volunteers to work as well”.
