Access to Finance: New Policy Proposals
The new Enterprise Strategy sets out measures to:
 Help small businesses and entrepreneurs continue to secure the debt finance they
need to start up and grow.
 Help businesses finance their ambitions to grow by further strengthening the
Government's role in working with the finance market in the provision of equity
finance.
 Ensure entrepreneurs and businesses, particularly those from under-represented
communities, continue to have access to advice and support to help them become
investment ready before seeking finance.

Accessing and managing debt finance
Announcing changes to SFLG to enable businesses to access debt finance for start-up and growth through high street lenders during any period of financial market disruption:
Increasing the banks SFLG lending allocations by 20 per cent for one year –
this will increase the amount of lending available by £60 million to a total of £360
million.
Extending the eligibility of the Small Firms Loan Guarantee Scheme (SFLG) to
businesses with growth ambitions that are more than five years old, including,
but not limited to, those who have changed ownership
Public sector model contracts will be changed to enable businesses that use
factoring and invoice discounting to compete for public procurement opportunities.
Expansion of the Money Advice Trust's Business Debtline service – Government
funding with banks will more than double by 2010/11.
A number of proposals to support access to growth finance:
An additional £30 million capital commitment through the Enterprise Capital
Fund with the aim of stimulating the delivery of mezzanine finance through
ECFs. Commitment also to look at ways of stimulating mezzanine through
SFLG. Capital for Enterprise Limited (CfEL) has been asked to work with banks and
fund managers to seek to stimulate mezzanine through existing interventions.
Commitment of £12.5 million for capital fund focused primarily on investing in
women-led businesses. As part of the Government's development of investment
readiness support, the Government will invest £12.5 million in a co-investment fund
with the aim of securing a total of £25 million of investment, focusing primarily on
investing in women-led businesses. The fund, which will be developed and will test
the market for focused investment funds, will make links with providers of
investment readiness support, who will aim to provide increased networking
support for women-led businesses to other sources of finance.
Launch of a third round of Enterprise Capital Funds (ECF) – Capital for
Enterprise Limited will launch a third round of ECFs in April 2008, and will seek to
commit around £50 million of Government capital per year into ECFs for the next
three years. The Government has committed an additional £30 million over the next
three years through ECF programme aimed at stimulating mezzanine products.
Support and work with British Business Angel Association (BBAA) to develop
and build capacity in the Business Angel community.
Development of a national framework for the delivery of investment readiness
support, including targeted support for under-represented groups such as
women to help entrepreneurs understand how to finance their businesses and to
gain the specialist skills to be ready for investment.

Commitment to explore further non-legislative approaches to tackling late
payment – New good practice guidance on credit management and debt recovery
is being published. Non-legislative approaches will be explored over the next six
months.
Procurement – In addition, the Government has set up an advisory committee,
Chaired by Anne Glover (Chief Executive of Amadeus Capital Partners Limited), in
order to provide advice for the 2008 PBR on necessary Government action to
reduce the barriers to SMEs competing for public sector contracts, within the scope
of EU law and the policy objective of value for money and advise on the practicality
of setting a goal for SMEs to win 30 per cent of all public sector business in the next five years.

Chapter 5 – Regulatory Framework

The UK is a good place to do business
The UK regulatory framework is recognised as amongst the best in the world in terms of starting and growing a business. The 2008 World Bank Doing Business 
survey puts the UK 6th overall out of 178 economies.

Progress to date

In March 2005, the Government launched one of the most ambitious better regulation programmes in the world. Work to deliver a 25 per cent net reduction in administrative burdens by 2010, worth £3.5 billion annually to business, is on course with over £800 million annual net savings already secured. The steps to deliver a more effective inspection and proportionate, risk based, enforcement regime, recommended by Philip Hampton, are also well on track. Since 2005, 21 regulators have merged, with an additional seven mergers in the pipeline, and eleven regulators have been disbanded or have lost their inspection functions.
Other measures already introduced include the introduction of common commencement dates for new regulations (6 April and 1 October) providing certainty to businesses about when changes will be made, and on-line notifications of new regulations, to make it easier for businesses to find out when changes have been made.

Next Challenges

The challenge is to keep regulation to a minimum both in terms of quantity and
complexity. Perceptions of regulation and in particular the complexity of regulation, can adversely affect a decision to start up a business. Over a third of adults who are not considering starting up in business identify complexity as a barrier. Successive surveys by the Federation of Small Businesses have found that small businesses are more dissatisfied with the complexity of regulation than the volume and the cost of
compliance. Initiatives like common commencement dates can have a real impact on
small businesses.

Thinking small first – How we regulate small businesses

Regulation has a greater impact on small business. The Government will introduce a new approach to regulating small businesses. This may mean exempting small businesses from regulation or where that is not possible, other approaches such as simpler guidance and easy to use forms.

Guidance on regulation
Businesses often rely on guidance to ensure they comply with regulation. Where
guidance is unclear, small businesses often pay for external advice and may incur additional costs by over-complying. Small businesses want certainty when following
guidance so that they can be confident that they have complied with the requirements of the law.

Regulatory Framework: New Policy Proposals
Building on its already strong programme the Government is taking four new steps to
confirm the UK's position as having the world leading better regulation programme:
_ Regulatory budgets for Departments – The Government will consult on the
introduction of a new system of “regulatory budgets” for Departments which will
set out the cost to business of new regulation that can be introduced within a given
period. The Government will also consider whether as a first practical step a new
system should be piloted by focusing on the costs faced by SMEs or by a particular
sector. These budgets would take account of cost reductions achieved by
simplifying or removing existing regulation which impacts on business. No other
country in the world has taken this step.
_ Exemptions for small businesses (new regulations) – The Government will
introduce a new approach to regulating small firms. In the first instance, it will
examine whether small firms can be exempted from new regulatory requirements
or be subject to simplification of enforcement. In a large number of cases, this will
not be possible either for legal or policy reasons. In these circumstances,
Departments will seek to work with small firms to design specific approaches for
them. The approach taken to consider the needs of small firms will be outlined
when new legislation is laid before Parliament.

Exemptions for small businesses (existing legislation) – Government will review
existing legislation, ensuring that principles from the Hampton Report are
embedded, introducing new, or amended, exemptions for small businesses and
wherever possible simplifying inspection and enforcement regimes.
_ Improving the quality of guidance – Sarah Anderson10 will lead an independent
review to make recommendations on ways that the Government can ensure that
small businesses can place greater certainty on official guidance so that when they
have followed it they can be confident that they have met the requirements of the
law. The review will initially focus on employment law which is a key concern for
many small business owners.
Other issues affecting the UK's attractiveness as a place to do business
Improving the passenger experience at the UK's major airports, particularly Heathrow, is critical to UK competitiveness. To reduce delays for travellers at Heathrow, new targets are being introduced to reduce queuing at security along with incentives to invest in improved facilities for passengers, greater use of automated biometric technology and, together with airlines, development of the Fast Track route through immigration.

Chapter 6 – Business Innovation

Enabling our entrepreneurs to innovate and our innovators to be
entrepreneurial
Enterprise and innovation are inextricably linked; innovation drives business and business can drive innovation. The evolving global economy presents both challenges and opportunities for UK businesses. We need to compete on the basis of added value. Thus, it is ever more important that business can capitalise on its ideas and successfully commercialise new innovative products, processes and services. The Enterprise Strategy focuses on business innovation, while the Department for Innovation, Universities and Science's (DIUS) Science and Innovation White Paper – 'Innovation Nation' – published in parallel with the Enterprise Strategy – goes wider and addresses how innovation can be introduced at all levels of society. Both strategies look at driving productivity, prosperity and social benefits.

Progress to date

The Government's role is to provide a fertile environment for innovation. It addresses this through a range of measures including taxation, regulation, knowledge transfer, skills and business support. It has enjoyed considerable success:
_ There has been an increase in the proportion of UK businesses that are innovation
active. 64 per cent of UK businesses were innovation active in 2004-06. This
represents a significant increase in innovation activity over recent years11.
_ Innovation activity levels increased substantially across all enterprises, the largest
increase was reported by SMEs (10-249 employees).
_ BERR's Annual Small Business Survey 2006/07 shows that a third of SME
employers (33 per cent) had introduced significantly improved or new processes to
their businesses, an increase of 22 per cent on the previous year.
_ The Government incentivises business to invest in R&amp;D. Since their introduction in
2000, R&amp;D tax credits have successfully delivered more than £2.3 billion of support
to innovative UK companies, through almost 30,000 claims. R&amp;D tax credits
encourage greater R&amp;D activity by providing a tax credit for qualifying R&amp;D spend.
_ Support for individuals and SMEs who research and develop technologically
innovative products and processes is also provided by the Grant for R&amp;D scheme.
Since it started in 2003, over 1,600 businesses have claimed support, totalling more
than £130 million.

The value of Government contracts is significant to the private sector as a whole. To
open up the public procurement market to SMEs in particular, www.supply2.gov.uk
was launched, giving them the facility to search, be alerted to and view low-value
contract opportunities (including R&amp;D) across the public sector. More than 69,000
suppliers and 5,000 public sector buyers have registered on www.supply2.gov.uk,
and over 72,000 opportunities have been published on the portal since its launch
in 2006.
_ The new Technology Strategy Board (TSB) was created in 2007 to manage the
Government's programme of support for business innovation. It also promotes
business participation in European innovation programmes. During 2008-2011, the
TSB will invest over £720 million in innovation.

Next Challenges

_ The challenge for Government is to close the gap in research and development
performance with our competitors and to raise the levels of innovation in small
businesses. BERR's Annual Small Business Survey 2008 indicates that relatively
few UK businesses develop completely new or novel innovations. Slightly less than
half of SME employers (48 per cent) had introduced new or significantly improved
products or services in the past 12 months.




