3 MEETING THE PRODUCTIVITY CHALLENGE

Productivity growth underpins strong economic performance and sustained increases in
living standards. Raising productivity growth is critical to meeting the opportunities and
challenges of globalisation. Budget 2006 sets out the next steps the Government is taking
to strengthen the drivers of productivity growth, including:
• advancing the goals of the ten-year Science and Innovation Investment
Framework to maximise the impact of science funding, including an
intention to create a single health research fund of at least £1 billion per year, to
simplify radically institutional research funding, to expand R&amp;D support for midsized
companies and introduce a package of measures to improve science
teaching, raise the quality of science lessons and entitle able pupils to study three
separate sciences at GCSE;
• measures to reduce further burdens on business, including new
commitments to reduce the administrative burden of the tax system, introducing
the Hampton Review's principles into law, and a review of how the experiences of
large business can be taken into account in administering the tax system;
• a comprehensive package of measures to enhance the UK's position as
a leading location for inward investment, developing an ambitious
strategy for marketing the UK:
• promoting London as the world's leading international centre for
financial and business services, with a new strategy to be developed and
implemented by a high-level group representing the City's key interests by
summer 2006;
• establishing a new International Business Advisory Council comprising
some of the world's foremost business people;
• a programme of organisational changes to UK Trade and
Investment, with the aim of a fundamental transformation of its effectiveness
in marketing the UK;
• strengthening the UK's reputation as one of the world's best
locations for higher education, by boosting support for international
students to the UK, and establishing three new University Partnership
Schemes;
• building on the Government's commitment to raise skills levels by
investing in the reform of further education and training provision, and asking the
Leitch Review of Skills to report specifically on how skills and employment services
can complement each other;
• boosting access to finance to enable early-stage companies with real
growth potential to bridge the equity gap and progress through to
market, announcing a further £50 million in 2006-07 and £50 million in 2007-08
for the Enterprise Capital Funds scheme; and
• taking forward the Government's strategy for tackling the long-term
lack of supply and responsiveness of housing and property and
introducing Real Estate Investment Trusts to create greater flexibility for investors.

Globalisation and
Productivity

3.1 Long-term global economic challenges and opportunities for the UK, published
alongside the 2004 Pre-Budget Report, identified the opportunities and challenges created by
shifting economic activity and rapid technological change as faster information flows and
falling transport costs continue to break down geographical barriers to economic activity.
Globalisation and the UK: strength and opportunity to meet the economic challenge, published
on 2 December 2005, set out the UK's existing strengths and where it needs to build on
success, in order to thrive in a global environment. The latest data on international
comparisons of productivity show that recently the UK has made progress in narrowing the
productivity gap as set out in Box 3.1. This Budget sets out the Government's plans in these
areas, particularly on science and innovation, attracting global investment to the UK,
reducing the burdens on business and enhancing skills.
The UK's productivity framework and performance

The five driver
Framework

3.2 Alongside the Budget the Government is publishing Productivity in the UK 6: Progress
and new evidence, which analyses the UK's recent productivity performance relative to
comparator economies. It also sets out new evidence underlying the Government's five driver
framework, which provides the context for the Government's strategy for raising productivity
growth.
This Budget sets out reforms described in the context of the five key drivers of productivity:
• improving competition, vital for the adoption of innovation and increased
business efficiency;
• promoting enterprise, by removing barriers to entrepreneurship and
developing an enterprise culture;
• supporting science and innovation, given that increasing rewards to
innovation mean that the UK's economic success will depend on its ability to
create new knowledge and translate it into innovative goods and services;
• raising skills levels, to create a more flexible and productive workforce, which
can adopt innovative technologies and enable individuals to move into new
areas of work; and
• encouraging investment, to increase the stock of physical capital, including
through stronger, more efficient capital markets.

Box 3.1: UK productivity performance
An in-depth discussion of the UK's productivity performance can be found in Productivity
in the UK 6: Progress and new evidence published alongside Budget 2006.
In the long-run, productivity growth is the key driver of wages, profits and ultimately
overall prosperity. The latest data on international comparisons of productivity shows that
recently the UK has made progress in narrowing the international productivity gap. Chart
a below illustrates some of this progress. Since 1995 the UK has halved the output per
worker gap with France and closed the gap with Germany. Although the gap with the US
remains significant, the UK is the only country in the G7 to have kept pace with the US.
Productivity performance is likely to be dampened by periods of strong employment
growth. Historically, the UK has rarely experienced simultaneously strong employment
and productivity growth. Since 1997 the UK has witnessed strong employment growth,
with over 2.3 million more people being employed, alongside productivity growth. The UK
is experiencing the longest sustained period of productivity growth and employment
growth since the 1950's when records began. Chart b illustrates the UK''s recent success
in combining employment and productivity growth.

To assess progress on actual headline productivity performance and remove distortions
created by cyclical factors, judgements on productivity performance should be made
between on-trend points.
There is evidence that the UK has improved its trend productivity performance. Over the
first half of the current economic cycle, 1997-2001, which covers the period between the
first and second on-trend points in the cycle, actual productivity (trend output per hour
worked) growth was 2.59 per cent per annum. This is higher than the figure of just over 2
per cent annual actual productivity growth over each of the previous two economic cycles.

European
economic reform

3.3 Strengthening economic reform in Europe is a key priority for the UK. During the UK
Presidency of the EU, further steps were taken to reduce the burden of EU regulation on
business, strengthen the transatlantic economic relationship and deliver greater integration
in European financial services markets. Member States also submitted their first National
Reform Programmes setting out the policies they intend to pursue to promote growth,
employment creation and productivity1. The UK will continue to press for progress on this
agenda. Box 3.3 later in this chapter sets out the further steps that are needed to drive up
competition in the Single Market.

Productivity in
the regions

3.4 The Government is also committed to strengthening economic performance across
the regions, localities and countries of the UK, and to reducing the persistent gap in growth
rates between the regions. The nine Regional Development Agencies (RDAs) were therefore
set up to advance the shared growth priorities for each region and local area in England. The
three Northern RDAs have worked together with other regional and local partners to develop
the Northern Way Growth Initiative, which provides a long-term strategy for transforming the
economic performance of the North.
3.5 The RDAs were asked to contribute to the development of Budget 2006 in three key
areas: rationalising business support; creating links between the national and regional
frameworks on innovation; and increasing private investment in economic regeneration.
Budget 2006 announces measures developed with and building on the RDAs' input, set out
later in this chapter, including a commitment to a radical rationalisation of the number of
business support services.

Cities and
regional growth

3.6 The RDAs, together with other regional and local bodies, have developed effective
collaboration across city regions, in recognition of the the strong role that cities play in
regional economic growth. Examples of this include the Northern Way Growth Strategy and
the Regional Cities East Initiative. Through the State of the English Cities Report2 and
Devolving decision making: 3 – Meeting the regional economic challenge: The importance of
cities to regional growth,3 published alongside the Budget, the Government has been
analysing the contribution that cities make to regional economic performance. High
performing cities contribute to competitive regions, stimulating growth and employment,
promoting excellence in surrounding areas and joining up separate business hubs to expand
existing markets and create new ones. The Government's strategy for facilitating the
economic growth of London so that it secures its position as a high performing city to meet
the opportunities and challenges of globalisation, is set out in Box 3.2.
3.7 Given the importance of strong collaboration across regions, local areas and cities,
this analysis raises a series of challenges around how the Government builds on steps already
taken to devolve decision-making to the regional and local levels. In seeking to meet these
challenges, the Government will conduct a review to feed into the 2007 Comprehensive
Spending Review to explore the opportunities for further releasing the economic potential of
English regions, cities and localities, and to more effectively respond to the ongoing challenge
of tackling pockets of deprivation. Devolving decision making: 3 – Meeting the regional
economic challenge: The importance of cities to regional growthalso sets out the Government's
initial assessment of the role that cities play in driving both regional and national economic
growth. It explores both the current state of economic performance across English cities, and
the different challenges cities face in raising this performance and in reducing disparities in
outcomes for their residents.


Local Authority
Business Growth
Incentive Scheme

3.8 To create a direct financial incentive for local authorities to promote local business
growth the Government introduced the Local Authority Business Growth Incentive (LABGI)
scheme in April 2005. Local authorities receive a proportion of increases in local business rate
revenues to spend on their own priorities, in addition to the grant that they have already
received in the local government finance settlement. The Government announced the first
year of LABGI payments in February. In England, 266 local authorities received LABGI grants
for 2005-06, totalling £114 million. The Government estimates that local authorities in
England and Wales could gain up to £1 billion over the three years to 2007-08.

Box 3.2: London – meeting the challenges and opportunities of
globalisation
London is well positioned to respond effectively to the opportunities and challenges
presented by globalisation, benefiting from a long history of trading links across the world,
excellent business connectivity, well developed infrastructure, and a highly skilled and
flexible workforce supporting knowledge intensive economic activity. Its successful bid to
host the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games shows the confidence in London at both a
domestic and international level.
To build on this historically successful foundation and advance economic success in the
future, the Government, working in partnership with business and the Greater London
Authority, will:
• grant further strategic and delivery responsibilities to the Greater London
Authority (GLA), enabling the Mayor to better match provision of public services
to specific needs across the capital. The Minister for Local Government and
Communities will respond to the outcome of ODPM's consultation in the spring;
• bring together London's world-leading financial and business services industry in a
new high-level group to develop a single coherent strategy for promoting the city's
competitive advantages as a location for international finance, especially in
emerging markets such as India, China and the Middle East (as described in detail
later in this chapter and in Financial Services in London: Global Opportunities and
Challenges published alongside the Budget);
• set out a programme of work which will enhance the delivery of public services in
the capital, improve the opportunities available to Londoners – particularly those
in disadvantaged areas – and promote continued economic growth; and
• publish Employment opportunity for all: analysing labour market trends in London,
alongside this Budget, analysing the underlying reasons for low employment rates
in London compared to other parts of the country, as a basis for future policy
action (set out in detail in Chapter 4).
