CHAPTER 1
The Police Service in 2004–2005
I have said that this was a year characterised by hard
work and steady progress in an overall environment no
less demanding than other years. This chapter will set
out that work, and will outline some of the important
pointers towards the progress made by the Service in
its ambition to add value, by means of improved
performance, to the daily lives and economic well-being
of the communities it serves.

Counter-terrorism
Although falling strictly out of the scope of this Report, it is right that
I should make reference to the fact that on 7 July 2005, some 52 people
were murdered in London by terrorist bombs. What has been made
starkly clear is that the Service has once again been greatly assisted by the general
public, in two main ways. First, the information flowing into New Scotland Yard
from ordinary members of the public has been remarkable. I cannot exaggerate
how valuable that information has been in tracing suspects. Second, the vigilance
of the public has been vital in preventing further terrorist outrages of this kind.
The public has been the eyes and ears of the Service, recognising that however
hard police officers work – and work hard they do – they cannot possibly be
everywhere all of the time. The public's response has been truly remarkable.
What was also remarkable was the skill, effectiveness and professionalism of the
response of the emergency services to these awful events: lives undoubtedly
were saved.
Performance
Introduction
Traditionally, HMCIC's Annual Report has been a place for putting on record
a series of tables and figures which report various facts and data. For some time
now, HMIC has not had its own data capture system. Rather, we now rely on the
data capture processes of the Home Office. This has reduced the data collection
burdens of the Police Service, and ensures a single point for data receipt in the
Home Office.
We have also used in our Baseline Assessment methodology the sources of data
verified under the Policing Performance Assessment Framework, as I report later
in this chapter. I have reflected on this and have concluded that the finite space
available to me should be devoted to those performance issues which are of direct
relevance to the work of HMIC and which were of particular significance during
the year in question. Other statistical information may be accessed via
www.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds.

One further significant change is that data on complaints made against police
officers is now collected by the Independent Police Complaints Commission: my
Annual Reports will therefore no longer publish such information. If, however,
there was a significant matter in this area for me to comment on then, in
consultation with the Commission, I will do so. The work of the IPCC may
be viewed at www.IPCC.gov.uk.
Unless otherwise stated, the data detailed in this Report has been collected
directly from the forces themselves by the Home Office's Research, Development
and Statistics (RDS) resource, and I am grateful to them for the support which
they provide to HMIC. The data is considered to be accurate, although necessary
adjustments are sometimes made later.
A few words of warning before proceeding further. As ever, readers should be
aware that no two police forces are the same. Each force faces particular policing
challenges which arise out of the specific demographic and geographical
characteristics of the locality in which they operate. Clearly, the challenges which
arise from policing populous conurbations are considerably different from those
which the police face in large, sparsely populated areas. It goes without saying,
therefore, that the composition of recorded crime in each force varies, to some
degree, from the national picture. Similarly, the resource inputs and budget
allocations vary from force to force, and this too may impact on performance.
It must also be noted that quantitative data, used in isolation, cannot fully
provide a comprehensive overview of performance. In order to draw a more
comprehensive picture, HMIC, through its inspection and assessment activity,
contextualises the raw statistical data and, in partnership with our colleagues in
the Home Office, advises forces, Ministers and other stakeholders about the
performance trends in each force. Some of these complications may be addressed
by comparing a Basic Command Unit's or a force's performance with those in the
Most Similar Force groupings. The Policing Performance Assessment
Framework provides a structure by which more sophisticated comparative
analyses of performance – a prerequisite for the identification of those forces
which require the greatest performance improvements – can be produced.

Figure 1 is a breakdown of the notifiable offences which were recorded by the
Police Service in England and Wales between 1 April 2004 and 31 March 2005.
Three-quarters of the offences recorded during this period were related to
property (burglary, criminal damage, fraud and forgery, and theft). This is a slight
reduction on the figure of 78% of recorded crime which these offences constituted
in 2003–2004. Violent crime accounted for more than 20% of recorded offences.
However, almost half of violence against the person offences recorded by the police
involved no injury to the victim. Other crimes which are of interest to the media
(drugs, robberies and sexual offences) accounted for just 5.3% of all recorded crimes.
During 2004–2005, 5.6 million offences were recorded by the police: a year-onyear
decrease of 6%. This was the first decrease in recorded crime since the Home
Office introduced new counting rules in April 1998.
The British Crime Survey estimates that overall crime, including those offences
which were unreported and unrecorded, fell by 7% during this period. This was
the tenth successive fall in the BCS crime rate: BCS crime has now decreased by
44% from its peak in 1995. The BCS figures also indicate that the risk of becoming
a victim of crime during the past year was lower than at any time since the BCS
was launched in 1981.

Figure 2 reveals how the number of offences recorded by the Service has changed
between last year and this year. The Government's three priority offences show
decreases: 17% in the case of both vehicle crime and burglaries, and 12% in the case
of robberies. There were sizeable increases in the incidence of violence against the
person and sexual offences, although the 17% increase in sexual offences is primarily
due to the change in recording practices for indecent exposure: these offences
previously were classified as “other offences”, whereas now they fall into the new
category of “miscellaneous sexual offences”.

Figure 3 shows the percentage change in vehicle crime per 1,000 population in each force
between last year and this year. As may be seen, this year has witnessed a decrease in the
volume of recorded vehicle crime offences, with all forces bar one achieving a reduction
from last year. This is a highly creditable result, and the Service is to be commended.
Since their peak in 1995, recorded crimes of this type have fallen by 44%, while British
Crime Survey figures show a 57% reduction over the same period.

Figure 4 shows the percentage change in domestic burglary per 1,000 households
in each force between last year and this year. All but two of the 43 English and
Welsh forces recorded fewer domestic burglaries than during the previous 12
months, which was a considerable improvement on last year. Taking England and
Wales as a whole, the number of domestic burglaries recorded by the police fell by
17%; according to the British Crime Survey, underlying offences also fell, by 20%.
The reduction in offences recorded this year was the second in succession.
This is all very good news indeed: the Service should once again be proud of
its achievements.

Figure 5 shows the percentage change in the number of robberies recorded per
1,000 population in each force between last year and this year. As may be seen,
40 of the 43 English and Welsh forces witnessed a reduction in the number of
recorded offences last year: once again, a significant improvement. Looking at the
national picture, robbery offences have now fallen for three consecutive years,
decreasing by 12% during the 12 months to April 2005. This contrasts with other
recorded violent crimes which, primarily due to the continuing effects of the
National Crime Recording Standard (introduced in 2002) and the reclassification
of indecent exposure offences just mentioned, once again increased this year.
The Government's Public Service Agreement target on street robbery – to
reduce robbery in the ten Street Crime Initiative areas by 14% from 1999–2000
levels by 2005 and to maintain that level – focused on the forces shown in Figure 6.
This is the last year of this initiative.

These ten areas accounted for 77% of the robbery offences recorded in England
and Wales in 2004–2005, slightly up on the previous year. Clearly, focus on this
particular menace must be sustained. Overall, though, we can discern some
success in this. The Street Crime Initiative has reversed the steep upward trend in
robbery seen from 1999 to 2001. Robbery has fallen by 32% in the ten street crime
forces when comparing provisional figures for 2004–2005 with the start of the
initiative in 2002 when robbery had reached its peak. This means that there have
been 32,527 fewer victims.

This work continues. A report published by the London School of Economics
in March 2005 indicates that the initiative has been cost effective. The economic
and social cost of the robberies prevented in the first two years of the initiative is
estimated to have been between £107 and £130m, which exceeds the average
annual cost (£24.1m per year) of the initiative. Although the initiative itself has
ended, funding has been made available to the ten Street Crime Initiative forces in
2005–2006. This is to ensure that achievements of the initiative are sustained and
that the good practice learnt continues to be applied as well as shared with other
non-street crime areas.

Detections
Detecting crime is central to reassuring the public and reducing offending.
The Service detected 1,428,513 crimes in 2004–2005, an increase of 2.5% from
the previous 12 months. The overall detection rate for all crimes recorded in
2004–2005 was 25.7%. This represents an increase of 2.2 percentage points from
2003–2004, following a four-year period during which the rate remained fairly
stable. This was also the highest detection rate since the Home Office issued
Detection Guidance in 1999–2000.
The year 2004–2005 saw increased detection rates in all the main volume crime
categories, and between 2003–2004 and 2004–2005:
• robbery detection rate has increased to 19.9% from 18.4%;
• violent crime to 49.5% from 46.8%;
• domestic burglary to 15.9% from 15%; and
• vehicle crime to 10.1% from 9%.
I am extremely pleased to record this encouraging development. Figure 7 provides
a more detailed breakdown, using data from the Home Office's Research,
Development and Statistics resource.

Figure 8 shows that the number of 999 calls fell slightly between 2003–2004 and
2004–2005 (by 1.4%), while the percentage of such calls responded to within the
target time rose by 0.8%. This result should be seen in the context of the thematic
inspection report “First Contact”, referred to in Chapter 2.
Race and criminal justice
Racist incidents
During 2004–2005, seven forces experienced a fall in the number of reported racial
incidents, and 34 saw an increase (two forces are presently unable to provide
information). In 2004–2005, 55,389 racial incidents were reported: an overall
increase from 2003–2004 of 8.6%.
It is possible that these figures contain a measure of change in recording
practices. However, we are confident that there is an underlying trend of
increased reporting, as victims and communities become ever more confident in
the ability of the Police Service to pursue such incidents. I see this as a very
important indicator of public confidence in the Service.
