Policy through dialogue: informing policies based on science and technology 
A report from the Council for Science and Technology, March 2005 
Summary and recommendations 
The returns on the government's ten-year investment framework for science and innovation will be at risk if there is not broad public support for its policies in areas related to science and technology. Some developments in science and technology have attracted considerable public controversy that governments have been poorly equipped to respond to in ways that command public and stakeholder confidence. 
Although government has recognised that engaging experts, stakeholders and the public in the development of science-based policies can inform its thinking and help to develop policies that carry greater support, the standard methods of engagement are limited in what they can offer. The time is ripe for government to engage earlier and more deeply with the public in the development of policies and priorities, so that they are informed by public aspirations and concerns from the outset. 
The government has taken the first, welcome steps in this regard. It now needs to generate a change in culture across government to ensure that non-expert and non-partisan perspectives are used effectively to inform the development of policies that are based on science and technology. 
This change in culture will require mechanisms for: 

• identifying issues where an investment in public dialogue is likely to bring benefit; 

• ministerial buy-in to the purpose of any dialogue process and commitment to explain how the dialogue has informed government policy or thinking; 

• appropriate means of governance and resourcing; 

• a capacity within government to learn from experience and improve the process. 

The Council for Science and Technology recommends to government: 

1. Government at the highest level should adopt an explicit framework for the use of public dialogue to inform science and technology related policies (paragraphs 16 - 43). 

2. The purpose of dialogue is not to determine but to inform policy. It does this by challenging the thinking of policymakers and scientists who contribute to policy making, as well as that of the public, stakeholders and special interest groups. Government must retain responsibility for decision-making (paragraphs 12 – 15). 

3. Government should establish clear criteria for identifying and prioritising areas that could usefully be explored through dialogue processes. These will range from longstanding areas of controversy to new, emerging issues. This role could be taken on by the new Centre of Excellence in science and technology horizon scanning (paragraphs 17-21 and box 2). 


4. Each instance of dialogue should have clear governance arrangements with three specific roles: sponsor (responsible for setting objectives and using the outcomes of the dialogue process); directors (to oversee the process) and contractors (to manage the process) (paragraphs 26 - 31). 

5. The sponsor of any dialogue process should state publicly: 


• the purpose of the process; 

• when and how they will publish a report of the process; 

• how the results of the process have informed government thinking and been taken into account in any resultant policy decisions (paragraphs 22-25). 


6. The revised Guidelines 2000: scientific advice and policy making should reflect OST's guiding principles for the government's approach to public dialogue on science and technology (paragraphs 26 - 31) 

7. Sufficient resources (funding, staff expertise and time) must be in place before government commits to any dialogue process (paragraphs 32 - 39). 

8. Government should work with others, including research councils, universities, professional bodies and industry, to build a wider capacity to engage with the public through dialogue (paragraphs 33 - 36). 

9. Government should create a mechanism that enables: 


• development of a corporate memory based on formal and informal evaluations of dialogue processes that have been used to inform science and technology policy; 

• sharing of this information across government and its non-departmental public bodies; 

• generation of a change in culture where dialogue is seen as a normal part of government's policy development processes on science and technology related issues (paragraphs 40 - 43). 

Science as a driver of change 

1. New scientific knowledge is being created at an unprecedented rate. It offers opportunities for new technologies and new understanding about the nature, health and welfare of individuals, society and the environment. 

2. Governments worldwide recognise the potential of these developments to contribute to their national economies and quality of life. For this reason, EU governments have committed themselves to an increase in investment in research to 3% of GDP within the decade and the UK government has developed a ten-year investment framework for science and innovation1. 

3. Science is not only a driver of technological innovations, which strongly shape societal change. It has also become an increasingly important resource for public policy, where it contributes to responses to challenges as diverse as climate change, the ageing population and national security. 

The issue 

4. In the UK, public confidence in the way that science is used by government has been rocked by its handling of science-related issues such as BSE, GM and MMR. For some important and difficult issues, this decline in confidence, which may be part of a wider trend of disengagement from government and a decline in deference to authority, has begun to inhibit decision making. (The government's push for greater collaboration between universities and business may inadvertently serve to increase this problem, given the public's greater distrust of industry-funded scientists compared to academic scientists2.) Unless this trend can be stemmed or reversed, there is a risk that many of the economic and social benefits that might otherwise flow from the government's ten-year investment framework for science and innovation will be jeopardised. 

5. Three issues lie close to the heart of the problem. Firstly, government, and some scientists, are inclined to misrepresent science as certainty. This is far from the case for much of the new science that drives innovative technologies and underlies many policy initiatives. Secondly, public concerns have often been assumed to focus around the risks that arise from scientific uncertainty. Thirdly, scientific inputs to the policy making process often hide un-stated assumptions, for example based on personal values, that need to be questioned and openly discussed in debates about policy. 

6. Public concerns can rarely be reduced simply to scientific issues. They are often a complex combination of: judgements about the way that scientific uncertainties have been handled and presented; questions about the assumptions that underlie judgements that are presented as purely scientific; valuations of costs and benefits; questions about controlling interests; and views on the kind of world we want to live in. By presenting issues such as the disposal of nuclear waste (see box 1) as primarily scientific, governments, industry and scientists have failed to engage with the diverse nature of much public concern, and have consequently failed to create acceptable public policy. 

Box 1: Radioactive Waste Management 
In 1976 the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution first drew attention to the need for the UK to find a long term solution for the storage of its civil and military nuclear waste3. Thirty years later, our radioactive waste remains in temporary surface stores. 
The intervening years have seen several policies abandoned: sea dumping was halted in 1982; investigations into near-surface storage options were terminated in 1987; and a policy of deep disposal was frozen in 1997 when planning permission to construct an underground test laboratory at Sellafield was refused. Each of these decisions has been at least in part driven by high levels of public concern and significant activity from interest groups. 
Nirex, the nuclear industry body established in 1982 and charged with identifying a long-term solution, did engage with the public during the 1980s. However, the engagement was focussed narrowly on issues around risk. Since 1997, there has been a change in approach and the issue has been redefined: from a technical challenge to be solved by engineers; to a social challenge that science and technology can help to solve. Further, in recognition of the importance of institutional arrangements to public confidence, Nirex was made independent in 2004. 
UK national consensus conference on nuclear waste management (1999) 
Nirex, OST and NERC jointly sponsored a consensus conference, which was overseen by an independent panel. Fifteen members of the general public were invited to take part. They spent time familiarising themselves with the subject before cross-examining experts from industry, government and environmental groups, and writing a report of their findings. Considerable effort was made to stimulate wider debate through the media, but coverage was limited, perhaps because of the pragmatic nature of the panel's conclusions and the challenge of persuading the media that this conference was different from other public meetings. The need for greater openness and transparency was a key theme throughout. Developments in government policy since 1999 do chime with the recommendations of the panel, including the establishment of CoRWM (see below), although there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate a direct link. 
Committee on Radioactive Waste Management (CoRWM) 
CoRWM, established by government in 2003, is tasked with reviewing the options for long term waste management in dialogue with the public and stakeholders, and recommending a publicly and technically acceptable solution. This is a major test for the value of extended engagement processes in resolving difficult, long-term issues and we will watch its progress with interest. CoRWM faces a number of particular challenges: 

• Its advice must be credible with expert scientists and engineers as well as with the public. CoRWM's technical competence has already been challenged.4 

• Public interest in nuclear waste has been most strongly expressed locally to possible storage sites. CoRWM needs to generate public interest in more abstract discussions. 

• There are no plans at present to build new nuclear power stations in the UK, but there is ongoing speculation around whether government intends to start to exploring this option more seriously. A change in policy on nuclear new-build could mean that CoRWM has to operate in a very different public arena. 

• CoRWM is under pressure from government to report more quickly that it would like to. Government initially asked CoRWM to report before the end of 2005. CoRWM judged that this timescale would not allow them to deliver a sound report; they proposed reporting in November 2006. It has now been agreed that they should report by July 2006. 

• Two government departments have an interest in CoRWM's work: Defra, who have responsibility for nuclear waste; and DTI, who have responsibility for energy supplies. CoRWM has commented to us that its relationships with the two departments are rather different, we hope that this will not prevent government from making best use of their advice. 

The need for deeper public engagement 

7. The government routinely engages with experts and stakeholders to inform its thinking. Early in the development of policy, government may approach scientific advisory bodies for their input and meet both formally and informally with stakeholders from the public and private sectors. Later in the process, government may seek views on its proposals through written consultations5, which are publicly available but tend to attract responses only from stakeholders and those with a pre-existing strong interest in the area. 

8. This engagement is necessary, but often not sufficient. The policies that emerge from it have sometimes been difficult or impossible to implement because they fail to take account of broader public concerns. They thereby feed an atmosphere of distrust that has, arguably, made policy development in some areas progressively more difficult. Policy makers and scientists need to be ready to reflect on and question the thinking that underpin their work. 

9. A mood for change has been developing for several years, particularly since the publication of the House of Lords Science and Technology Committee report on Science and Society in 2000. The government should now capitalise on this mood by ensuring that alongside input from an appropriate range of experts, meaningful engagement with the public is routinely used to inform the development of science- and technology-based policies 



