Chapter 1– Introduction: working together to safeguard and promote the welfare of children and families

Supporting children and families
1.1 All children deserve the opportunity to achieve their full potential.We set this out in
five outcomes that are key to children and young people's wellbeing:
l stay safe
l be healthy
l enjoy and achieve
l make a positive contribution
l achieve economic wellbeing.
1.2 To achieve this, children need to feel loved and valued, and be supported by a network of reliable and affectionate relationships. If they are denied the opportunity and support they need to achieve these outcomes, children are at increased risk not only of an impoverished childhood, but also of disadvantage and social exclusion in adulthood. Abuse and neglect pose particular problems.
Parenting, family life and services
1.3 Patterns of family life vary and there is no one, perfect way to bring up children.
Good parenting involves caring for children's basic needs, keeping them safe, showing them warmth and love, and providing the stimulation needed for their development and to help them achieve their potential, within a stable environment where they experience consistent guidance and boundaries.
1.4 Parenting can be challenging. Parents themselves require and deserve support.
Asking for help should be seen as a sign of responsibility rather than as a parenting failure.
1.5 A wide range of services and professionals provide support to families in bringing up children. In the great majority of cases, it should be the decision of parents when to ask for help and advice on their children's care and upbringing. However, professionals do also need to engage parents early when to do so may prevent problems or difficulties becoming worse. Only in exceptional cases should there be compulsory intervention in family life – e.g. where this is necessary to safeguard a child from significant harm. Such intervention should – provided this is consistent with the safety and welfare of the child –
 support families in making their own plans for the welfare and protection of their children.
The inquiry into the death of Victoria Climbié, and the Chief Inspectors' safeguarding reports

1.6 Shortcomings when working to safeguard and promote children's welfare were brought into the spotlight once again with the death of Victoria Climbié and the subsequent inquiry. The inquiry revealed themes identified by past inquiries that resulted in a failure to intervene early enough. These included: poor co-ordination; a failure to share information; the absence of anyone with a strong sense of accountability; and frontline workers trying to cope with staff vacancies, poor
management and a lack of effective training (Cm 5860, p.5).
1.7 The examination of the legislative framework for safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children set out in the Children Act 1989 found it to be basically sound: the difficulties lay not in relation to the law but in its interpretation, resources and implementation. The recommendations from the inquiry upheld the principles of the Children Act 1989 and made it clear that support services for children and families cannot be separated from services designed to investigate and protect children from deliberate harm.
1.8 In 2002, eight inspectorates published their report, Safeguarding Children, following joint inspections of children's safeguards. The inspectorates found that the priority given to safeguarding was not reflected firmly, coherently or consistently enough in service
planning and resource allocation.
1.9 A second joint Chief Inspectors' Report on Safeguarding Children was published in July 2005.This report showed that since 2002, the priority given to safeguarding children across agencies has increased, and children are listened to and consulted better. Agencies are also working better together to identify and act on welfare concerns. However, the
report identified some specific concerns about the priority given to safeguarding in practice and the safeguarding arrangements for particular groups of children, including disabled children and children living away from home.
The Government's response
1.10 The Government's response to the Victoria Climbié inquiry report and the first joint Chief Inspectors' Report (Cm 5861) identified the key features of an effective system to safeguard children. These informed the Green Paper Every Child Matters (Cm 5860) and the Children Act 2004, in particular the plans for integration of services around the needs of
children through the creation of children's trusts, the requirement for local authorities (LAs) to set up Local Safeguarding Children Boards (LSCBs) and the new duty on agencies to make arrangements to safeguard and promote the welfare of children.
1.11 As part of its response to the Victoria Climbié inquiry, the Government published practice guidance to assist practitioners to work together to safeguard and promote the welfare of children and safeguard them from harm (Department of Health et al. (2003) What To Do If You're Worried A Child Is Being Abused).The document summarises the key processes set out in Chapter 5 of this guidance.
An integrated approach
1.12 Children have varying needs that change over time. Judgements on how best to intervene when there are concerns about harm to a child will often, and unavoidably, entail an element of risk – at the extreme, of leaving a child for too long in a dangerous situation or of removing a child unnecessarily from his or her family. The way to proceed in the face of uncertainty is through competent professional judgements, based on a sound assessment of the child's needs, the parents' capacity to respond to those needs – including their capacity to keep the child safe from significant harm – and the wider family circumstances.
1.13 Effective measures to safeguard children are those that also promote their welfare.
They should not be seen in isolation from the wider range of support and services already provided and available to meet the needs of children and families:
- enquiries under s47 of the Children Act 1989 may reveal significant unmet needs for support and services among children and families. These should always be explicitly considered, even where concerns are not substantiated about significant harm to a child, if the family so wishes
- if processes for managing concerns about individual children are to result in improved outcomes for children, then effective plans for safeguarding and promoting children's welfare should be based on a wide-ranging assessment of the needs of the child, parental capacity and their family circumstances.

A shared responsibility
1.14 Safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children – and in particular protecting them from significant harm – depends on effective joint working between agencies and professionals that have different roles and expertise. Individual children, especially some of the most vulnerable children and those at greatest risk of social exclusion, will need coordinated help from health, education, children's social care, and quite possibly the voluntary sector and other agencies, including youth justice services.
1.15 In order to achieve this joint working, there need to be constructive relationships between individual workers, promoted and supported by:
- a strong lead from elected or appointed authority members, and the commitment of chief officers in all agencies – in particular, the LA's Director of Children's Services and Lead Member for Children's Services2
- effective local co-ordination by the LSCB in each area.
1.16 For those children who are suffering, or at risk of suffering, significant harm, joint working is essential, to safeguard and promote welfare of the child(ren) and, where necessary, to help bring to justice the perpetrators of crimes against children. All agencies
and professionals should:
- be alert to potential indicators of abuse or neglect
- be alert to the risks that individual abusers, or potential abusers, may pose to children
- share and help to analyse information so that an assessment can be made of the child's needs and circumstances
- contribute to whatever actions are needed to safeguard and promote the child's welfare
- take part in regularly reviewing the outcomes for the child against specific plans
- work co-operatively with parents, unless this is inconsistent with ensuring the child's safety.
Key definitions and concepts
Children
1.17 In this document, as in the Children Acts 1989 and 2004, a child is anyone who has not yet reached their 18th birthday. ‘Children' therefore means ‘children and young people' throughout. The fact that a child has reached 16 years of age, is living independently or is in further education, is a member of the armed forces, is in hospital, in prison or in a Young Offenders' Institution, does not change his or her status or entitlement to services or protection under the Children Act 1989.
Safeguarding and promoting welfare, and child protection
1.18 Safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children is defined for the purposes of this guidance as:
- protecting children from maltreatment
- preventing impairment of children's health or development
- ensuring that children are growing up in circumstances consistent with the provision of safe and effective care and undertaking that role so as to enable those children to have optimum life chances and
to enter adulthood successfully.
1.19 Protecting children from maltreatment is important in preventing the impairment of health or development. Protecting children from maltreatment and preventing impairment of children's health and development are necessary, but not sufficient to ensure that children are growing up in circumstances consistent with the provision of safe and effective care. These aspects of safeguarding and promoting welfare are cumulative, and all contribute to the outcomes set out in paragraph 1.1.
1.20 Child protection is a part of safeguarding and promoting welfare. This refers to the activity that is undertaken to protect specific children who are suffering, or are at risk of suffering, significant harm.
1.21 Effective child protection is essential as part of wider work to safeguard and promote the welfare of children. However, all agencies and individuals should aim proactively to safeguard and promote the welfare of children so that the need for action to protect children from harm is reduced. 
Children in need
1.22 Children who are defined as being ‘in need', under s17 of the Children Act 1989, are those whose vulnerability is such that they are unlikely to reach or maintain a satisfactory level of health or development, or their health and development will be significantly
impaired, without the provision of services (s17(10) of the Children Act 1989), plus those who are disabled. The critical factors to be taken into account in deciding whether a child is in need under the Children Act 1989 are: 
- what will happen to a child's health or development without services being provided;
and
- the likely effect the services will have on the child's standard of health and development.
LAs have a duty to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in need.
The concept of significant harm
1.23 Some children are in need because they are suffering, or likely to suffer, significant harm. The Children Act 1989 introduced the concept of significant harm as the threshold that justifies compulsory intervention in family life in the best interests of children, and gives LAs a duty to make enquiries to decide whether they should take action to safeguard
or promote the welfare of a child who is suffering, or likely to suffer, significant harm.
1.24 A court may make a care order (committing the child to the care of the LA) or supervision order (putting the child under the supervision of a social worker or a probation officer) in respect of a child if it is satisfied that:
- the child is suffering, or is likely to suffer, significant harm; and
- the harm, or likelihood of harm, is attributable to a lack of adequate parental care or control (s31).
1.25 There are no absolute criteria on which to rely when judging what constitutes significant harm. Consideration of the severity of ill-treatment may include the degree and the extent of physical harm, the duration and frequency of abuse and neglect, the extent of premeditation, and the presence or degree of threat, coercion, sadism and bizarre or
unusual elements. 

