Wednesday 8 November 2006
FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH OFFICE
Sanctions Regimes (Revised)
The Minister for the Middle East (Dr. Kim Howells): The Government have committed themselves to informing Parliament on an annual basis of the sanctions regimes being implemented by the United Kingdom. Currently the United Kingdom implements United Nations sanctions in relation to al-Qaeda and the Taliban, Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Liberia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Sudan and Somalia. The UK also implements sanctions regimes imposed autonomously by the EU in relation to Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burma, China, the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (in connection with individuals indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia), Moldova, Sudan, Uzbekistan and Zimbabwe. In accordance with a decision of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe, the United Kingdom implements arms embargoes on Armenia and Azerbaijan. The Government also take full account of the Economic Community of West African States moratorium on certain exports of small arms and light weapons to Economic Community of West African States members. A full list of sanctions regimes and restrictive measures implemented by the UK has been published on the Foreign and Commonwealth Office website at: www.fco.gov.uk/sanctions.
HOME DEPARTMENT
Criminal Justice
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Gerry Sutcliffe): The Government are committed to rebalancing the criminal justice system in favour of victims and the law-abiding majority.
It is wrong for convicted criminals to profit from their crimes now or in the future, whether directly from the proceeds of the crime itself or indirectly through cashing in on the story of their crime. It is contrary to the principles of natural justice that they should be able to exploit for financial gain crimes which have devastated the lives of victims and their families.
Together with the Scottish Executive and my ministerial colleague at the Northern Ireland Office, the hon. Member for Delyn (Mr. Hanson), we will be 
8 Nov 2006 : Column 44WS
publishing on Friday 10 November a consultation paper setting out a range of possible options for tackling this problem.
I will be placing copies of the consultation in the House Libraries. We would welcome comments on the proposals it contains.
Sentencing Consultation
The Secretary of State for the Home Department (John Reid): I am informing the House of my intention to publish shortly a consultation document entitled “Making Sentencing Clearer”. This document meets the commitment I made in July, in the review of the criminal justice system, to bring forward with the Lord Chancellor and the Attorney-General a consultation on a number of sentencing and related issues.
The consultation outlines proposals for building better public understanding and confidence in the way sentences are handed down by judges and magistrates. The consultation also makes proposals for providing sentencers with more flexibility in sentencing dangerous offenders and proposals designed to focus probation resources on the more serious offenders.
Copies of the consultation will be placed in the Library and on the Home Office website.
TRANSPORT
Aircrafts Registers
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Transport (Gillian Merron): On 1 August 2005 the Department launched a consultation paper seeking views on the principle of whether foreign registered aircraft based in the UK being used for non-commercial purposes should be required to be placed on the UK or another EU register. This would ensure that the safety of such aircraft was overseen by the Civil Aviation Authority or another EU aviation authority and that they were operated to European safety standards.
The Government have considered the responses to the consultation carefully and have decided that it would not be appropriate at this time to introduce a requirement to place such aircraft on the UK register.
The Government response to the consultation has today been published and is available on the Department's website at: www.dft.gov.uk. Copies have also been placed in the House Libraries.
The response explains that the Government's objective remains that aircraft based in the UK should be required to meet safety standards acceptable within Europe and be subject to checking by the UK and other European aviation authorities.
European proposals published in November 2005 to extend the scope of common European aviation safety rules may provide scope for a better means of achieving that objective in a proportionate way. Stakeholders 
8 Nov 2006 : Column 45WS
have been consulted generally on the proposal “To amend Regulation (EC) No 1592/2002 on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European Aviation Safety Agency”. This proposal specifically amends the scope of the EASA Regulation to include a category of aircraft registered in a third 
8 Nov 2006 : Column 46WS
country and used into, within or out of the Community by an operator established or residing in the Community. Detailed implementing rules will be needed to give force to this amendment and we would expect the agency to consult stakeholders on the details of their proposals at the appropriate time.
Written Answers to Questions
Wednesday 8 November 2006
FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH OFFICE
Adapted Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty
Harry Cohen: To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what the position is on the proposal for an Adapted Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty; and if she will make a statement. [100435]
Mr. McCartney: It has not proved possible to respond to my hon. Friend in the time available before Prorogation.
Afghanistan
Mr. Hague: To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs pursuant to her answer of 30 October 2006, Official Report, column 242W, on Afghanistan, what measures the Pakistan President indicated would be taken to deal with the Taliban and reduce the level of activity across the border into Afghanistan. [100420]
Mr. McCartney: It has not proved possible to respond to the right hon. Member in the time available before Prorogation.
Mr. Hague: To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what progress has been made in implementing the Action Plan for Peace, Reconciliation and Justice in Afghanistan; and whether she expects the programme to meet commitments set out in the Afghanistan Compact. [100437]
Mr. McCartney: It has not proved possible to respond to the right hon. Member in the time available before Prorogation.
Mr. Hague: To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what representations have been received from the Pakistan Government on steps to secure the Pakistan-Afghanistan border; and what UK assistance is being considered. [100438]
Mr. McCartney: It has not proved possible to respond to the right hon. Member in the time available before Prorogation.
Mr. Hague: To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs when the last annual review under the terms of the Enduring Relationship Declaration between the UK and Afghanistan took place; what the findings of the review were; and what priorities were agreed for the next period. [100439]

8 Nov 2006 : Column 1504W
Mr. McCartney: It has not proved possible to respond to the right hon. Member in the time available before Prorogation.
Cluster Munitions
Nick Harvey: To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs whether she plans to call for a ban on cluster munitions at the Conference on Certain Conventional Weapons. [100427]
Mr. McCartney: It has not proved possible to respond to the hon. Member in the time available before Prorogation.
Harry Cohen: To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what assessment her Department's human rights monitors have made of the use of cluster bombs; why those used in the Lebanon-Israel conflict were not referred to in her Department's Human Rights Annual Report 2006; if she will ensure that such a reference is included in the next report; and if she will make a statement. [100456]
Mr. McCartney: It has not proved possible to respond to my hon. Friend in the time available before Prorogation.
Cuba
Dr. Gibson: To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what recent discussions have taken place between her Department's officials and officials from the US Administration about Cuba. [100412]
Mr. McCartney: It has not proved possible to respond to my hon. Friend in the time available before Prorogation.
EU Member States (Visa Requirements)
Mr. Weir: To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (1) what recent discussions she has had with the relevant departments of the Governments of (a) other European Union states and (b) candidate states for admission to the European Union on the visa requirements for entry of (i) British subjects and (ii) British citizens; [92771]
(2) which (a) nations within the European Union and (b) candidate states for entry to the European Union apply different visa requirements for (i) British subjects and (ii) British citizens. [92768]
Mr. Byrne: I have been asked to reply.
There are no visa requirements for British citizens or British subjects who fall under Article 17 of the EC Treaty who wish to travel to countries in the EU. However, all the EU member states (excluding the UK) impose visa requirements on certain British nationals who do not fall under this definition. This depends on the category of passport they hold (e.g. British Overseas Citizen passport or British Protected Persons passport) and the length of stay in a member state.
With regard to the candidate countries wishing to join the European Union (Romania, Bulgaria, Croatia and Turkey), only Turkey requires British citizens or 
8 Nov 2006 : Column 1505W
subjects as defined under Article 17 of the EC Treaty to obtain a visa. All candidate countries currently impose visa requirements on certain British nationals depending on the category of passport they hold.
The Government have participated in discussions with all EU member states, Bulgaria and Romania as part of negotiations on a European Commission proposal to amend the Common Visa List. The Common Visa List applies to Schengen participants that implement the Schengen visa provisions (this excludes the UK and the Republic of Ireland). The current proposals would give British Nationals (Overseas) visa-free access, but would retain the visa requirement for certain other categories of British national (namely British Overseas Citizens and British Protected Persons). We will keep Parliament informed of progress on negotiations.
Iraq
Harry Cohen: To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs whether reports produced by the International Tax and Investment Centre have been forwarded by (a) the UK's Ambassador to Iraq and (b) his office to (i) Ministers in the Iraqi government and (ii) the Coalition Provisional Authority since March 2003; and if she will make a statement. [100404]
Mr. McCartney: It has not proved possible to respond to my hon. Friend in the time available before Prorogation.
Harry Cohen: To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what her Department's position is on the proposed extradition to Iran of the Iranian dissidents in Camp Ashraf, South East Baghdad; and if she will make a statement. [100405]
Mr. McCartney: It has not proved possible to respond to my hon. Friend in the time available before Prorogation.
Harry Cohen: To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs on what dates since March 2003 (a) the UK's Ambassador to Iraq and (b) her officials have met International Tax and Investment Centre representatives; what subjects were discussed; and if she will make a statement. [100407]
Mr. McCartney: It has not proved possible to respond to my hon. Friend in the time available before Prorogation.
Israel
Mr. Moore: To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what representations she has made to the Government of Israel on its military incursions in Gaza; and if she will make a statement. [100389]
Mr. McCartney: It has not proved possible to respond to the hon. Member in the time available before Prorogation.

8 Nov 2006 : Column 1506W

