COMMITTEE OF SELECTION 
  109.  There shall be a committee, to be called the Committee of Selection, consisting of nine Members, of whom three shall be a quorum: and every private bill on committal shall stand referred to the committee.       110.  The Committee of Selection may, if it thinks fit, form into groups all opposed private bills which, in its opinion, it may be expedient to submit to the same committee, and the groups so formed shall be published with the Votes.       111.-(1)  The Committee of Selection shall refer every opposed private bill which stands referred to it, or any group of such bills, to a committee of four members not locally or otherwise interested in the bill or bills referred to it, and shall at the same time nominate one of the members as chairman.   (2)  The Committee of Selection shall refer every unopposed bill which stands referred to it to the Committee on Unopposed Bills which shall consist of seven members, namely the Chairman of Ways and Means, the Deputy Chairmen of Ways and Means, and four members selected by the Chairman of Ways and Means from a panel to be appointed by the Committee of Selection at the commencement of every session.   (3)  The Committee of Selection shall not treat any bill as an opposed bill unless a petition in which the petitioner prays to be heard against the bill has been presented in accordance with Standing Order 171A (Petitions against private bills) or Standing Order 235 (Petitions in favour of or against draft provisional orders) and has not been withdrawn, or the Chairman of Ways and Means has informed the House that in his opinion the bill ought to be treated as an opposed bill.       112.  When the Chairman of Ways and Means has in pursuance of Standing Order 85 (Power of Chairman of Ways and Means to report special circumstances, etc., to House) informed the House that, in his opinion, an unopposed bill ought to be treated as an opposed bill, the bill shall again stand referred to the Committee of Selection.       113.  The Committee of Selection shall, subject to the provisions of Standing Order 177 (Interval between committal of bill and sitting of committee) in regard to the interval between the committal of a private bill and the sitting of the committee thereupon, fix the time for holding the first sitting of every committee to which has been referred an opposed private bill, or a group of private bills.       114.  The Committee of Selection shall name the bill or bills which are to be taken into consideration at the first sitting of the committee on any group of bills.       115.  To each member appointed to be a member of a committee on any opposed private bill or group of private bills the Committee of Selection shall give notice of his appointment and transmit to him a blank form of the declaration which under Standing Order 120 (Declaration by members of committee on opposed bill) he is required to sign, with a request that it may forthwith be returned properly filled up and signed.       116.  The Committee of Selection shall report to the House the name of every member from whom it has not received within a reasonable time such declaration as is mentioned in the last preceding order, filled up and signed as therein mentioned, or, in lieu thereof, an excuse which it deems sufficient.       117.  The Committee of Selection shall have the power of discharging from a committee any member or members appointed by it and of substituting an equal number of other members.       118.  The Committee of Selection shall have power, in the execution of its duties, to send for persons, papers and records. 

COMMITTEES ON OPPOSED BILLS 
  119.  [Repealed 12th November 1951]       120.  Each member of a committee on an opposed private bill, or a group of private bills, shall, before he is entitled to attend and vote in such committee, sign the following declaration:   I,  having been selected by the Committee of Selection to serve as a member of the Committee on the.........................Bill or on Group.........................of Private Bills, hereby declare, that I have no personal or constituency interest in the said bill or any bill included in the said group; that I recognise my obligation to attend every meeting of the Committee; and that I will never vote on any question which may arise without having duly heard and attended to the evidence relating thereto.  And no such committee shall proceed to business until the said declaration has been so signed by each of such members.       121.-(1)  A committee on an opposed private bill shall not be allowed to proceed if more than one of its members is absent, unless by special leave of the House, and if at any time during the sitting of the committee more than one of the members is absent, the chairman shall suspend the proceedings; and if at the expiration of one hour from the time fixed for the meeting of the committee, or from the time when the chairman so suspended the proceedings, more than one member is absent, the committee shall be adjourned to the next day on which the House sits, and then shall meet at the hour at which the committee met on the day of such adjournment.     (2)  If, at any time after the committee has been formed, the required quorum of members cannot attend in consequence of any of the members having become incapacitated by illness or otherwise from continuing to serve on the committee, the chairman shall report the circumstances of the case to the House, in order that such measures may be taken by the House as will enable the members still remaining on the committee to proceed with the business referred to it, or as the emergency of the case may require.       122.-(1)  If the chairman of a committee on an opposed private bill is absent from the committee, the member next in rotation on the list of members who is present shall act as chairman.     (2)  A member of any such committee shall not absent himself from his duties thereon, except in the case of illness or by leave of the House.       123.  In the case of an opposed bill promoted by a local authority containing clauses by which it is proposed to create powers relating to police, sanitary or other local government matters in conflict with, deviation from, or excess of, the provisions of the general law, the committee to whom the bill is referred shall, when considering such clauses as aforesaid, have the assistance of the Counsel to the Speaker.         124.  The committee on each group of bills shall take first into consideration the bill or bills named by the Committee of Selection to be taken into consideration at the first sitting of the committee, and the committee shall, from time to time, appoint the day on which it will enter upon the consideration of each of the remaining bills, and on which it will require the parties severally promoting or opposing the same to enter appearances; and not less than two clear days' notice of such appointment shall be given by the clerk attending the committee; and if the committee defers the consideration of any bill, notice shall be given of the day to which the same is deferred.         125.  Every committee on an opposed private bill shall report to the House the cause of any adjournment over any day on which the House is to sit.         126.  There shall stand referred to the committee on an opposed private bill-   (a)  every petition presented in accordance with Standing Order 171A (Petitions against private bills) against the bill, and(b)  every petition which has been deposited in the Private Bill Office and in which the petitioners complain of any amendment as proposed in the filled-up bill, or of any proposed additional provision or of any matter which has arisen during the progress of the bill before the committee,  being a petition in which the petitioners have prayed to be heard by themselves, their counsel or agents: and copies of all such petitions shall be laid before each member of the committee.       127.-(1)  The promoters of an opposed private bill shall be entitled to be heard before the committee on the bill, by themselves, their counsel or agents, in favour of the bill and against any petitions against the bill which stand referred to the committee under Standing Order 126 (Reference to committee of petitions against bill).     (2)  Any petitioners whose petitions stand referred as aforesaid shall, subject to the rules and orders of the House, and to the prayer of their petition, be entitled to be heard upon their petition by themselves, their counsel or agents.       128.  No petition against a private bill shall be taken into consideration by the committee on the bill, which does not distinctly specify the ground on which the petitioner objects to any of the provisions thereof; and the petitioner shall be heard only on the grounds so stated; and, if it appears to the committee that such grounds are not specified with sufficient accuracy, it may direct that it shall be provided with a more specific statement, in writing, but limited to such grounds of objection so inaccurately specified.         129.  [Repealed 12th November 1951]       130.  A petitioner against a bill originating in the House of Lords who has discussed clauses in that House shall not on that account be precluded from opposing the preamble of the bill in this House.         131.  In the case of any opposed private bill, in which no party has appeared on a petition against the bill or on a petition complaining of amendments as proposed in the filled-up bill, or all parties who have so appeared have withdrawn their opposition before the evidence of the promoters has been commenced, the committee to which the bill has been referred shall forthwith refer back the bill, with a statement of the facts, to the Committee of Selection which shall treat it as an unopposed bill.         131A.  Whenever copies of the minutes of the evidence taken before a committee on an opposed private bill are required they shall be reproduced at the expense of the parties and the cost of reproduction shall be divided among the several parties in such proportions as may be specified by the Private Bill Office:     Provided that the minutes may be printed instead of duplicated if the Chairman of Ways and Means has given authority for printing, on an application made to him by the promoters of the bill not less than six clear days before the first meeting of the committee. 
THE COMMITTEE ON UNOPPOSED BILLS 
  132.-(1)  The Chairman of Ways and Means shall, when present, be ex officio chairman of the Committee on Unopposed Bills.     (2)  The committee shall have the assistance of the Counsel to the Speaker.   (3)  The quorum of the committee shall be three.   (4)  The Chairman of Ways and Means shall have power to select from the panel appointed under paragraph (2) of Standing Order 111 (Reference to committees of opposed and unopposed bills) one member to act as chairman at every sitting of the committee at which neither the Chairman of Ways and Means nor either Deputy Chairman is present, and at any such sitting the member so selected shall be a member of the committee in addition to the four members selected under paragraph (2) of Standing Order 111 (Reference to committees of opposed and unopposed bills).       133.  No member of a committee on any unopposed private bill in which he is locally or otherwise interested shall have a vote on any question that may arise, but every such member shall be entitled to attend and take part in the proceedings of the committee.         134.  The promoters of an unopposed private bill shall be entitled to be heard before the committee in favour of the bill by themselves or their agents.   
