With the agreement of the governments of the Overseas Territories, the right of individual petition under the European Convention on Human Rights was accepted or acceptance renewed by all Territories to which the Convention applies, except the British Virgin Islands, in early 2006. The FCO and the governor’s office continue to encourage the British Virgin Islands government to accept the right of individual petition under the Convention, particularly now that the new British Virgin Island constitution contains a fundamental rights chapter. The government of Pitcairn has expressed a wish for the Convention to be extended to Pitcairn and a study is now taking this forward.

In order to address the lack of enabling legislation, which continues to hinder progress on improving good governance and human rights standards in a number of Territories, the FCO funded the family law and domestic violence legislative programme in Anguilla, the British Virgin Islands, Montserrat and the Turks and Caicos Islands. Six model legislative bills were drafted and presented to the attorneys general of those Territories for their consideration. These covered family courts, childcare and protection, the status of children, juvenile justice, domestic violence and adoption. The six bills are due to be presented to the Anguilla Executive Council and the Turks and Caicos Islands Cabinet in the next few months.

We continue to press for the inclusion of a fundamental human rights chapter when considering constitutional review. The Virgin Islands Constitution 2007 (SI 2007/1678), which came into force on 15 June 2007, has a comprehensive chapter on the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual. In addition, the attorney general of the British Virgin Islands is drafting a paper that will be put before the Cabinet, requesting authority to prepare the draft legal framework to establish a human rights commission. Where a constitution already has a fundamental rights chapter, the opportunity is taken during the constitutional
negotiations to update the chapter, such as in the Turks and Caicos Islands Constitution (SI 2006/1913).

The FCO’s Overseas Territories Programme Fund supports the White Paper commitments on human rights. For example, during 2006, it funded the
Cayman Islands human rights public awareness campaign to promote human rights within the Territory. The campaign sought to raise greater awareness of the human rights work of the Cayman Islands Human Rights Committee, encouraging the public to become actively involved in promoting and protecting their rights. The committee is a non-governmental body of representatives from both the private and public sectors. While the committee’s findings and reports into complaints
of human rights violations are not legally enforceable, their recommendations for legislative and administrative reform play a critical role in the preservation of human rights in the Territory.

The committee has set up a working group to examine a number of human rights issues, and the compatibility of a bill of rights (fundamental
rights chapter), proposed for inclusion in any new constitution that may emerge out of the ongoing constitutional review, with the rights contained in the Convention. Separately, the FCO has jointly funded with the Cayman Islands government a review of the children’s law and associated regulations. These were submitted to the Law Reform Commission for their input in September 2007. The amended legislation, which is designed to enhance the care and welfare of children in
the Cayman Islands – in line with the UN CRC – is slated to go before the legislative assembly towards the end of January 2008. A complementary project to review the adoption law will begin shortly.

The Turks and Caicos Islands government has set up a human rights commission and governing legislation passed through the House of Assembly. In April 2007, the FCO funded the visit to the UK by the Chair of the Human Rights Commission, Doreen Quelch Missick. Mrs Missick held talks with the FCO, the Department for International Development (DfID), the Commonwealth Foundation and the UK Equality and Human Rights
Commission. These covered the establishment of the Turks and Caicos Islands Human Rights Commission, Turks and Caicos Islands UN human
rights conventions reporting responsibilities, and a programme to strengthen human rights in civil society. This was with a view to assisting the Turks and Caicos Islands in all of those areas by offering practical advice.

In addition, the FCO is working closely with DfID on the implementation of their four-year programme across the Territories, which will complement existing projects already undertaken in the Territories and build capacity for human rights.

The programme has three key objectives:
- to increase the commitment by the governments of the Overseas Territories and partners to an improved human rights agenda; to increase the awareness and capacity of governments and civil society to address human rights issues in the long term; and 
- to strengthen human rights reporting and to monitor arrangements in accordance with relevant international treaties.

Support for British citizens and nationals abroad

Introduction

Human rights lie at the very heart of consular work. Our consular staff around the world work to protect the human rights of British nationals abroad. Victims of forced marriages, prisoners facing execution, and children illegally taken abroad by a parent are just some of the British nationals we try to help. Consular assistance can take many forms. We offer information about lawyers and foreign legal systems and facilitate the rescue of forced marriage victims, as well as supporting pleas of
clemency for prisoners facing the death penalty.

Child abduction

The FCO’s Child Abduction Section, established in 2003, handled some 265 cases in the financial year 2006/07. It assists parents whose child has
been abducted or retained by the other parent in a country that has not signed the Hague Convention. These “non-Hague” cases are much harder to resolve for everyone, as parents must usually start legal proceedings in the overseas courts to obtain custody of their children. Non-Muslim parents face particular difficulties in countries with Sharia law where they may have fewer rights to custody and access.

We continue to work to promote better international co-operation on parental child abduction. In November 2006, officials from the Child Abduction Section attended the Hague Convention Special Commission, which reviewed implementation of the convention and other issues surrounding child abduction. The convention, which over 70 countries have signed, aims to return children to the country where they lived
 before their abduction.

We are also encouraging more countries to sign the Hague Convention. We arranged a visit to India by UK high court judges in November 2006 and
welcomed India’s subsequent announcement of its intention to sign the Hague Convention. We sponsored two senior Indian judges to visit the
UK in October 2007 to share our experience of dealing with Hague cases and hope that this will help India prepare for signature of the convention in the near future.

More British children are abducted to Pakistan than to any other country. We are working with the reunite International Child Abduction Centre to
organise a major conference which we hope to hold in Islamabad in 2008. This will provide a forum for judges, lawyers, police and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) from the UK and Pakistan to share expertise and consider best practice in dealing with child abduction cases.

Forced marriage

A forced marriage is conducted without the valid consent of both parties and where duress, either physical or emotional, is a factor. This is not the same as an arranged marriage when families take a leading role in choosing the marriage partner, but both parties enter freely into the marriage.

The joint Home Office/FCO Forced Marriage Unit was established in 2005 as the UK’s “one-stop shop” for developing government policy on forced
marriage, co-ordinating outreach projects and providing support and information to those at risk. This was in recognition of the need to co-ordinate action against the UK and overseas nature of forced marriage. In 2007, the unit launched around 200 successful rescue operations across the globe. It was also involved in the passage of the Forced Marriage
(Civil Protection) Act in July 2007. The main thrust of the act was to provide measures to courts to prevent forced marriages from occurring. In order to share our experiences and develop best practice, we brought together consular staff from 11 posts for a conference on forced marriage and child abduction in Dubai in April 2007. Staff exchanged ideas on
how to engage with local NGOs that offer support to victims of domestic violence, such as refuges. We have also taken steps to share best practice with our European partners. We hosted the Active against Forced Marriage conference in October 2007. The conference aimed to increase
understanding of the motivating forces behind forced marriage and identify some of the barriers to tackling the problem.

Working in partnership is crucial to tackling forced marriage. The unit worked closely with Karma Nirvana, a Derby-based NGO, to set up the Survivors Network. The network provides informal advice and support to those who have escaped a forced marriage. We also developed a handbook for survivors of forced marriage. The handbook offers practical advice and solutions to some of the challenges facing those who have escaped a forced marriage. It has also proved very useful to consular staff overseas who, after rescuing an individual, help prepare them for the realities of life back in the UK.

The unit has an extensive outreach programme, speaking at some 75 events in the past year, targeting affected communities in an attempt to tackle the problem, and working with professionals to raise awareness of both the unit and the issue. The unit published guidelines for health professionals in 2007 and distributed a copy to every GP’s surgery and school nurse in the country. The unit is doing all that it can to tackle the causes of forced marriage, but a large part of its work is, inevitably, assisting those in crisis, such as in the case of Nazia.

Nazia’s Story

Earlier this year, the Forced Marriage Unit received a call from West Yorkshire Police. They had been contacted by Chris, who was worried about his 23-year-old girlfriend, Nazia. Nazia had recently been diagnosed with
schizophrenia. Fearing the shame of their daughter’s relationship with Chris, Nazia’s parents tricked her into travelling to Pakistan.

Once there, Nazia discovered that her family had arranged her marriage. Her husband-tobe repeatedly raped her. With no access to medicine for her schizophrenia, her condition deteriorated.

The unit worked with the British High Commission in Islamabad to locate Nazia and rescue her. After medical and psychiatric attention at a women’s refuge in Islamabad, Nazia flew back to the UK. The unit secured
Nazia a place in a women’s refuge, referred her to a mental health specialist and worked with the housing department in her local area to
provide long-term accommodation. Nazia now has a full-time job and plans to marry Chris. She has had no contact with her family since she left Pakistan.

British prisoners

As at the end of December 2007, we were aware of 2,419 British nationals detained overseas. Many are held in conditions that potentially breach
their human rights. British consular staff provide assistance in these difficult circumstances, and regularly raise issues of health, welfare and human rights with foreign authorities. We are committed to being non-judgemental and non-discriminatory, treating all detainees the same regardless of the charges or circumstances. We also connect them with other organisations that can provide assistance. Most notably, we enjoy a long-standing partnership with Prisoners Abroad, a charity providing practical and emotional support as well as resettlement assistance.

We work with the National Offender Management Service at the Ministry of Justice to allow British nationals to serve their sentences in the UK.
We signed three new prisoner transfer agreements with Jamaica, Lesotho and Pakistan in 2007, and began negotiations with Vietnam and Libya. We
already have agreements in place with over 90 countries, having recently ratified an agreement with Nicaragua. Prisoner transfers allow eligible
prisoners to serve their sentences closer to friends and family, promoting their rehabilitation and transition into normal life after release. In 2007, 71 prisoners were repatriated to the UK from 15 countries.

