Give up before you clog up One in five people in the
UK dies from smoking. Smoking causes more deaths from cardiovascular disease than from cancer worldwide.

Action
The BHF ran a hard-hitting campaign targeting smokers who had tried and failed to give up. The £4 million campaign funded by the Department of Health aimed to increase awareness of the link between heart
disease and smoking.“Give up before you clog up” in January 2004 included a TV advertisement broadcast 450 times; 2,500 poster sites; press and online adverts; an anti-smoking website; and a special BHF telephone
helpline.

Impact
94% of smokers recalled seeing the campaign and 12,000 phoned the helpline. The BHF contacted a sample
number of these callers and 46% had stopped smoking. 74% of these were still not smoking seven weeks later. There were 82,313 visits to the anti-smoking website in the early weeks and the site is still running.

Next steps
Following its success, the Department of Health granted us additional money to re-run the poster campaign
in May 2004, and further work on smoking is planned for the next two years. We will continue to lobby
government and work with action groups to fight smoking-related heart disease.

Stephen Plumb stopped smoking after his first heart attack: “I wish that I’d given
up before the damage had been done.”

Reduce the risk
Most heart disease is avoidable if we take simple measures to improve our lifestyle. A 50-year study part-funded by the BHF showed that on average smokers die ten years younger than nonsmokers. It also revealed that stopping at age 50 halves the risk of death, and stopping at age 30 avoids almost all the risk. Over one third of deaths from coronary heart disease are due to lack of physical activity,with only 37% of men and 25% of women taking the recommended 30 minutes of moderate exercise at least five times a week. So our
events and initiatives encourage all age groups to get active, from children skipping to Heart Runners
completing marathons.

Step to it Experts recommend a target of 10,000 steps
a day. It’s estimated that the average adult clocks up only about 3,000.

Action
The Walking the Way to Health Initiative (WHI) was launched in 2000 – a five-year partnership
between the BHF and the Countryside Agency with support from the New Opportunities Fund.
Its aim is to improve the health of disadvantaged and sedentary people in England by promoting
regular brisk walking as a perfect way to improve fitness.
Impact
300 local walking schemes have been set up and 10,000 walk leaders have been trained. At the halfway
point, WHI had helped more than 600,000 people walk more often, and is on track to meet the target of one million.
Next steps
We have worked with partners in Wales and Scotland to set up similar schemes. And WHI Step-O-Meters,
which encourage people to walk more by tracking their progress, are being made available from GPs in areas with high rates of coronary heart disease. A joint BHF/Countryside Agency strategy will ensure that local schemes continue into the future.

Stressed out? High blood cholesterol, low levels of physical activity, smoking, high blood pressure, obesity, diabetes, or family history can lead to CHD. But what about stress?

Action
The link between stress and CHD is becoming clearer as more research is done. BHF Professor of Psychology
Andrew Steptoe is investigating why, for some people, stress makes them particularly vulnerable to coronary heart disease.
Impact
Half a million people in the UK believe work-related stress is making them ill. This year we published our Stress and Your Heart booklet giving tips on coping with stress. Here, people explain how they have used
exercises or healthy eating plans to get back in control.
Next steps
The complex job of measuring the effect of stress on the heart will continue. Meanwhile BHF researchers in Wales are investigating how depression could damage our blood vessels, believing this may be linked to over-activity of the body’s stress response.

Eat for life
The BHF website has become a significant feature of our work with young people. The interactive cbhf.net website pitches heart health hero Artie Beat against the Bad Snax brigade. Players zap unhealthy food before it lands on their plate. The site is loaded with information on eating and exercise… and after the user has
been surfing for a while a pop-up message suggests they get up and get active!

Worryingly, over 80% of people eat too much saturated fat and most of us eat too much salt. Our booklets,
Food should be fun…and healthy, So you want to lose weight and Cut the fat help people to make healthy choices.

Food for thought
In studies of the effects of early lifestyle on adult cardiovascular disease, Professor David Barker has shown that people who were born small but put on weight quickly in childhood are at increased risk of CHD and the associated disorders of hypertension, diabetes and stroke. BHF-funded scientists have discovered that a mother’s poor diet could dramatically reduce the lifespan of her child. Using mice, researchers found that offspring whose mothers were fed a low protein diet during pregnancy and then a normal diet postnatally, only
lived for two thirds of their expected lifespan.The effect was even more pronounced if the mice offspring
were fed a fattening “cafeteria”diet.

Help The country is full of people going the extra mile to
play their part in the fight against heart disease, raising cash, having fun and reaping the health benefits at the same time.

This is John Wright, who collapsed with a heart attack in 1990, aged just 56. His heart had stopped and was shocked back to normal rhythm with a defibrillator, saving his life.
While he was convalescing, John pickled a few onions and gave them to family and friends.They went down so well that John decided to sell more and give the money to the BHF to fund a local defibrillator. Soon John’s onions were travelling across the county to schools, companies and hospitals.Now 14 years later, John has raised over £13,000 for the BHF which has helped to buy
defibrillators.One of these has just saved a local woman’s life.

Time for action We continue to build our series of
innovative fundraising events.Those taking part often
become committed to our cause and go on to help
us by volunteering their time.

Action
Thousands of Heart Runners ran for the BHF in events throughout the country.Over 400 runners supported us in the Flora London Marathon 2003.
Impact
Our Heart Runners raised well over £450,000 for us in 2003/04.
Next steps
We hope to raise £1.5 million from this year’s Flora London Marathon 2004 which had 1,000 Heart Runners pounding the pavements in the rain.

As part of the BHF’s fundraising partnership with Flora, Nell McAndrew led the BHF Heart Runners Team at the Flora Light Challenge for Women in September. Over 1,000 women helped push the final fundraising figure from the Flora partnership
to £350,000 during the year.

Action
Bike rides and walks are organised across the country. 27,000 cyclists took part in the BHF’s 54-mile London
to Brighton Bike Ride.
Impact
The London to Brighton Bike Ride raised a record £2.5 million for the BHF.
Next steps
In 2004/05, cyclists and walkers joining one of our World Experiences will travel further afield, to Peru on the Inca Trail, and to South Africa and Everest.

At the heart of Valentine’s Day
Our new Real Valentine Campaign invited people to consider a more caring alternative to the commercial Valentine’s route. We produced do-it-yourself card kits and visitors to our website paid a donation to compose a love poem and have it read aloud by a celebrity sound-alike. The result was £227,700 raised and almost 6,500 new supporters.
BHF shops staff and volunteers took Valentine’s Day to heart by encouraging customers to donate £1 to post a Love Note in the shop window. Over six million households read about the love note campaign in their local paper. The result was an incredible £200,000 for the BHF and two marriage proposals! We are expanding our Love Notes message by taking this BHF appeal to shopping malls and supermarket foyers next year.

Volunteers run the BHF We could not continue to run our local events and charity shops without the help of dedicated volunteers who give up their time.

“I wanted to do something to thank the people who’ve helped me. I’ve managed to
raise over £13,000 which has paid for local defibrillators to save more lives.”

The shops story
Good cost control and steady progress on sales led to an excellent trading performance in Shops this year. Profits were up by 15.2% to £9.1 million. Twenty new high street shops were opened in 2003/04, bringing our national chain to 467 at 31 March.
Heart Week ribbons were introduced for the first time in 2003/04 and BHF shop volunteers took to the
streets to help gather donations. Shops raised over £185,000 during the year from their efforts with the
ribbons.We aim to increase Heart Week returns to over £200,000 by joining colleagues in Community
Fundraising in many additional locations this year. Managers and volunteers in every BHF shop raffled
a luxury Christmas hamper during December. They sold tickets with great enthusiasm and over £175,000
was raised. The expansion of Shops will continue; we aim to find at least another 30 shops units this year. To help run them we need to recruit many more teams of volunteer helpers.
An army of local supporters
People raise vital funds for the BHF, while improving their heart health by joining the walks, runs and bike rides we organise across the UK. Income raised by our regional volunteers and staff totalled £10.6 million last year.
Raising money for the BHF can take many forms. Fourteen years ago, 71-year-old John Wright from Stroud in Gloucestershire had a heart attack in an ambulance on the way to hospital. His life was saved by a defibrillator and ever since he has been raising money by making and selling pickled onions.

Heart Week 2003 Just 40 years ago, only one in five children born with a heart defect survived – now that figure has risen to over four in five.

Action
Companies and individuals were urged to Wear Red to show their support. People were asked to make a regular monthly donation and heartshaped ribbon bows were offered for a suggested donation of £1.
Impact
Over £854,000 was raised through Heart Week and 46,000 new people signed up to support us,many committing to donate a regular monthly amount.
Next steps
The red theme continued for Heart Week 2004 with the Big Red Fightback encouraging people to shun lifts and escalators for the week and use the stairs instead.

The staff at eBay took Wear Red to heart. An online auction featured prizes donated by Ferrari, Flora, MBNA,Walt Disney, Kenwood and Virgin Atlantic.

Action
Finding out that your child has a heart defect can be devastating and the family needs information and
support.We published Operation Fix-It, a colourful story book for children facing heart surgery. We helped to fund an online resource at www.dipex.org where parents can read other families’ personal experiences of congenital heart disease. A new title in our awardwinning Heart Information Series has been produced for carers.

Impact
Feedback showed that the book has helped parents and children deal with the emotional and practical
issues of living with a heart condition. Parents have been reassured by the medical information on the website and the chance to find out how others cope.
Next steps
Around 5,000 children are born with congenital heart disease each year in the UK.The number of adults living
with congenital heart disease is set to rise by 50% over the next decade. We are funding research to improve
diagnosis and treatment of heart defects, information booklets and specialist nurses to support children as they grow into adulthood.
