British Airways is one of the world’s leading airlines. Our network provides
passenger and freight services to 149 destinations in 72 countries around
the world, and we are part of the oneworld alliance which serves 558
destinations in 130 countries.

British Airways’ airline network is centred on
the United Kingdom, where over 85 per cent
of our workforce is based. Our airline
operations comprise mainline passenger and
cargo services operated from the London
airports and services operated by our
regional subsidiary, British Airways
CitiExpress. The British Airways Group also
includes a number of smaller subsidiaries
engaged in aviation-related activities.1
Our airline network generates economic
value by meeting the demand for business
and leisure travel. We provide vital arteries
for trade and investment, as well as leisure
travel opportunities for individuals and
families. In 2004/05, British Airways earned
over £7.8 billion in revenue, 3.3 per cent up
on the previous year. Eighty three per cent of
this revenue was generated from passenger
traffic, 6 per cent from cargo and 11 per cent
from other activities (including fuel
surcharges). We carried over 35 million
passengers and nearly 900,000 tonnes of
cargo to destinations in Europe, the
Americas and throughout the world.
At the end of March 2005, we had 290
aircraft in service, compared to 291 in
March 2004. We have a relatively young
aircraft fleet, which brings environmental and
efficiency benefits. The average age of our
aircraft fleet is 8.5 years, compared with a
global average of about 11 years.
British Airways aims to manage its business
responsibly. One of our key responsibilities
is to our shareholders – ensuring that we
generate a sustainable return on the capital
employed in our business and can invest for
future growth. We have set a target of a 10
per cent operating margin to ensure an
adequate financial return and continue to
make progress towards this goal. We also
have responsibilities to other stakeholders –
our employees, our customers and the
communities affected by our operations.
Airlines generate major social and economic
benefits but also have significant impacts on
the environment and on communities
around airports. This report sets out the
steps we are taking to address these issues.
We recognise that major challenges remain,
but key areas of progress include:


• A further step towards our operating
margin target, with a 1.5 percentage point
increase to 6.9 per cent;
• The roll-out of our employee engagement
programme, with 10,500 employees
attending an Owning our Future workshop
by the end of April 2005;
• Awarded the Gold Standard in the annual
‘Race for Opportunity’ benchmarking,
the first time we have achieved this level
of achievement;
• Continuing to maintain the highest
standards of safety and security for our
customers and employees, and a record of
zero fatalities in work-related health and
safety incidents;
• Hitting our £20 million donations target on
the tenth anniversary of Change for Good;
• A 3.9 per cent improvement in fuel
efficiency, bringing the improvement since
1990 to 27.4 per cent – more than 90 per
cent towards our 1990-2010 efficiency target;
• Joining the BAA Clean Vehicles Programme
at London Heathrow, and achieving a silver
standard for the performance of our fleet of
ground vehicles;
• Launch of the British Airways waste
initiative, targeting two per cent per annum
waste reduction per passenger and an
increase in our recycling/recovery rate to
40 per cent;
• A further reduction in the global noise
impact of our aircraft fleet, coupled with a
good track record of operational
performance to reduce noise;
• Continued successful participation in the
United Kingdom Emissions Trading
Scheme and encouraging progress towards
bringing aviation within emissions trading
within the European Union.

Building a sustainable business
In 2004/05 we made further progress towards financial sustainability,
by increasing our operating profit margin to 6.9 per cent. A 10 per cent
operating margin remains our financial target. However, we will only
achieve and sustain this if we can work successfully in partnership with all
our key stakeholders.

Market background
Global air traffic rebounded strongly in
2004, though air fares have remained under
strong downward pressure from vigorous
competition. Figures from the International
Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) show
that international scheduled air travel rose
by more than 15 per cent in 2004, the
fastest growth in any calendar year for more
than 25 years. This was the first year to
see traffic volumes surpass the level of
the previous peak year in 2000. Freight
traffic also recorded a double-digit increase
in 2004.
This rebound in air travel in 2004 was
founded on a year of strong global
economic growth. Passenger traffic growth
in the Middle East and Asia was also
boosted by comparison with a weak
performance in 2003 as a result of the war
in Iraq and the Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS) epidemic in the Far East.
Air travel has continued to grow at a more
moderate – but still healthy – pace in the
first few months of 2005.
The recovery in air traffic has been
accompanied by stiff competition in all
markets, maintaining the strong downward
pressure on yields. Meanwhile rising fuel
costs have disrupted the normal cyclical
recovery in airline profitability, despite
substantial reductions in non-fuel costs.
According to the International Air Transport
Association (IATA), the airline industry’s
fuel bill in 2005 is expected to be nearly
$40 billion more than in 2003. As a result,
it expects its member airlines to make
losses of $6 billion in 2005, on top of
cumulative losses of $36 billion between
2001 and 2004.
British Airways’ performance in
2004/05
Despite modest capacity growth, British
Airways’ passenger traffic volumes (RPK’s)
rose by nearly five per cent in 2004/05 as a
whole, resulting in a 1.8 percentage point
rise in passenger seat factor to 74.8 per
cent. However, even after two years of

growth, British Airways’ traffic remains
well below its level four years earlier.
This reflects the strategic downsizing of the
airline between 1998 and 2002, which left
capacity in 2004/05 still more than 15 per
cent lower than in 2000/01.

Operating revenues rose more than three
per cent to £7.8 billion in 2004/05, but
strong competitive pressures caused
average passenger yields to fall 4.4 per cent
(before the impact of fuel surcharges). For
British Airways, 2004/05 was the first year
of revenue growth following three years of
declining turnover, though total operating
revenue remains nearly £1.5 billion lower
than in 2000/01.
Along with other airlines, British Airways
has had to battle against stiff cost
headwinds. Fuel costs have risen by a third
(nearly £300 million) in the last two years
to £1.1 billion, up from less than 11.5 per
cent of total operating expenditure in
2002/03 to 15.5 per cent in 2004/05.
Employee costs rose by 4.3 per cent to £2.3
billion in 2004/05 as pension and wage
increases were only partially offset by
manpower reductions and other efficiencies.

Due to a successful restructuring
programme, British Airways has made
substantial reductions in costs during the
period since 2000. The good progress
continued last year, when non-fuel unit
costs were cut by a further 4.5 per cent. As
a result, the airline’s profitability improved
again in 2004/05. The operating margin
(operating profit as a percentage of
revenues) rose to 6.9 per cent in 2004/05,
up from 5.4 per cent in 2003/04 and 3.8
per cent in 2002/03. We are making good
progress towards our target of a 10 per cent
operating margin, which is necessary to
deliver an adequate return to shareholders
and to finance new investment.
Business Plan priorities
The airline market in the United Kingdom
remains fiercely competitive. No frills
carriers continue to consolidate their
presence in European markets, and now
account for more than a third of all
shorthaul flights from London’s airports. As
a result, British Airways has seen its share
of passengers in the United Kingdom
shorthaul market fall from more than 30
per cent in 1998 to about 20 per cent in
2004. Even among business travellers,
corporate cost consciousness has allowed
no frills airlines to carry an increasing share
of the market, and the proportion of
business travellers flying in the premium
cabins of the network carriers, such as
British Airways’ Club Europe, has continued
to decline.
Longhaul services also face vigorous
competition. As the market recovers,
competitor airlines are beginning to order
new aircraft and start new intercontinental
services. In particular, Middle East carriers
are undertaking rapid expansion of their
hubs. Ailing American carriers are able to
offload costs under the protection of the
United States Chapter 11 bankruptcy laws.

Despite the challenging market conditions,
British Airways’ total revenue is expected to
improve by four to five per cent in 2005/06.
But there are also major cost headwinds.
British Airways’ fuel bill is expected to rise
by a further £400 million in the financial
year 2005/06, while the pension fund will
continue to require large company
contributions for the foreseeable future.
British Airways’ business plan for the two
years ending in March 2007 identifies three
priority areas. The first is ‘Fit for 5’ – being
ready to move to Terminal 5. This presents
an opportunity to secure a better future for
the airline – offering the prospect of a
superior customer experience and enabling
significant change to improve the efficiency
of our operations.
Second, we are making targeted investment
in products and in training for employees.
This includes investment in the air and on
the ground, where we are applying new
technology (such as on-line check-in) to
ease the travel experience and speed
passengers through the airport. It also
includes a renewed focus on training and
employee engagement.
Third, we need to continue to reduce our
cost base to ensure it is competitive in the
global airline market.
Longer-term growth prospects
Looking beyond Terminal 5, British Airways
is working to support the plans for future
development which have been supported by
the 2003 White Paper, “The Future of Air
Transport”. This recommended the building
of a third runway at Heathrow, and
consideration of better use of the existing
runways at Heathrow by ‘mixed mode
operations’. Mixed mode – enabling airlines
to use each runway for both take off and
landing – would add to runway capacity
over the longer term and in the short term
it could also reduce congestion and delays.
The government is working with key
stakeholders to establish the environmental
implications of this expansion, through its
Project for the Sustainable Development of
Heathrow. British Airways is actively
contributing to this work, particularly
through the monitoring and modelling of
the impact of aircraft on local air quality
(see page 14 for more details).
Working with stakeholders –
‘The BA Way’
In developing our business plans over the
next couple of years, and over the longer
term, it is essential for us to work in
partnership with our stakeholders to deliver
sustainable business performance.
We need to work closely with our
employees and suppliers as we seek to
contain costs, deliver improved service
standards and remain competitive in the
global marketplace. We need to work
closely with our customers to identify the
product investment and service quality
improvements which will generate value in
the years ahead. And we need to work
closely with local communities and
government to ensure that the continued
operation and expansion of our business is
socially and environmentally sustainable.
‘The BA Way’, which was launched within
British Airways just over a year ago,
embodies this stakeholder-driven approach.
It contains three main elements – our
formula for business success, our values
and our business goals.
This year’s British Airways Corporate
Responsibility Report aims to reflect ‘The
BA Way’ framework, particularly focussing
on our business goals. In addition to our
financial target, ‘The BA Way’ includes four
other business goals: employee motivation;
safety and security; customer advocacy; and
community respect. These goals form the
basis of the remaining sections of this report

Corporate Responsibility Board
In 2003, British Airways established an
internal Corporate Responsibility Board
(CRB) to improve our co-ordination and
management of social and environmental
issues. 

