2 Issues Considered in 2005
2.1 Introduction
2.1.1 As stated in its 2004 report, the FAC had agreed that 2005 was primarily to be a year
of consolidating the initiatives developed in the course of 2004.
2.1.2 Whilst recognising that further work would be required to achieve the FAC’s
objectives, it was considered by the FAC and leagues that significant progress had
been made in 2004 in the areas of financial regulation and governance.
2.1.3 Measures considered in 2004 included the development of the Fit and Proper Person
Test, the introduction of sporting sanctions for those clubs entering an insolvency
event and the enhancement of measures to control clubs’ wages in line with their
income. The Fit and Proper Person Test has now been in operation for over a year in
all six leagues and has been widely accepted as a welcome development within the
game.
2.1.4 In 2005 the FAC has considered various issues fundamental to its agreed policy
referred to at 1.2 above. The key issues considered are shown below.
2.2 Governance: A Guide for Football Clubs
2.2.1 The FAC’s terms of reference include the consideration of the adequacy of corporate
governance at each level of the game. The FAC has overseen the preparation of a
non-mandatory Guide (“the Guide”) that sets out best practice principles to assist
professional and semi-professional clubs in assessing the effectiveness of their
governance procedures, and to put in place improvements where necessary.
2.2.2 The FAC considers it to be vital for the long-term health of the game that clubs are
able to demonstrate accountability and transparency. The FAC decided that the
Guide should not be mandatory, but should encourage the adoption of good
governance procedures in the interests of each club and the game as a whole rather
than being required by rules or formal codes of practice. It was felt that such an
approach would be better welcomed by clubs.
2.2.3 The FAC sees the Guide as a significant step in its objective of improving the
governance of clubs. A copy of the Guide has been sent to each club in the FAPL,
FL, FC, IFL, NPL and SFL.

2.3 Security of Tenure of Grounds
2.3.1 A key issue for stakeholders in the game, in particular supporters, is the protection of
clubs’ grounds for future use. The issue was also raised in the Parliamentary All
Party Football Group Report in February 2004 (page 15).
2.3.2 The FAC identified that there were two fundamental issues to be addressed in this
area:
(i) The protection of a ground for long-term use by the club, and the avoidance
of owners asset-stripping; and
(ii) How Leagues can best ensure that clubs have a consistent level of security
of tenure that is sufficient to meet their fixtures each season.
2.3.3 The FAC’s work in this area is ongoing. Work to date has included reviewing existing
FA and League rules, identifying the current security of tenure of grounds by clubs
and the roles of other bodies such as Sport England and The Football Foundation.
2.3.4 Initial findings on the two issues include:
(i) The FAC recognises the need for clubs to have flexibility to adopt different
structures of legal entity owning grounds where they may aid the long term
preservation of grounds for clubs. The FAC identified that there may be
justifiable business reasons as to why a ground is not owned by a club, such
as the raising of development capital.
It was also recognized that any football legislation in this area ought to have
legitimate aims and be reasonable and proportionately justified. It was noted
that approximately 75% of clubs in the top six leagues no longer own the
freehold of their ground and hence any football legislation in this area may
have limited effect.

(ii) The FAC recognised the differing security of tenure requirements of each
League that included minimum lease/licence requirements of between one
and ten years. The FAC considered that a consistent security of tenure
requirement across the Leagues was not practical at this stage. In some
cases a club’s position may be weakened on the renewal of a lease if the
landlord is aware that a club requires a minimum security of tenure in
accordance with League rules.
2.3.5 The FAC’s work will continue in this area in 2006 with possible proposals including:
*?Leagues to maintain up to date data on the security of tenure held by each
member club.
*?Possible requirements for clubs to provide advance notice of any potential
change in the freehold or leasehold interest of their ground.
*?Other Leagues to introduce a requirement consistent with those currently in
FAPL and FL rules requiring League approval before a relocation is
permitted. 1
*?Where a new rule is introduced or already exists, clubs that do not currently
have security of tenure should comply with the rules of their League within an
agreed timescale.
*?Leagues should encourage clubs that have advised of a change in the
leasehold interest to a ground to consider the risks of not adopting the
provisions of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 that provides for the right of
renewal.
Note: Some of the above proposals are already established in certain of the
Leagues.
2.4 Change in Club Ownership
2.4.1 At its March 2005 meeting, the FAC considered the possibility of regulating the
change in majority ownership of clubs and agreed to obtain external legal opinion on
such regulation. It was noted that, at present, there is no formal regulation of such
changes within the top six leagues.
2.4.2 In the light of a number of recent changes in ownership of clubs, members believe it
is relevant to examine this issue at the present time and to assess whether regulation
is both a) possible and b) necessary to help protect the long-term future of clubs.

2.4.3 Legal advice was considered by the FAC at its October 2005 meeting. The legal
advice focused on the legitimate aims of any proposed rule in this area.
2.4.4 After full consideration of this advice, the FAC agreed that further work needed to be
undertaken before conclusions over the possibility of any regulation in this area could
be reached. This work will be undertaken in 2006 and the findings reported to The
FA board. The options for The FA would appear to be either putting in place some
form of regulation or, alternatively, to explain clearly why action is not feasible.
2.5 English Football: A Framework for Cashflow Analysis
2.5.1 The FAC commissioned an analysis of the key cash flows for English professional
football (i.e. The FA, FAPL and their clubs, FL and their clubs and The Football
Foundation) covering the 2003/2004 season, being the most up to date figures
publicly available. This was the third and final year such an analysis was undertaken,
with a view to establishing and understanding trends in material cashflows.
2.5.2 The key findings in the 2003/2004 season included:
*?English football generated £2.9bn of inflows (2002/2003 £2.4bn) and applied
£2.75bn of outflows (2002/2003 £2.4bn).
*?Over 25% of the inflow (£0.8bn) was generated from broadcasters, consistent
with the previous season, with matchday activities generating £0.7bn, up
from £0.6bn in 2002/2003.
*?Financiers provided £0.8bn to English football (2002/2003 £0.3bn).
*?A record investment of £0.3bn was made in football facilities, (2002/2003
£0.26bn) principally by The FA in Wembley and by FAPL clubs.
*?The largest recipient of football’s outflows was the government in the form of
taxation (including payroll taxes and VAT) at £0.6bn, amounting to 22% of
outflows for the season.
*?Net of tax, players received an estimated £430m, in line with 2002/2003, and
representing less than 20% of the total outflows from English football.
*?Payments to agents amounted to less than 2% of the total outflows for the
second successive season.
Note: the above figures exclude cashflows between the football bodies such
as distributions to clubs by The FA, FAPL and FL

2.5.3 The FAC agreed that the information contained in the analysis would provide a
valuable tool in informing ongoing debate regarding the overall cash flows within the
game.
2.6 Mutuals
2.6.1 In 2004 the FAC examined the possibility of rule changes to be put in place in
Leagues (where necessary) to permit clubs to be mutuals. It transpired that only one
league, the FL, specifies the corporate structure that a member club must have – its
articles state that ‘a member club must be incorporated under the Companies Act.’2
2.6.2 Mutual organisations are governed by the Industrial and Provident Societies Act and
not the Companies Act. A mutual entity, such as an Industrial and Provident Society
(“IPS”), cannot be a member of the FL.
2.6.3 The provisions of the Industrial and Provident Act currently do not permit a mutual
organisation to enter insolvency arrangements, but legislation to allow such
arrangements is believed to be a possibility.
2.6.4 Based on the current legislation, the FL expressed a reluctance to amend its articles
to allow an IPS to become a member of the League. The reasoning is that, unlike a
club incorporated under the Companies Act, in the event that an IPS runs into
financial difficulties it cannot enter administration to allow the club to formulate a
rescue package.
2.6.5 There is therefore a risk that an IPS club may be forced to close and be unable to
preserve its ongoing membership of the FL, resulting in the loss of that club to the
League as a whole.
2.6.6 It is clear, however, that FL article 4.1 has not prevented Supporters Trusts from
being able to secure overall ownership and control of a club through the acquisition of
all or majority of the share capital of the club company that is the member of the FL.
2.6.7 In 2005 the FAC exchanged correspondence with Supporters Direct on the matter
and considered the position further. The FAC understands that there has not been
any change in legislation to allow an IPS to enter into insolvency arrangements.

2.6.8 The FAC acknowledges the important role Supporters Trusts have played in the
survival of several clubs that have encountered severe financial difficulties. The FAC
understands that Supporters Direct is working with HM Revenue &amp; Customs on
various matters. In the event of changes in primary legislation relating to the ability of
an IPS to restructure in the event of insolvency, the FL has indicated that it will
reconsider its position. The FAC is therefore awaiting developments in the legislation
of this area.

3 The FA’s Financial Advisory Unit (“FAU”)
3.1 Although it is a body distinct from the FAC, much of the work covered by the FAU
underpins the overall objectives of the FAC itself. The FAC therefore considers it
appropriate to refer in this report to the work carried out by the FAU in the course of
the year.
3.2 Work undertaken by the FAU in 2005 includes:
*?Supporting the FAC in the development and implementation of its policy
initiatives (see Section 2 above).
*?Continuing the review programme of clubs in the FL, FC, IL, NPL and SFL
(see 3.3 below).
*?Working with the FAPL and UEFA in the development and implementation of
the UEFA licence regime.
*?Updating the best practice brochures on various financial issues of interest to
clubs at all levels, including those on PAYE, Corporation Tax and VAT.
Copies were circulated to clubs and placed on The FA’s website,
TheFA.com.
*?Liaising with the National Minimum Wage Department of HM Revenue and
Customs regarding the application of minimum wage legislation to payments
by clubs to players. The application of national minimum wage to payments
to players is an important issue for semi-professional clubs. Guidance notes
were prepared, circulated to semi professional clubs and placed on
TheFA.com.
*?Working with clubs that are subject to insolvency proceedings and liaising
with their respective Leagues.
3.3 The FAU’s club review process has now been in operation for five years. All clubs in
the FC and its feeder Leagues have been visited on at least one occasion. 

