 
The direction that social housing policy has taken over the last twenty-eight years in the UK is a residual needs based model, where social housing is concentrated on those with the greatest need, but at the lowest cost to the public purse. This tends to lead to concerns about the creation of communities where the vast majority of the residents are on low incomes, be it welfare benefits or minimum wage paid employment that tends to severely handicap social mobility because of the unbalanced socio-economic mix (Hills, 2007).
The Choice Based Model
The Social Housing Property Plan, makes no mention of choice based social housing allocation. However, we believe that the choice based model provides a fairer approach to social housing allocation and that there is a current trend for the model (Brown et al, 2000), noting that,
“allocation policy are towards choice-based lettings, aiming to enhance
consumer choice into allocations, and towards community lettings, which aim to
widen neighbourhood social and/or demographic mix.” (Cole et al, 2001).
Choice based models may be used by trained social housing allocation staff to
overcome some of the inherent problems with social housing estates, in the form of, Accountancy Business and the Public Interest, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2007
antisocial behaviour, deviancy, crime, dysfunctionality, drug &amp; alcohol abuse and
problems of social and economic deprivation (Murie, 1999). If the above social
problems are allowed to become manifest social housing becomes highly stigmatised
and marginalised, which then tends to be utilised for those families that either cannot
or will not participate in paid employment (Pryke, 1998).
The choice based model allows empowerment of those seeking social housing and
has proven very popular with the State (Councils) that have introduced it since 2000,
and the Department for Communities and Local Government have set a deadline for
all Councils to have adopted the choice based model by 2010 (www.direct.gov.uk,
2007). The choice based models have proven very popular with applicants, who prefer
it to the needs based model, and as a consequence the State (Councils) have/has
witnessed faster re-let times for vacant properties and reduced turnover of stock once
tenants have accepted a tenancy (Hills, 2007).
Tenure Size
Social housing tenants in the UK enjoy less space per person than other types of
tenure, even less than they did a decade ago, and are therefore less satisfied with
their living space. If we use data from the three geographical areas of London, the
South West and the South East as comparable to the socio-economic mix of Jersey,
we can see that the average floor space per person in the private sector is 38.1
square meters, and for social housing the average is 30.0 square meters per person
(Hills, 2007). We could not find statistics on tenure sizes for Jersey.
First Time Buyer Properties
Living in areas like London, the South West, the South East of England and Jersey,
where house prices are very high and unobtainable for a significant proportion of the
population, has led to the first time buyer being unfairly handicapped due to the
economic inequality of these regions (Braham and Sherratt, 2002). Research
indicates that 99.33% of key public sector employees like, firemen, police offices,
teachers, nurses and ambulance staff cannot afford to buy their own property in
Accountancy Business and the Public Interest, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2007
London the South East and South West (The Halifax, 2007). It is now 69.3% more
difficult for first time buyers in the UK to become owner-occupiers than it was in 1994,
due to the steep average house price increases in London, the South West and South
East (Shelter, 2006).
The Housing Mix
We believe there should not be pockets or estates of housing divided by the
occupant's income or wealth. The very reason social housing tends to receive a bad
reputation is because of the polarisation it creates for its tenants. This has been
witnessed in the UK and in Jersey, examples of which would be the old Nicholson
Park and Elysee estates.
With a solely market driven model of housing policy, where those on the lowest
incomes seem to end up in the lowest cost and most undesirable estates leading to
polarization, relative poverty, social exclusion, and lack of opportunity to become
socially mobile. These problems can be overcome to some extent by utilising submarket
rents for those returning to paid employment. Those retuning to paid
employment have traditionally found that as their income increases their rent subsidy
is adjusted, which tends to act as a disincentive to returning to paid employment (Hills,
2007). Socio-economically mixed estates or communities tend to be the only way to a
better society.
The conceptualization of mixed communities or estates, is not a modern idea as
Aueurin Bevan (1949) notes that,
“It is entirely undesirable that in modern housing estates only one type of
citizen should live. If we are to enable citizens to lead a full life, if they are to be
aware of the problems of their neighbours, then they should be drawn from
different sections of the community. We should aim to introduce what has
always been the lovely feature of the English and Welsh village, where the
Accountancy Business and the Public Interest, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2007
doctor, the grocer, the butcher and the farm labourer all lived in the same
street… the living tapestry of a mixed community.”
Bevan's concept of community has been supported by recent research into mixed
communities from twenty case studies, where the overwhelming outcome has been
deemed very successful. Mixed communities seem to have avoided the problems
inherent of social housing estates like, stigmatisation, polarisation and social exclusion
(Holmes, 2006).
Funding Housing
The Social Housing Property Plan states that there is an urgent need for the
maintenance and refurbishment of the existing social housing stock, and that,
“Inadequate revenue budget and capital funds to achieve this re-investment,
and a corresponding duty placed on the Housing Department under the States
Strategic Plan 2006 to 2011, to produce detailed proposals for the procurement
of funding to sustain a programme of refurbishment works for States rental
accommodation.” In addition, that, “For a number of years, the housing revenue
budget has been starved of funds, while at the same time there has been
constant pressure to defer capital spending.” Adding that, “the only realistic way
in which these two issues can be dealt with, is through the sale of some
property in order to raise the funds to be spent on the remainder.” (Social
Housing Property Plan, 2007).
As for first time buyers, The Social Housing Property Plan states that,
“There are undoubtedly a number of ways in which the States could encourage
home ownership, whether (as with the H2 and H3 sites) by supporting the
development of affordable starter homes; through financial assistance in the
form of tax incentives; or (as was suggested recently) through some form of
interest-free loan scheme.” Arguing that this could be achieved through,
Accountancy Business and the Public Interest, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2007
 “Housing association administrating a Homebuy scheme provides an interestfree
loan of 25% of the cost of an identified property on the open market, and
the tenant funds the remaining 75% from savings and/or a mortgage.”
Alternatively, direct discounted sales of existing social housing stock where,
“Prices have been set at 10% discount to first-time buyer market price, with a
contractual provision for States "clawback' of that 10% when the property is
next conveyed”. Alternatively, a shared equity model; where, “In order to extend
the opportunity to as many people as possible, discounts of up to 25% are
offered.” Although, “maintenance obligations for the whole of the property are
passed onto the purchaser, which, together with the reduction in management
costs, will to some extent offset the foregone 25% rent.” (Social Housing
Property Plan, 2007).
We believe that the argument presented in the Social Housing Property Plan, that the
only way to fund essential maintenance and repairs to existing social housing stock is
to sell 800 units to first time buyers is unfounded and ill advised. Jersey has a real
need for significantly more State supplied social housing and first time buyer homes.
This could easily be achieved by using long-term government issued bonds as surety
at commercial banks to raise funding for capital projects, and Jersey's geographical
size would seem perfect for this type of project as,
“Local spending provides local benefit. If capital funding is needed to secure
that benefit, then it makes sense to seek to raise at least some of that funding
in the area that will benefit from the spending.” (Murphy, 2005).
We believe that the Housing Department can take the same advantage as private
business in raising funds for capital projects, where governments always have a lower
cost of borrowing from banks than the private sector. The revenue generated could
cover repayment of loans from commercial banks from the income generated by
Accountancy Business and the Public Interest, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2007
mortgage repayments from first time buyers and rents from social housing tenants in
new and refurbished developments (Steel, 2007).
Summary
It is difficult to analyse the outcomes of this paper in the context of political ideology as
Jersey's government consists of fifty-three independently elected politicians who are
free to vote without the confines of the party political whip. Although, Jersey's social
and economic policies do have similarities to the neo-conservative and neo-liberal
policies of the United States and UK. Therefore, we need to consider weather the
States of Jersey's government is a socially and economically responsible government
in relation to its spending on social protection and benefits, including the supply of
social housing by the State for some its most vulnerable citizens.
Our analysis indicates that Jersey basically has a flat income tax rate of 20%. This has
left Jersey with a low tax revenue take of 11.34% of GNI. This coupled with a £34,000
per annum ceiling on social security contributions and the pending introduction of GST
at 3% clearly demonstrates the regressive nature of the States of Jersey's fiscal policy
strategy. The lack of will to introduce a textbook progressive income tax model has led
to low spending on social protection and benefits at 9.48% of GNI. The introduction of
coercive social policy in the form of long-term incapacity benefit and the pending
income support scheme where people will have to participate in paid employment as a
right of being in receipt of social protection benefits may well lead to increased rates of
relative poverty and further demand for social housing.
Our analysis of the Housing Departments proposal to sell 800 social housing units to
first time buyers with out replacing said stock in conjunction with contemporary data
from the UK seems to indicate that Jersey should be aiming to have approximately
25% of all housing as social housing, not the 10% the States of Jersey Housing
Department deem adequate. We also note that in certain areas of the UK that suffer
from wide socio-economic inequality, like Jersey, there is a real need for subsidised
first time buyer homes for skilled and essential employees, like those from the
Accountancy Business and the Public Interest, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2007
emergency services, where only 0.67% of them can afford to become owneroccupiers.
As we have seen there is a funding model in the form of government
issued bonds as surety at commercial banks to fund capital projects.
The high rents, poor standards of maintenance and lack of choice based allocations
for State supplied social housing, seems to represent a cost-cutting department who
do not understand the role of social housing in the twenty-first century. We would
argue that the States of Jersey governments' lack of will to formulate and implement
sustainable social and economic policies is a government that is socially and
economically irresponsible.
Accountancy Business and the Public Interest, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2007
