TO UNAMBIGUOUSLY INTERPRET data from an OMICS style experiment, there is a requirement for access
to a significant amount of additional information, or data about data (meta-data) (Bammler et al., 2005),
for example, information related to the sample used in the experiment, details of the experimental design,
and hardware used to obtain measurements. It is particularly important to have these meta-data if OMICS
style experiments are to have any applied use in regulation and policy (e.g., chemicals management).
In practice, any one of a myriad of uncontrolled environmental, biological, or technological parameters
can have a significant influence on the resulting data. This is particularly true in environmental OMICS investigations
in which biological samples which come from outbred individuals, populations (of a single
species), and communities (e.g., of soil, water, or artificial environment-like bioreactors). The field of environmental
OMICS is a diverse, heterogeneous discipline, often involving non-model organisms and multifactorial
experiments that can have an extremely large number of measurable parameters. Some of these
parameters are beyond the control of the researcher, but could still represent important information for interpretation
of the investigation. The challenge, therefore, is to provide biologists with a framework that
aids them in identifying and capturing the essential information associated with these particular types of
experiments.
The effective annotation of such data will necessarily require the extension of current OMICS data standards
which have largely been developed to describe model organisms and which are appropriately generic.
Groups that have developed or are developing standards in an attempt to address this requirement for OMICS
style experiments include MGED (Microarray Gene Expression Data Society) for transcriptomics (Ball and
Brazma, this issue), HUPO-PSI (Human Proteome Organisation–Proteomics Standards Initiative) for proteomics
(Taylor et al., this issue), and more recently, the Metabolomics Standards Initiative for metabolic
studies (Fiehn et al., this issue).
In transcriptomics, the MGED society has developed a conceptual structure for representing the Minimum
Information About a Microarray Experiment (MIAME) (Brazma et al., 2001). MIAME outlines the
core information that is common to most microarray experiments and aims to establish a foundation for
the standardized annotation of microarray data (Ball and Brazma, this issue). Most major scientific journals
now require that any microarray data described in publications that involve microarray experiments
comply with the MIAME guidelines. Furthermore, as with sequence data, prior to publication researchers
should first obtain an accession number by submitting their data to a MIAME-compliant, public data repository
such as ArrayExpress (Parkinson et al., 2005), GEO (Barrett et al., 2005), or CIBEX (Ikeo et al.,
2003).
The challenge of capturing domain specific information is not unique to environmental biology and is faced
by investigators in many different areas of biology. Historically, MIAME was developed as a generic specification,
neutral of biological discipline, but there are now successful examples of its extension to describe
particular types of investigations. Discipline-specific initiatives can be regarded as important because they address
“real world” data capture requirements for the particular community they represent. A good example of
this is MIAME for Toxicogenomics (MIAME/Tox), which has expanded the core standard to support more
closely the field of toxicogenomics (Sansone et al., 2004), MIAME for Nutrigenomics (MIAME/Nut) (Garosi
et al., 2005) and MIAME/Plant (Zimmermann et al., 2006). All of these initiatives seek to build new resources
and standardize best practice within their respective communities.
We have built a similar extension to MIAME to meet the needs of the environmental genomics community.
This effort has depended heavily on the involvement of the scientists actually generating environmental
genomic data to help model the concepts for inclusion in the specification who now work together
as the Environmental Genomics Working Group (EGWG). This community project is being coordinated by
the Natural Environmental Research Council's (NERC) Environmental Bioinformatics Centre (NEBC), a
bioinformatics center established to serve the data management needs of this community (Field et al., 2005).
The toxicogenomics, nutrigenomics, and envirogenomic communities have recognized the need for a
strategy that capitalizes on synergies and have joined forces to form the Reporting Structure for Biological
Investigations (RSBI) (Sansone et al., this issue) working group under the MGED umbrella. The EGWG
working group represents the environmental genomics component of the RSBI working group.
In the short-term, the EGWG aims to contribute to the systematic support of transcriptomic data management
generated in environmental genomic studies through the development of:
1. Guidelines and a specification for the extension of the core MIAME specification to create MIAME/Env
to capture environmental transcriptomic data
2. A set of case studies in which MIAME/Env is applied to data from the environment transcriptomics
community
3. An appropriate repository that allows the storage, publishing, and searching of Env annotations such that
they can illustrate the features of Env and promote its discussion within the wider community
In the longer-term, the EGWG hopes to contribute the following in an environmental OMICS context:
4. Terms and structure for an environmental biology ontology
5. Guidelines for the capture of environmental information about the biomaterials used in other OMICS
experiments
6. Closer interactions with members of the wider functional OMICS community
DEVELOPING THE MIAME/ENV CHECKLIST
The general process we have used to develop Env is similar to most efforts to build community-level consensus.
In summary, this process entailed the recognition of the need for an Env extension to MIAME, formation
of a working group, selection of relevant case studies, generation of a MIAME/Env checklist, development
of a suitable implementation, development of a repository to store, view, and distribute Env annotations,
and finally, the annotation of case study data to Env compliant format and submission to the repository. In
this process, the support, both financial and intellectual, of the management of the NERC Environmental Genomics
Science programme (EG) was invaluable (Tiwari et al., 2006).
Rationale
The informal Env specification was developed in the first instance through the formulation of a working
group that included scientists generating transcriptomic data for a variety of species of environmental importance.
From discussions within our community it became apparent that most environmental genomics
experiments can be placed into one of three broad categories:
1. Field trials—Experiments in which one or more organisms are taken directly from the field or obtained
from a standard provider, samples and extracts are prepared, and the hybridizations then performed
2. Conditioned field trials—Experiments in which one or more organisms are taken from the field and conditioned
in the lab or field under controlled animal husbandry conditions (preconditioning) and where
“treatments” (conditioning) may be performed pre- and/or postsample/extract preparation
3. Lab experiments—Experiments in which one or more organisms are lab reared or obtained from a standard
provider and where “treatments” (conditioning) are usually performed pre- and/or post-sample/extract
preparation
This is the principal classification that drove the design of the MIAME/Env specification. We envisaged
that these three experimental types would require different levels of experimental detail to be provided in
certain sections of the specification. For example, field trials might be considered to be an irreproducible
type of experiment, and as such the environmental history and location of the sample source will be of paramount
importance and the information provided here will provide a high degree of detail. In contrast, sections
such as animal husbandry and sample manipulations may be of less importance and might be relatively
sparsely annotated.
Environmental transcriptomic use cases
The draft checklist was developed using case studies selected from our community. The usefulness
of case studies in the development of such a project cannot be overstated. The selection of a range of
case studies helped to define the “core” descriptors that were thought to be essential to capture from environmental
transcriptomic studies. Four of the case studies selected to represent a broad range of taxa
and experimental conditions are described on the project website (_http://envgen.nox.ac.uk/miame/case_
studies.html_) and involved (1) rhythmic gene expression investigation in Nereis virens [egcat:000029],
(2) lytic phase transcription profile of a Coccolithovirus [egcat:000010] (Wilson et al., 2005), (3) application
of microarray technology to reveal the complexity and genetic basis of the environmental adaptive
osmoregulatory physiology of euryhaline teleosts [egcat:000011], and (4) turnip mosaic virus coevolution
in wild Brassica species [egcat:000023]. The description of each case study provided on
the web site overviews the environmental information of most importance to each study to illustrate
the scope of the data that needed to be modelled. Further information about each project is stored in
EnvBase (_http://envgen/nox.ac.uk/envbase_) and can be accessed using the accession number given (i.e.,
egcat:000010).
The MIAME/Env checklist
The MIAME/Env checklist was developed through an iterative process of knowledge gathering by the
developers from the participating environmental biologists and is available from the project website
(_http://envgen.nox.ac.uk/miame/miame_env.html_). In brief, we decided to define four additional concepts
useful for environmental genomics studies: geographic location, environment, organism relationship, and
phenotype. These four concepts range in complexity. Geographic location is given as set of coordinates in
a global context. In comparison, organism relationship has been designed to capture interactions and dependencies
between organisms, a common feature of environmental (ecological) studies used, for example,
to model endo-parasite host relationships, where the “environment” of the parasite under study is another
organism.
In contrast to the minimal complexity required to adequately describe the concepts “geographic location”
and “organism relationships,” the concepts “environment” and “phenotype” can be described with a potentially
endless variety of parameters. For example, worms have about 40 different measurable phenotypic
characteristics. Among those currently used in the analysis of polychaete worms, Rouse and Fauchald (1997)
adopt a methodology in which measures of anatomical characteristics such as the antennae, palps, nuchal
organs, parapodia, and chaetae form the basis of subsequent analyses. In particular, Olive et al. (case study
1) capture information about the behavioral phenotype of costal dwelling worms, recording their activity
as a function of time. Clearly, the majority of these phenotypic characteristics are unique to these specific
types of organisms and do not constitute generic minimal descriptors that would be common for other experimenters
wishing to annotate their data.
The Env specification attempts to overcome this challenge by adhering to a defined structure as follows.
Four pieces of information are collected to describe each optional parameter. The first piece of information
is a “compound concept,” consisting of the entity and a measure of that entity. This is followed by a value
for the measurement; the units used for the value (if appropriate) and finally, the assay used to obtain the
value. For example, when capturing an environmental concept the compound entity might be soil and the
measure of that entity might be temperature (“soil temperature”), the value could be “14,” the unit could
be “Celsius,” and the assay for the measurement was “thermometer.” This concept is based on a proposal
for describing mouse phenotypes (Gkoutos et al., 2005). Capturing the parameters using a generic methodology
such as this, permits data annotation both with existing ontologies and via user-specific terms. Another
benefit of this approach is that it provides a unified method for capturing measured and derived parameters.
Two further additions were made which applied to the description of experimental protocols. Firstly, we
defined terms to describe the biological treatment of a sample (in addition to physical and chemical treatments).
The main motivation for doing this was a particular need among environmental biologists to describe
treatments involving a biological component. For example, one of our case studies (case study 4) examined
the effect on gene expression in the plant Brassica rapa when exposed to a biological perturbation, namely infection
with Turnip mosaic virus. Secondly, the concept “ExperimentalPhase” was defined to record the phase
in the experiment in which a protocol was applied. For example, many of the treatment procedures constitute
an acclimation phase, which involves pre-conditioning the organisms potentially taken from the wild, prior to
treatment or conditioning. This was considered to be a common and important distinction in the phase of most
environmental experiments that the community considered useful to represent about their data.
