This approach should be adopted where there is the
possibility of the reoccurrence of a moderate or severe
injury but the department lacks firm grounds for
seeking statutory powers.
This approach should be adopted where there is moderate
injury, the reoccurrence of which is deemed likely
without specific preventive intervention. The extent of
the injury and the likelihood of its reoccurrence should
be such that on the balance of probabilities it appears
that the child's best interests would be served by
remaining in the family home. Specific requirements
(e.g. regular medical examination or attendance at a
day centre) might form an additional part of this
disposal where appropriate. (Under Magistrates (CYP)
Rules 1970 Sec. 28(2), it is possible for a supervision
order to contain a requirement that a child be medically
examined. It is also possible to attach an intermediate
treatment requirement to a supervision order made in
civil proceedings, although we have never heard of this
taking place. The Review of Child Care Law (DHSS,
1985) recommends that the court in future should have
power to impose these requirements on parents rather
than on children, which it is hoped would improve
enforceability.)
This approach should be adopted where there exists clear
evidence that despite preventive work a risk of persistent
moderate or severe injury to the child exists if left in
the parental home. The seeking of a care order should
take place only when there is a definite intention to
remove a child for a medium to long-term. Early use of
home-on-trial should be discouraged.
538 BRIAN CORBY AND CHRIS MILLS
Decisions about which category to place families in would rely more
heavily than before on explicit consideration of the range of factors agreed
upon as important indicators of risk or non-risk. It may well be that these
factors could be weighted and decisions reached using some form of scoring
system as an aid in this process, although it is important not to see this as a
substitute for decision-making. Area review committees could be involved
in drawing up guidelines for this.
It will be noted that registration does not figure in this scheme. As was
suggested earlier, there are so many dysfunctions associated with registering
children that it would be clearer to estimate the degree of risk involved
as suggested above and categorise the case accordingly. In its present form
the central child abuse register should be abolished. Its importance seems
to have been grossly exaggerated in the past. A study by BASW (1978) and
another reported on by Geach (1983) attest to the fact that little use is made
by practitioners of such registers. In the area in which this study was carried
out individual social work offices kept clearly marked records of children
on the child abuse register and, therefore, rarely needed to consult the
central register itself. There seems to be no reason why such practice should
not continue with cases clearly identified by the level of risk involved. A
central register of the names of those convicted of offences listed under
Schedule 1 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 would obviously
continue to be necessary.
The use of supervision orders, as suggested above, would allow Care
Orders to be used more selectively and reduce the need for early use of
'home on trial'.
MATCHING RISKS AND RESOURCES
Turning to resources, it was clear that in the area studied social workers
were the main resource provided in cases of child abuse. Forty seven of the
S3 cases resulted in allocation to a social worker for help, monitoring or
more serious action. Another resource available for younger children was
that of the day nursery although this was used more selectively. On a few
occasions the services of other health and welfare professionals were
recruited. In other areas there are more services of a therapeutic kind, such
as special units run by the NSPCC, and day centres of various types. Where
such facilities are available clearly they must be included in any risk/
resource calculation made by a case conference in addition to the allocation
of social work manpower. However, it is with the latter that this paper is
mainly concerned, (a) because of the key role played by social workers in
the field of child abuse generally and (b) because of the particular practices
prevailing in the area where the study took place.
CHILD ABUSE 539
At present no official emphasis is placed on the degree of expertise of the
worker being commensurate with the degree of risk involved in a child
abuse case. This should be remedied. In the area under study 7 out of 26
social workers dealing with 25 cases were unqualified and another 10 'Level
II' workers, i.e. qualified workers expected to carry out the full range of
tasks under the supervision of a senior manager. Four of the unqualified
social workers dealt with very difficult cases that resulted in care
proceedings. The reason for this was that they happened to be in situ when
the case was referred initially. Little consideration seemed to be given to
whether they were the most appropriate people to be working with these
families. In practice the senior social workers in these cases assumed a
higher profile than would normally have been expected. However, given the
highly emotive atmosphere surrounding the field of child abuse this
situation should not be allowed to continue. In many of the cases resulting
in public inquiries over the past twelve years social workers lacking
experience in child abuse practice have been exposed to the cruel misery of
being in the public eye. It is the responsibility of organisations to ensure
that adequately trained people deal with such difficult problems. We would
suggest, therefore, that once cases had been categorized in terms of risk
social workers of an agreed level of experience and appropriate training be
allocated to them. In addition resources should be available virtually on a
mandatory footing for social workers' use should they require them and
their clients agree to their use where statutory orders are not in force. What
follows is to be seen as a suggested framework rather than as a blue-print.
(1) Little or no evidence of risk to child. In such cases the family should be
offered the services of the department on a voluntary basis. Access can be
arranged to self-help groups, welfare rights agencies etc.
(2) Recognized low risk. The department should acknowledge that the
family requires child care assistance and advice with the aim of preventing
deterioration in standards of care in the home. A 'Level II' generic social
worker should be assigned to the case. Access to day care and material
resources may be arranged as appropriate.
(3) Moderate risk. Where further abuse of a child is assessed as a
possibility unless social work intervention takes place and the department
is not in a position to seek statutory powers to deal with this, a social
worker of at least 'Level HI' status with a specialized reduced caseload
should be assigned to the case. ('Level HT social workers are expected to
carry out the same duties as 'Level II' workers but by virtue of greater
experience they are expected to operate more autonomously.) The family
should be accorded priority for access to day care, respite care, financial
assistance etc. as necessary.
540 BRIAN CORBY AND CHRIS MILLS
(4) Acute risk. Where further injury to the child is assessed as imminent, a
social worker of at least 'Level IIP status should be assigned to the case
with a view either to intensive work under a supervision order or a care
order. The latter course should be taken only in cases of severe or persistent
abuse where it should be the first consideration.
[In (3) and (4) in areas where additional therapeutic resources are available
these should be considered for use as well].
It should be noted that we suggest that the more serious risk cases in this
scheme be allocated to specialist social workers. There are a variety of
reasons for this. Child abuse work is stressful and demanding particularly
at this level of risk. While we are concerned that social work with such
families should not be solely reactive and defensive there is little doubt that
social control issues and the use of authority are to the fore in this type of
work and not all social workers are at ease in such a climate. In addition the
complexities and pressures of the child abuse system are such that those
with only occasional experience of it find it difficult to work within in a
positive way. It is suggested, therefore, that specialist social workers,
appropriately trained, deal with the more serious cases of abuse. This could
mean changes of social worker if for instance a case moved from level (2) to
(3). This can be difficult for families though the small number interviewed
in this study indicated a preference for openness on the part of social
workers about monitoring and checking on their children. If this were
generally the case and open communication about fears and risks could be
maintained then a change of worker could be achieved without too much
pain or anxiety and it is possible that clients would feel more secure with a
more experienced worker.
CONCLUSION
The suggestions put forward in this paper should, as we have emphasized
throughout, be seen as such, not as blue-prints for practice. What is
important is that greater emphasis be placed on considering risks in child
abuse work and the resources needed to operate within that level of risk. All
too often the notion of risk is eschewed because practitioners, managers
and society as a whole prefer not to think in terms of risk-taking,
particularly where the health and safety of children is concerned. The
preference is for risk-free situations, yet in the field of child abuse such an
approach would only be possible if we were to ride roughshod over the
rights of parents, an option which is considered by us and many others in
our society to be unacceptable. We suggest, therefore, that it is far better to
take a more realistic view of the risks involved in abused children remaining
CHILD ABUSE 541
with their families, decide on courses of action accordingly and have access
to the resources deemed necessary for achieving these.
In addition two further aspects should be considered. Firstly, whatever
systems are adopted for working in the field of child abuse should be
assessed for effectiveness. There are few signs that this is currently being
done. We suggest that attention be given to assessing some of the
intervention strategies proposed in this paper such as the validity of
indicators used to assess risk and the overall effectiveness of decisions
reached so that the system can be modified and developed accordingly.
Secondly consideration needs to be given to the ethos and principles
guiding child abuse work. Much of the discussion in this paper has been
concerned with systems and techniques for protecting children. Most of the
children who come to the attention of the child abuse system remain with
their families and social work and other agency input takes place on a
voluntary basis. In order to maintain this position and protect children at
risk it is essential that an open communication policy (as far as possible)
prevail. The systems and techniques outlined above should not be seen as
strategies for dealing with an enemy. It is important that families be
involved in decision-making to the greatest possible extent, that they be
more involved in the case conference system and be made more aware of the
concerns felt by professionals about their children's health, welfare and
safety than they are at present. Similarly there should be more openness
about the reasons for visiting and monitoring. Families interviewed in this
research preferred social workers to be direct. Gearly there is much that
could be done to enhance social work skills so as to improve open
communication in situations where authority has to be exerted.

