 

 
Although there was a significant (P = 0.0014) correlation between genetic differentiation (/1 – ) and the geographic distance (log km) between sample localities (r = 0.31) for all samples, its effect was rather weak with distance, accounting for less than 10% of the variation in genetic differences among samples (Figure 2a and Table 4). This relatively explanatory capability of geographic distance is a result of large genetic differences between samples with different pheromones at small and intermediate geographic distances (Figure 2). There was a marked increase in the strength of isolation by distance genetic structure when the samples with CEMB and 9MGB pheromones were analyzed separately, with geographic separation accounting for 97% and 54%, respectively, of the genetic variation between samples (Table 4). The correlation between geographic distance and genetic differentiation was significant only for the 9MGB samples (P = 0.0028) after a sequential Bonferroni correction ( = 0.05, k = 3), most likely because the small numbers of CEMB samples available to examine this relationship decreased the statistical power of this test. 


 


 
A neighbor-joining tree55 of showed five groups: Lu. pseudolongipalpis by itself (3MAH); a well-supported (mostly 9MGB) clade containing Altagracia, Guayabita, El Layero, and Las Cabreras from Venezuela; Lu. cruzi by itself (a 9MGB chemotype); a well-supported and distinct CEMB clade that consists of the Marajó, Sobral (CEMB), and Natal samples; and a group containing the remaining samples (Sobral 9MGB, Jacobina 3MAH plus AH, and Lapinha MGB) from Brazil. Phylogeographic trees based upon other genetic distance metrics produced identical tree topologies. 


 
Our analysis of the phylogeographic structure of South American Lutzomyia produced four main outcomes: 1) much of the genetic differentiation between populations reflects geographic separation, 2) the type of sex pheromone released by the male overrides geographic distance effects upon the phylogeographic structure of Lu. longipalpis, 3) these data provide further support for the taxonomic descriptions of Lu. cruzi and Lu. pseudolongipalpis, and 4) the data agree with reported differences in male copulation songs, a second phenotype likely to be involved in sexual selection in Lu. longipalpis.25,26 
Microsatellite loci have become the mainstay of modern population genetics,57 but it is relevant that two processes may reduce genetic variability and therefore affect the relationships between our samples. First, longer (and typically more polymorphic) alleles may be restricted to the focal species (used to isolate the microsatellites).58 We found no evidence for this ascertainment bias because although there was significant variation (different sampling dates were pooled) in allele length among samples (df = 11, P &lt; 0.001 for all loci, by Kruskal-Wallis test), the size ranges of alleles were significantly longer in the Jacobina sample at only two loci and generally overlapped between most samples. Second, this study like many others used sand flies from experimental colonies that may have lost genetic variation through a founder effect. The influence of colonization upon genetic variability and its potential effect upon understanding the genetic relationships of Lu. longipalpis has been questioned, with genetic differences noted for some59 but not all60,61 comparisons between field and colony samples. We could not explicitly test for a loss of variation (there are too few loci for a meaningful bottleneck analysis), but noted that although we observed fewer alleles in the laboratory populations, there were no statistically robust differences in genetic variability between field and colony samples. Furthermore, although Mukhopadhyay and others59 reported a reduction in genetic variability in laboratory-reared Lu. longipalpis from Lapinha compared with its field counterpart, the two sampled populations clustered together but separately from other Brazilian populations in a genetic distance-based dendogram.59 We believe that although there was undoubtedly a reduction of genetic variation in the colonized material, relative to the field sampled sand fly populations, the magnitude of this reduction did not appreciably affect the phylogeographic substructuring shown in Figure 2. A similar phylogenetic tree to that shown in Figure 3 was obtained when the two long-term colony populations (Lapinha and Jacobina) were excluded from the analysis. This indicates that the effect of colonization was negligible in this instance. However, the results presented here would be strengthened by the use of more loci and additional field-caught sample sets. 


 
There was apparent temporal genetic stability in all but in one field population, Lu. pseudolongipalpis, which was caught at its original description site (La Rinconada, Curarigua), which is approximately 20 km from El Paso where a cryptic subspecies of Lu. longipalpis has been detected.33 Although we may have inadvertently collected separate species during different sampling trips, and this cannot be ruled out without further sampling, it is considered unlikely because the significant variation in is due to differences in allele frequency (probably because of small sample sizes and sampling error) at a single locus (LIST6-002), rather than different alleles per se. Furthermore, the phylogenetic structure based upon samples from individual years was identical to that with pooled groups and displayed 100% bootstrap support for the two Lu. pseudolongipalpis samples on their own distinct branch. Although fine-scale genetic differences between temporal collections of the same population might exist, the genetic stability found in this study allowed us to increase sample size through pooling collections made on different dates in the same location. 
Geographic distance between Lu. longipalpis populations was a relatively poor predictor of the level of genetic differentiation among populations when all samples were considered regardless of male sex pheromone chemotype (Figure 2a and Table 4). We note that not only are there genetic differences between Brazilian Lu. longipalpis per se, but that the type of sex pheromone shapes the genetic structure of this sand fly taxon. This conclusion is apparent from the contrasting patterns of isolation by distance with and without regard to the sex pheromone (Figure 2) and the phylogeographic clustering by pheromone, particularly the striking separation of the sympatric Sobral samples between two Brazilian species or clades that are based on different chemotypes (Figure 3). Three independent studies29,42,43 showed strong genetic differentiation between sympatric populations with 9MGB and CEMB pheromones at Sobral, although the magnitude of these differences in one of the studies was lower at Sobral than among other members of the Lutzomyia species complex.43 Although two previous reports described genetic differentiation between a sample from Sobral and other Brazilian populations, because neither study distinguished between pheromone types, it is difficult to interpret their data with respect to speciation processes relevant to Lu. longipalpis.31,61 
The smaller genetic differences among Venezuelan samples (except Lu. pseudolongipalpis) compared with those from Brazil reflects the variation in geographic scale between samples (Table 3 and Figure 3). To what extent the genetic divergence between Venezuelan samples represents restricted gene flow or the presence of sibling species is unclear without breeding experiments. All sex pheromone-typed Venezuelan populations (with the exception of Lu. pseudolongipalpis) were of the wide spread 9MGB type (also in Honduras, Guatemala, Colombia, and Bolivia, as well as the Brazilian Lapinha population).19,62,63 The collection sites for the Venezuelan study collections (El Layero, Las Cabreras, Guayabita, and La Rinconada in Venezuela) were located in tropical dry forest type of vegetation. The role of the Chivacoa Gap in isolating the Laran Clade (Lu. pseudolongipalpis) from other Lu. longipalpis populations has been previously discussed,38 although isolation is not complete since Lu. pseudolongipalpis (3MAH) was found in sympatry with a 9MGB population at El Paso, only 8 km from La Rinconada, Curarigua.33 The Brazilian CEMB populations were located in drier sites along the northeastern region (Marajó and So Luis Islands, Natal, Joo Pessoa, Las Jaibas-Maceió, Alagoas, and Santarem).19,24,63–65 The Jacobina population (the only known 3MAH/AH population) lies in a narrow valley between two mountain ranges east of the Chapada Diamantina Ridge and well separated from the nearest sex pheromone-typed populations. However, at Sobral (a dry caatinga region in northeastern Brazil), two genetically differentiated 9MGB and CEMB populations share the same ecologic habitat.19,42 It would be interesting to estimate the relative contribution of pre-mating and post-mating barriers to gene flow between these sympatric populations. 
This albeit incomplete contemporary geographic distribution of the pheromone chemotypes and the weak correlation between genetic and geographic distances described begs an explanation. The simplest one, based on ecologic distribution, would assume 9MGB as the ancestral chemotype in Lu. longipalpis across the savannahs of South America, followed by subsequent speciation to either 3MAH/AH or CEMB. Forest refuges arose in the dry climatic periods of the cyclical oscillations of cool versus warm ~100,000-year intervals characteristic of the Pleistocene and Recent epochs of the Quaternary period and have been shown to foster increased rates of speciation and biodiversity.66 
Given the size of Brazil, the presence of sibling species in this region should not be surprising. However, the controversy regarding the taxonomy of Lu. longipalpis generally results from the pattern of genetic differentiation among Brazilian samples, which has been interpreted as representing members of the same biologic species or clade.12,30,32,35–40 However, genetic divergence in the per intron and in the cac IVS6 intron among the populations from Jacobina, Lapinha, and Natal supports the occurrence of sibling species or near species in Brazil.28,29,41,42 Overall, the pattern and magnitude of genetic differences between Brazilian sand fly samples reported here is consistent with other studies, importantly including male songs and sex pheromones that indicate that Lu. longipalpis exists as four or five cryptic species or clades within Brazil. These species (siblings, clades, or races) appear to be sibling 1, cembrene pheromone, and burst-type copulation song in northeastern Natal, Marajó, and Sobral CEMB populations; sibling 2, 9MGB pheromone and song pattern I pulse copulation song, at Lapinha Cave; sibling 3, 9MGB pheromone and song pattern II pulse copulation song at Sobral; sibling 4, (3MAH plus AH) pheromone and polycyclic pulse copulation song at Jacobina; and a possible sibling 5, cembrene isomer pheromone at Jaibas in Minas Gerais State.16–24 The present number of known siblings in the South American subcontinent would be six, including the 3MAH-producing Lu. pseudolongipalpis Arrivillaga &amp; Feliciangeli 2001 from La Rinconada and El Paso in the Lara State of Venezuela.15 Current genetic data have been interpreted as consistent with a single species of Lu. longipalpis in Central America, but given the presence of several cryptic species in Venezuela and Brazil, we believe that these data should be treated with caution.10–14,30–32,67 Our data supports only one (Lu. pseudolongipalpis) of the four (cis and trans Andean, Lu. pseudolongipalpis or Laran, and Brazilian) clades suggested by isoenzyme and mitochondrial analyses.38,39 These analyses were interpreted to support a single clade in Brazil, despite a population collected on the Brazilian side of the Roraima formation that clustered with the trans-Andean clade and not within the Brazilian clade.38,39 In these reports, it was concluded that the large genetic distance between the four clades supports vicariance (separation or division of a group of organisms by a geographic barrier) as the most significant force in their evolution.38,39 As shown in Figure 2, our data for six Brazilian Lu. longipalpis populations contests this conclusion. 
Furthermore, most studies have overlooked the distinct CEMB pheromone clade with regard to its effect on the patterns and processes of genetic evolution in Brazilian sand fly populations. For example, an absence of isolation by distance genetic structure has been reported,36,37,40 although three of the populations examined (Lapinha, Jacobina, and Santarém) produced different sex pheromones.19 Where there are sufficient samples, as observed for the 9MGB samples in Figure 3, we demonstrated a stronger pattern of isolation by distance (the Venezuelan and the Brazilian clades) between populations with similar sex pheromones than that observed between all populations. Although genetic differences between Brazilian samples are expected to arise through geographic separation within a particular sex pheromone clade, speciation processes (i.e., pre-zygotic barriers) other than vicariance are clearly shaping evolution within the Lu. longipalpis complex. From the pattern of sample clustering (Figure 3), we suspect that males from Las Cabreras and possibly Altagracia possess 9MGB or a related sex pheromone

