On 21 January 2000, President Clinton, announcing the National Nanotechnology Initiative at California Institute of Technology, asserted that nanotechnology would play a decisive role in bringing about "an era of unparalleled promise'. He continued by asking his audience of scientists and industrialists to:
Imagine the possibilities. Materials with ten times the strength of steel and only a small fraction of the weight – shrinking all the information housed at the Library of Congress into a device the size of a sugar cube – detecting cancerous tumors when they are only a few cells in size. (Cited in National Science and Technology Council Committee on Technology 2000)
Clinton's evocation of a range of unnamed new materialities (with different properties of size, weight and strength), and a named capacity (early cancer detection), resonates with other injunctions to imagine the possibilities of nanotechnology. Injunctions that hope for almost anything from the banal and everyday (such as new hair-care products) to the fantastic and utopian (such as posthuman bodily states). Simply put, despite the ambiguous, reflective, relation we may now have with science and technology, a range of Western governmental and non-governmental actors have created hope for specific nanotechnologies and for nanotechnology as a disruptive event. Potential has come to reside in nanotechnology and promise in a nano-enabled future. The task that animates this paper is, therefore, a simple one – to understand how hope is created for nanotechnology. Hopes such as those listed in the context of US nanotechnology and nanoscience policy:
•
The human body will be more durable, healthier, more energetic, easier to repair, and more resistant to stress, biological threats and aging processes.
•
National security will be greatly strengthened by lightweight, information-rich fighting systems, uninhabited combat vehicles, adaptable smart materials, invulnerable data networks, superior intelligence-gathering systems, and effective defence against biological, chemical, radiological and nuclear attacks . . . (Roco and Bainbridge 2002; bullet points in original)
The open-endedness of this list of just some of the hopes named in Roco and Bainbridge's report, that is its logic of open-ended seriality, hints that the problem that animates this paper is not simply to understand the presence of specific hopes. But, rather, to understand how hopes are accumulated for nanotechnology. Hopes that are perhaps without limit.
Nanotechnology is, of course, not the only new or emerging technology animated by the circulation of hopes in and for possible or potential future benefits. Indeed Mulkay (1993), commenting on the UK embryo debate, argues that hope has been the default mode of legitimization for new or emerging technologies in the West. Now we may want to question this assertion given the emergence of fears and anxieties around new and emerging technologies, a point I will return to later in the paper, but hopes still accompany the emergence of new or altered technologies to serve important functions; disrupting networks, establishing legitimacies, enrolling actors, mobilizing resources, dampening dissents or forcing silences (see Brown 2006). Given these functions, the paper describes how hope emerges alongside the particular disclosure of the nanoscale that is taken to define the event of nanotechnology. The first section argues that the reduction of life to "materiality itself' can only be understood within the context of a set of anticipatory practices that govern futures. Section two argues that anticipatory practices function through affect and that affect is, consequently, transversal to the multiple processes of anticipatory governance. 1 The following two sections turn to describe how hopes have been placed in nanotechnology in UK science and technology policy, focusing on relatively early reports by the MoD (2001) and the DTI/OST (2002). The third section argues that the ground for hopes to be created for nanotechnology is the tension between the promise of an equivalence between "life itself' and matter and the promise of a multiplication of matter into an excess of new or altered materialities. It is then argued that the hopes that emerge in the midst of this tension are legitimized through the strategic enactment of explicitly anticipatory epistemic objects that function by creating what Massumi (2005a) has termed "affective facts'. The conclusion, in the exploratory spirit of this paper and special section, opens up a set of questions about anticipatory knowledges and the governance of affect and offers a definition of nanotechnology based on its disclosure of materiality.
 "Nano', from the Greek nanus ("dwarf'), has rapidly achieved the status of a prefix – as in nano-venture capital, nano-art, nano-electronics or nano-science fiction. Until around 20 years ago it was used only as a highly specialized term describing either small amounts ("nanograms' or parts per billion in analytical chemistry, for example) or small time periods (e.g. nanoseconds in laser pulse spectroscopy). "Nano' is now taken to be a fixed measure, one billionth of a metre, denoting a scale. Nanotechnology is not therefore issue or device based but, as Nordmann (2002) argues, an attempt to inhabit this place and act on the nanoscale – to see, to move around, to move things and to initiate productive processes (see Nordmann 2004). And the nanoscale is a curious place because it is populated by nothing but matter. What exists, and all that can exist, are atoms and different relations between atoms. This reduction of life to "matter itself' unbounds human and non-human bodies by making them mere phantasms subject to the twin moves of analysis and synthesis that have long provided the formal and epistemological basis to atomism (Tiffany 2000). Life becomes matter and matter becomes its constitutive elementary parts (atoms and molecules) which are then synthesized into more complex structures (whether through "molecular self assembly' (Drexler 1986) or "bionanotechnology' (Jones 2004)). Because the atomic microcosm is made the last residue of the real, internal to nano-technoscience is, therefore, a moment of radical doubt: a move that subjects matter to a dream of perfect modulation and discloses the nanoscale as a place subject to a particular sort of inhabitation – unlimited control over the structure of matter. Ultimately nanotechnology is, or so this critical story goes, another example of the instrumentalization of life – albeit one founded on the rationalization of insensible bodies that has long characterized atomism.
Perhaps what the prefix "nano' names, therefore, is not only a place but the reduction of life to matter and the opening up of life to control without remainder. Now this narrative is convincing, perhaps because it makes nanotechnology the culmination of the disenchantment of matter (see Bennett 2001), but it forgets the multiplicity of other ways in which the nanoscale has been, is and will be disclosed. Kearnes (2006), for example, has convincingly argued that nanotechnologies based on biomimetic understandings of "life' complicate this narrative by being based on practices that "modulate' rather than "control' molecular processes (see Bensaude-Vincent 2006). In addition, and the focus of this paper, the practices that establish such complex relations between life and matter are accompanied by a multitude of other practices in different spheres that make and remake the event "nanotechnology'. Because, to put it simply, if nanotechnology can be said to currently exist it is in an odd zone poised between "reality and dream, present and future, fact and fiction' (Hayles 2004, 11). So the two reports on nanotechnology that are the subject of this paper, by the MoD and the DTI/OST, explicitly attach nanotechnologies to a set of risks and opportunities. Both are the result of a range of anticipatory knowledge practices, including Delphi exercises, horizon-scanning exercises and simulations, that over the past 10 years have become institutionally embedded in UK science and technology policy-making. Thus the ontological and temporal indeterminacy of dwelling at the nanoscale is not simply a given but a practical achievement emergent from these and other practices that create, know and govern possible, potential or preferred futures (including roadmaps, future assessments, visions, simulations, scenarios and science fiction).
Given this range, how to understand how anticipatory knowledge functions? Perhaps it is worth pausing, before working through this question, to stress that different anticipatory knowledges have long been intertwined with governing. Divination and clairvoyance were entangled with the exercise of sovereign power in ancient civilizations, whilst, from probability statements about economic cycles through to future markets, the governance of capitalism is anticipatory (Adam 2006). Because of the difference between these techniques it is a mistake to assume that anticipatory practices in relation to nanotechnology are exclusively based on a desire to alleviate future uncertainties. O'Malley, drawing on the example of the promissory logic of contract law, cautions against any one-dimensional understanding of anticipatory practices by arguing that uncertainty itself has long been a distinctive modality of governance based on both
a creative constitution of the future with respect to positive and enterprising dispositions of risk taking and on a corresponding stance of reasonable foresight or everyday prudence (distinct from both statistical and expert-based calculation) with respect to potential harms. (2000, 461; emphasis in original)
Anticipatory governance based upon a logic of preemption, to give a contrasting example, can be entangled with a "when, then' causal logic rather than "what if' questions (Elmer and Opel 2006).
Because of these and other differences, it is worth distinguishing between anticipatory knowledge practices on a number of axes before we turn to focus in the later sections on specific practices, notably scenarios, in relation to nanotechnology. First, and most simply, anticipatory knowledges such as preemption or prevention differ in the skills and techniques that compose them and in their logics and rationalities. Second, different anticipatory practices produce different epistemic objects through which future possibilities and potentialities are disclosed, objectified, communicated and rendered mobile (such as scenarios, trends, forecasts, predictions, signals, plans and roadmaps). For example, the Foresight Institute, the organization founded by Erik Drekler, has created imaginative scenarios of a host of "potential applications' (nanomachines, etc.) alongside technology and social policy "roadmaps' that aim to "ensure the beneficial implementation of nanotechnology' (cited at http://www.foresight.org). Third, the effect of such anticipatory practices is that immaterialities, including risks, threats, opportunities and promises, can be considered to be co-produced as part of technoscientific assemblages. Witness for example how, in a different context to nanotechnology, post 9/11 USA governmentality has moulded itself around the disclosure and elimination of threat (Massumi 2005b).
Anticipatory governance and "affective facts'
 
Despite the odd temporal and ontological status of immaterialities such as risks and threats, poised between the virtual and actual and the present and future (Massumi 2005b), such modes of inactuality can come to take on a complex efficacy. In this section I argue that their efficacy is achieved predominantly although not exclusively through affect and that affect is, consequently, not a mere "extra' to technoscience that can be attributed directly to individual personal feelings or vaguely to a collective mood but a necessary component of how anticipatory practices function.
That certain affects, notably fear, dread and anxiety, accompany the emergence of anticipatory logics of governance is now widely claimed or asserted. Heightened concerns about a range of risks, now in almost every conceivable sphere of thought and life, are argued to have generated a "culture of fear' (see Furedi 2002). New risks are produced and these enact fears and/or anxieties which feed back to produce societies governed by the logic of risk and conduct shaped by danger/threat. Isin, developing the implications of these claims for the subject that is governed, argues that contemporary governance now takes as its subject the citizen as an affective being "who governs itself through responses to anxieties and uncertainties' and is thus incited to make two adjustments to its conduct:

[o]n the one hand the neurotic citizen is incited to make social and cultural investments to eliminate various dangers by calibrating its conduct on the basis of its anxieties and insecurities rather than rationalities, it is also invited to consider itself as part of a neurological species and understand itself as an affect structure. (Isin 2004, 223)

