Alasdair MacIntyre is known as a moral philosopher rather than as an
organization theorist and he has indeed been self-critical in respect of his lack
of attention to, what he has termed, the "productive crafts' (MacIntyre 1994a:
284). However, the growth of his influence across social science since the
publication of his seminal After Virtue, in 1981 (Soloman 2003: 142), has
extended to work within organization science, although much of this work
continues to be contested.
It is in this context that we have written this paper. Its purposes are threefold.
First, to introduce MacIntyre's ideas on virtue in the context of organization;
second, to trace the development of these ideas; and, finally, to sketch some of
the uses to which they have been put in the organizational literature. If successful,
our paper will provide one point of entry to MacIntyre's work for
readers who have not been introduced to it, and make some novel suggestions
about its development for those who have.
MacIntyre's critique of contemporary organizations has formed a remarkably
consistent feature of work that has, in wider respects, been noted for the
changes evident in its ideological commitments (Horton and Mendus 1994:
1; Borradori 1994; MacIntyre 1994b). In attempting to present elements of
his work to make this case, our selections reflect authorial intent more than
the structure of his original arguments. We hope that we have done no violence
to the original, but are aware that this paper is no substitute for it.

The paper begins with some preliminary commentary on epistemology,
without which our notion of his "general theory' might too easily be seen as
a set of abstractions. It traces MacIntyre's occasional work on contemporary
organizations between 1953 and 1980 and suggests that his empirical research
with practising managers in the power industry alerted MacIntyre to the
parallels between the compartmentalization of moral positions within
individuals' roles as managers, citizens and family members, and the victory
of emotivism over other moral philosophies in the modern age. The paper
then provides an account of what we claim to be his "general theory' of
virtues, goods, practices and institutions, which appeared with After Virtue.
The paper concludes with an account of the use of MacIntyre's ideas in the
organizational sciences literatures.
MacIntyre as Critical Realist
Among the relatively fixed points of MacIntyre's moving ideological
commitments is his critical realist approach to method in social science (see
Turner 2003). MacIntyre sees relations between social structures, social roles
(and characters) and the framework of ideas in which agency comes to be
understood, as intimate. The factors that agents take to be motives for, and
justifications of, action are historically rooted in the type of social roles
and ideologies that frame the relations between motives and action.
For example, the modern noumenal self needs little justification for action
other than it be freely chosen, whereas the ancient self of Greek civilization
could not have so justified her action because she had not acquired a notion
of free choice. For her, freedom to choose extended only to alternative means
of fulfilling a social role in a set of circumstances whose understanding
included that of the range of actions required by those who inhabit her social
role (MacIntyre [1981] 1985: 58–59).
It follows that MacIntyre has consistently rejected understandings of social
science as science (MacIntyre [1981] 1985: 88–108), in which human behaviour
can be explained, predicted and, at least in part, controlled through the identification
of relationships between variables, precisely because the understanding
of those variables is peculiar to social structures in which concepts express
relationships characteristic of those structures (MacIntyre [1971] 1978: 83–84).
MacIntyre presents an extended argument in chapters 6–8 of After Virtue
in which these notions are applied to the claim to expertise relied on by
managers for their authority (pace Weber). This is the claim "to possess
systematic effectiveness in controlling certain aspects of social reality'
(MacIntyre [1981] 1985: 74). MacIntyre argues that such expertise (and the
education that promises its transference) requires the demonstration of lawlike
generalizations — hypotheses of causation that predict and explain in the
same way as those in natural science (MacIntyre [1981] 1985: 88–105).
However, sources of unpredictability in human action (including the notions
through which behaviour is understood) are such as to render knowledge of
this kind impossible.

MacIntyre concludes, that the idea of management's expertise in controlling
social outcomes is a myth whose purpose is the maintenance of an
ideology in which the distinction between manipulative and non-manipulative
action is obscured in the name of effectiveness (see also Brehony 2002). The
limits that MacIntyre places on the claims of social science are no proxy,
however, for a commitment to social constructivism (and its postmodern
allies) in its denial of the possibility of truth (see, for example, Borradori
1994: 265).
MacIntyre's position is liable to cause readers some confusion, and one
commentator has observed that "it may be MacIntyre's special distinction to
strike half of his readers as an old-fashioned universalizing metaphysician
(since he defends a version of tradition and teleology) while striking the other
half as a dangerous relativist' (Higgins 2004: 35). Achtemeier (1994) offers
a solution to this problem in arguing that MacIntyre's approach to social
science may be labelled "critical realist' (Bhaskar 1975; Hartwig 2005). At
the risk of oversimplification, critical realism can be characterized as an
approach that maintains the existence of an objective reality (hence exhibits
a realist ontology) while being sceptical towards our ability to understand it
(hence a critical epistemology). MacIntyre's scepticism carries a unique
historical flavour, but there is enough here that echoes critical realism for
MacIntyre's work to suffer from the same misunderstandings that have beset
critical realist work. Part of this problem is that readers schooled in modern
treatments of research methods have learned neither to distinguish between
ontology and epistemology nor to recognize that abjuring this distinction is
itself characteristic of a distinctive position.
Nowhere is this more evident than in Burrell and Morgan's (1979) collapsing
of ontology and epistemology into a single subjective–objective axis,
which, along with the axis of stability and change, serves to locate alternative
research paradigms. For MacIntyre, such approaches fail in their definition
of axes and consequently in their attempt to fix boundaries around ideological
commitment. What is missing from such accounts includes any notion of time.
For MacIntyre, intelligibility requires narrative, and narrative requires
historical awareness (MacIntyre 1990, [1981] 1985: 206, 210). Summarizing
MacIntyre's entire project, Murphy writes:
"The path out of the moral wilderness is the formulation of an ethics of human nature
where human nature is not merely a biological nature but also an historical and social
nature — and the formulation of an historical, but not relativistic, account of
rationality in inquiry.' (2003: 7)
MacIntyre's commitment to historical understanding of the development
of ideas is bound up with his critical realism — such is the intimacy of the
relations between ideas and social structures that changes to both over time
render redundant any attempt at a once-and-for-all determination of paradigms.
Accustomed as we are to thinking about objectivist and subjectivist
assumptions as either opposites or polarities along a dimension, an understanding
of MacIntyre's position requires us to recognize that this way of
thinking about ideas within social science is itself historically specific (Tsoukas and Cummings 1997). Indeed, in Three Rival Versions of Moral
Enquiry (1990), MacIntyre traces and dissects the histories of both objectivist
and subjectivist approaches to moral enquiry (labelled as Encyclopaedia and
Genealogy, respectively).
In writing such an account historically, and not analytically, he was
committed to, argued for and exemplified a different approach to doing social
studies — one that he labels, not as "critical realist' but as "tradition'. In this
approach, enquiry is undertaken through using the best methods we have
discovered up to now, to determine the most accurate rendering of the truth
that can be given up to now. And part of doing intellectual work this way,
is the acknowledgment of the historical rootedness of our ideas, methods
and results.
It turns out that we can only understand this if we have available to us a
notion of tradition in which today's "best so far' is only "best so far' because
it gives a better (according to the "best so far' criteria we have of establishing
merit) account of whatever it is we are considering than have previous accounts
(see Borradori 1994: 262 for a brief version of this argument and MacIntyre
1988 for an extended version). The traditional approach to enquiry holds to a
notion of truth that seeks neither the timelessness of law-like generalizations
nor the dissolution of categories through which enquiry is undertaken (the endpoint
of genealogy). Skinner and Foucault are likewise rejected.
If social theory involves neither testing hypotheses to adduce relations
between variables in the cause of developing law-like generalization allowing
for control of social phenomena, nor deconstructing postulates in the cause
of unmasking power relations, then what does it involve? For MacIntyre,
social theory is active self-reflection in the context of practice; the notion of
disengaged theorizing is illusory. As early as 1953, he wrote that, "Hegel
forgot what Kierkegaard remembered when Kierkegaard said that the tragedy
of the speculative philosopher is that he must turn aside from his place as a
spectator of time and eternity in order to sneeze' (MacIntyre [1953] 1995:
16–17), and this opposition to speculative theory remains his position in his
mature work (MacIntyre 1994a: 289).
His commitment to an engaged philosophy marks an aspect of MacIntyre's
rejection of utilitarian and other supposedly "rational' systems constructed in
the Enlightenment. An early MacIntyre text (1964) captures this. Here he uses
Dickens' contrast of Gradgrind's functional definition of a horse in Hard
Times with the "living skill' of horse-riding (MacIntyre 1964: 5–6) to illustrate
the point that abstract knowledge has "nothing to do with an ability to handle
horses' (MacIntyre 1964: 6). More than 30 years later, his commentary on
Marxism's detachment from practice echoes the same point (MacIntyre
[1953] 1995: xxviii–xxx).
From his earliest writings onwards, before his concept of a "practice'
became central to his mature project (for example, MacIntyre [1953] 1995:
60), through his commitments to and rejections of large portions of Marxism
(Borradori 1994: 258–259), he has maintained that social theory should
embody features of practical social life and that the proper purpose of theory
is to enable practitioners to develop better understandings of that life. Further, the ability to resolve the disputes between or inconsistencies within previous
theories, rather than the ability to explain, predict and control behaviours, is
the hallmark of successful theorizing (MacIntyre 1977a: 460).
Having set out the broad direction of MacIntyre's understanding of
theorizing, and distinguishing it from what usually is required for systematic
thinking to be labelled "theory', we now turn to a representation of MacIntyre's
theorizing about organizations. Although subsequent reflections demonstrate
MacIntyre's rejection of some key theses in his first significant publication
in this area (particularly his preface to its most recent reissue ([1953] 1995):
v–xxxi), Marxism and Christianity contains the condemnation of the capitalist
mode of organization that has persisted in his work (Murphy 2003: 3). In
the section that follows, we focus on two main features of this criticism of
contemporary organizations — the centrality of utilitarianism to corporate
decision-making, and the effects of work under capitalism. We then turn to
After Virtue (1981), as it is only from this point that a positive account of
work in conditions of human flourishing can be found and the centrality of a
conception of the virtues emerges.
MacIntyre on Contemporary Organizations 1953–1980
Decision-making in the Capitalist Mode
The focus of MacIntyre's comments on contemporary organizations prior to
After Virtue is overwhelmingly critical. MacIntyre does not detain readers
long with distinctions between types of organizations within capitalism, but
consistently identifies capitalism both with modernity and bureaucracy as a
mode of production. The distinction between public and private organizations
is also subsumed in his work (MacIntyre 1964: 11; [1981] 1985: 25) and there
is no evidence to suggest, in so far as they take on bureaucratic form, that
voluntary organizations are in any way exempt.
