INTRODUCTION
 

 
Downlapping reflections within these units are likely to represent the outward dipping internal layering that makes up the finer scale internal structure of the mud cone. Similar configurations have been observed within seismically imaged igneous volcanic constructions (Gatliff et al., 1984; Planke et al., 2000). Examples where the internal reflection configuration is chaotic or reflection-free are likely to result from cases where no internal layering has developed, or it has not been imaged. The sheet-like external form and parallel and continuous internal reflection configuration of Unit 3 is not consistent with its interpretation as a mud cone. Instead, we interpret this seismic facies unit as tabular sheet of non-eruptive sediment deposited during a break in the volcanic activity.
Overlying the edifice, within the onlapping unit, is further evidence for activity of the mud volcano system that occurred following construction of the main edifice. The position and shape of the amplitude anomaly observed within this unit is consistent with its interpretation as a series of mud flows. The fact that each mud flow occurs as an amplitude anomaly rather than as a seismically resolvable top and base indicates that its thickness is below the limit of vertical seismic resolution (?/4), which in this case is approximately 12 m. The radial arrangement of these kilometre-scale mud flows bears a close resemblance to the centimetre-scale flow patterns observed at metre-scale mud and fluid vents (gryphons) that occur on numerous currently active onshore mud volcanoes (Fig. 5c). This observation highlights the multi-scale nature of mud volcanic depositional components. It also provides an insight into the likely pattern of mud flows that stack to form the wedge-shaped seismic facies units identified within the main edifice.
Edifice collapse history
The sub-circular depression in the BMV reflection located at the centre of the edifice has been an important structural element throughout the volcano system's evolution. The extensional offset of the BMV reflection around this depression leads us to interpret this feature as a circular fault system that has formed by the focussed gravitational collapse of the BMV surface. The feature has previously been termed the "caldera' of the mud volcano system by Davies &amp; Stewart (2005) due to its structural similarity to igneous calderas. We refer the reader to this study for a detailed description of the caldera's deeper structure (see also Fig. 2).
The uneven displacement distribution around the caldera's bounding fault system indicates that collapse has been asymmetric; similar to the "trapdoor' type of igneous caldera (Cole et al., 2004). As the thickness of the internal mud cones will be affected by the development this caldera, our 3D analysis of the internal structure of the edifice provides a useful framework for assessing the temporal evolution of the caldera fault system. The following discussion of this evolution is illustrated with reference to Fig. 7b, where we have coloured internal sections of the edifice to reflect the perceived level of caldera growth during the volcano system's evolution.
Seismic facies Units 1, 2 and 3 thicken towards the centre of the caldera and thin significantly across the margin with greatest displacement. This pattern suggests that the centre and hinged side of the caldera was a zone of greater accommodation space during the deposition of these units. It is therefore likely that the caldera was actively subsiding during construction of the lower part of the edifice (coloured red in Fig. 7b). Within this growth section, the reflection "X' is deformed by the synform that faces the area of greatest caldera fault displacement (marked Y in Fig. 7c). The position and extent of this synform suggests a genetic link with the largest displacement section of the caldera fault. We interpret it as a hangingwall basin to the section of the caldera fault that it faces (Fig. 7c, Childs et al., 2003). It can therefore be used as an "indicator' of caldera fault activity. The structural concordance observed between BMV and reflection X in Unit 1 indicates that reflection X was present before the development of the synform (Fig. 7d). The lowermost part of Unit 1 (below reflection X) therefore must have been erupted before the formation of the synform and thus before the initiation of the caldera fault. The section can therefore be considered as pre-caldera and has been coloured blue in Fig. 7b and d. The small u-shaped depression present within the Unit 1 mud cone is part of this pre-caldera section (Fig. 4). The shape of this feature and position near a thick section of the cone suggests that it is likely to represent an eruptive crater. This has previously been termed "the pioneer cone' by Davies &amp; Stewart (2005). We consider it likely to have been the source of the pre-caldera erupted mud.
Overlying the growth section, the smaller thickness reduction of Unit 4 across the caldera fault may also suggest that the caldera was actively subsiding during its deposition. However, by this stage in the edifice's evolution a thick pile of sediment had accumulated above the hinged side of the caldera meaning that this change in thickness could also be the effect of differential compaction (coloured yellow in Fig. 7b). No thickness reduction of Unit 5 indicates that and no further caldera collapse was occurring at the time of its deposition (coloured grey in Fig. 7b).
Volcano system eruptive history
Our analysis reveals a complex eruptive history involving construction and collapse of a large edifice followed by extrusion of minor eruptive deposits during it's burial. We have summarized the key stages of this history in a schematic model for the evolution of large mud volcanoes based on the analysis of Chirag (Fig. 8).
Stage I involves the deposition of the "pioneer cone', which was sourced by a narrow (&lt;10 m diameter) feeder conduit terminating at the surface as a volcanic crater (e.g. "Lusi' mud volcano East Java – Davies et al., 2007) This was followed by initiation of focussed collapse of the edifice floor and development of the asymmetric caldera fault system, possibly as a result of localized depletion of the system's source region. Further extrusive pulses took place during this phase resulting in the deposition of the edifice's growth section (Stage II). We speculate that upon initiation of this phase the eruptive source point moved from the pioneer cone crater to the caldera fault itself. Towards the end of the growth phase a break in eruptive activity resulted in the deposition of a layer of non-eruptive background sediment (Stage III). Later pulses of extrusion resulted in the deposition of large mud cones (Stage IV). By this stage caldera growth was minimal.
Following the phase of edifice construction, mud volcanism at Chirag appears to have continued during the deposition of the onlapping unit that overlies the stacked mud cones (Stage V). This period of extrusion did not result in the construction of mud cones as observed within the main edifice. This may be due to a lower eruptive volume, an increased background sedimentation rate, acceleration of fold growth or a reduction in the viscosity of the erupted mud. Fluids and sediment erupted during this late stage of the system's evolution may be the result of remobilization of previously erupted material within the underlying edifice as it is buried and compacted (Fig. 2).
Implications for fluid and sediment eruption
The composition of the Chirag edifice as a number of individual component mud cones suggests it was constructed by a number of discrete extrusive periods, rather than a single uninterrupted episode. With an average sediment volume of approximately 2.7 km3 as the record of each pulse; each one is likely to have involved the release of considerable volumes of fluid (both liquids and gases) from the host sedimentary basin.
Pulsed fluid expulsion of this kind reflects periodic activity of the hydrodynamic system and supports the idea of some form of "on–off' trigger mechanism controlling the eruption pattern. Reasons for this pattern are uncertain. Possibilities range from repeated mechanical seal-failure and resealing events within the conduit system (Sibson et al., 1988; Roberts &amp; Nunn, 1995), to some form of temporal variation in the deeper hydrodynamic drive of the system and mud source output rate. Cyclical and pulsed fluid expulsion from sedimentary basins in general is a widely reported phenomenon observed in a range of tectonic settings (Hallager et al., 1990; Roberts &amp; Nunn, 1995; Carson &amp; Screaton, 1998; MacDonald et al., 2000; Bons &amp; van Milligen, 2001).
This study suggests that pulsed fluid flow through large, long-lived mud volcano systems may be a volumetrically significant process of fluid and sediment expulsion from sedimentary basins. It highlights the importance of pulsed fluid-mud expulsion patterns in controlling the internal architecture of large mud volcano edifices.
Comparison with igneous volcano systems
Difficulties in assessing caldera structure within the igneous realm arise because studies of most modern calderas are limited due to superficial exposure, their large dimensions, overprinting by other structures and deep erosion (Branney, 1995; Lipman, 1997; Beresford &amp; Cole, 2000; Lipman, 2000; Smith et al., 2006). Well-imaged analogous systems from other volcanological domains are therefore of potentially high value to the study of igneous caldera structure and formation. Chirag is a pristine example of a well-imaged complex mud volcano system within which we can observe characteristics of both structural and eruptive style that are similar to many igneous volcano systems. These similarities highlight the potential of large mud volcano systems to act as important analogues for igneous volcano systems.
Firstly, the maximum displacement on the central trapdoor caldera fault is approximately 480 m which is comparable with direct measurements taken from the late Palaeozoic Glencoe and Ben Nevis calderas of Scotland, where at least 300 and 450 m, respectively, of downfaulting has been determined (Bailey &amp; Maufe, 1960). The 2 km diameter of the Chirag caldera falls within the broad range of typical igneous caldera sizes (&lt;1 km – 40 × 75 km diameter) and has most in common with basaltic and andesitic calderas (Lipman, 2000).
Secondly, characteristics of the volcano's eruptive history show a close similarity to igneous volcano systems. For example, Lipman (2000) has proposed a model of caldera-forming eruption cycles based on data from a range of igneous volcanoes. First is a phase of pre-collapse volcanism that is often sourced from a discrete central vent followed by a ring-vent phase and caldera-collapse (Cole et al., 2004; Kennedy et al., 2004). Finally, the system undergoes a resurgence of magmatism that is most commonly focussed on the caldera fault zone. This model closely matches the evolutionary history of the Chirag edifice described above and depicted in Fig. 8.
3D seismic reflection data have been used in this study to describe the internal architecture of a large mud volcanic edifice leading to a reconstruction of the volcano system's eruptive history. In doing so, we have recorded the evolutionary history of a large focussed fluid flow system in a tectonically active sedimentary basin. The key elements of this eruptive history have been presented in a new model of mud volcano system evolution, which may be applicable to other large mud volcano systems. Characteristics of the eruptive history highlight the importance of pulsed fluid flow through long-lived mud volcano systems as a mechanism of fluid and sediment expulsion from sedimentary basins. The duration and frequency of each pulse is important in controlling the internal architecture of large mud volcano edifices. Strong structural and evolutionary similarities can be observed between the studied mud volcano system and magmatic volcanoes. This supports the notion that large mud volcano systems may act as important analogues for igneous volcano systems.
The authors would like to thank BP for the provision of data used in this study and NERC for provision of award number NER/S/C/2004/12724 that supports the research. We are also grateful to Schlumberger GeoQuest for the provision of IESX and GeoViz software package. We thank Sverre Planke and Ben Clennell for helpful reviews and members of the 3DLab at Cardiff University for helpful discussion. The technical conclusions presented here do not necessarily represent the opinions of BP or the AIOC Partnership.

