INTRODUCTION
Allergens are defined as either the source of an allergy-producing substance, the substance itself, or one or more of the specific proteins that make up the substance and provoke the immune response. The allergens that affect the largest amount of people are those that are present in the air around us, and they are called environmental inhalant allergens or inhalants.
It is fascinating to note that allergic individuals have reactions that range from almost unnoticeable to life-threatening on exposure to substances that cause no problem to the large majority of the population. In vivo challenge procedures can be very useful in the analysis of allergic symptoms. Skin testing has a high degree of sensitivity and specificity for determining antigens that cause allergic disease. However, positive skin tests do not necessarily indicate that a specific allergen causes symptoms specific for a certain organ.
To the majority of the general public, allergy testing is mysterious and largely misunderstood.[1] The allergen source materials are heterogeneous mixtures of proteins, glycoproteins, carbohydrates and other substances that are not allergenic. It is not unexpected that variability exists between test results obtained with different allergen-containing reagents.
The earliest method of standardising allergen extracts was arbitrarily designated 1 g of pollen as containing 1 million Noon units: A 1/10 (w/v) extract prepared by extracting 1g of pollen in 10 mL of extraction fluid would contain 100 000 Noon units per mL. This weight-by-volume (w/v) system has been extended to virtually all allergen source materials and is still the most widely used in clinical practice.[2]
When it became obvious that most allergens were proteins, the protein-nitrogen unit (PNU)[3] was proposed as a method of standardising allergen extracts. One milligram of protein nitrogen is equivalent to 100 000 PNU.
More recently, the clinical laboratory has employed monoclonal antibody-based enzyme immunoassays to quantify dust mite, cat, dog, and cockroach indicator aeroallergen levels[4][5] in indoor home and work environments. Levels of allergenic proteins in environmental and medical/consumer products are measured by other assays such as the competitive inhibition radioallergosorbent test.[6]
Allergic reactions are processes based in the immune system. People develop allergies because their bodies become sensitised to a specific allergen. This sensitisation can develop over a period of hours to many years and causes the release of histamines. The histamine binds with other cells to produce the allergic reaction. Genetics and environmental exposure are believed to play a part in sensitisation. But, even with a genetic history, a person must be exposed to an allergen source in order to develop allergies. After a person becomes sensitised, their body reacts whenever they come in contact with the allergen. Low levels of exposure may cause mild symptoms, whereas high levels may cause more severe symptoms. Allergens can affect people through skin contact, inhalation, or ingestion. Common reactions to allergen exposure are sneezing, coughing, wheezing, watery and itchy eyes, rashes, or eczema. These reactions occur because of the histamine reaction in the body. It is one way our body tells us to stay away from the allergen. Antihistamines are over-the-counter medications commonly used for mild forms of allergic reactions such as itching, sneezing, or rashes. When the symptoms involve the respiratory system such as wheezing and coughing, the doctor prescribes medication. The best way to avoid the asthma symptoms related to allergen exposure is to avoid coming in contact with the allergen.
Indoor allergens are proteins found in homes, at work, and in schools. These indoor allergens are year-round and cause a constant source of exposure. This constant exposure increases the risk of sensitisation to indoor allergens. The most common indoor allergens are pets, dust mites, cockroaches, and moulds.
One allergy often leads to another. Taking some general precautions may therefore prevent an individual from developing further allergies - or at least may provide some relief from allergic symptoms. To successfully accomplish avoidance, the individual must know the allergen content of the environment, preferably by a simple quantitative measurement of an indicator aeroallergen. A full-service diagnostic allergy laboratory can provide quantitative measurements of dust mite, cat, dog, and cockroach aeroallergens to determine relative burden levels. Determination of protein content of allergens gives an idea of the presence of allergens or dust materials in the atmosphere. We have developed devices to estimate the amount of allergens by conducting tests with extracts from aeroallergens produced by cats, cockroaches, pollen, food, bird feathers, etc. This may be used for determining an exposure risk that would facilitate avoidance therapy.
Though, at this stage, it is difficult to assess quantitative differences between various allergens present in the air, an overall idea of the allergen level might be obtained.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Protease (EC 3.4.24.31 from Streptomyces griseus: 5.2 U mg-1), l-amino acid oxidase (l-AAO, EC 1.4.3.2 extracted from the venom of Crotalus adamateus: 0.31 U mg-1), and D- amino acid oxidase (D-AAO, EC 1.4.3.3 from porcine kidney: 0.81 U mg-1), bovine serum albumin (BSA) and all amino acids were supplied by Sigma Chemicals Co Ltd, Poole, Dorset, UK and used as received. Hydroxyethylcellulose (HEC) was supplied by Fluka (Gillinham, UK). Acrylamide was supplied by SISCO Research Laboratories Pvt Ltd, Mumbai, India and N,N-dimethylene-bis-acrylamide was obtained from Merck KgaA, Darmstadt, Germany.
Allergens
All allergens were received from Biopol Laboratory Inc, Washington, USA. The allergens were 1. Periplaneta americana (Cockroach) detritus, 2.Medicago sativa (alfalfa) pollen, 3.Zea mays (corn) pollen, 4.Lolium perenne (perennial ryegrass) pollen, 5.Ustilago maydis (corn) smut, 6. Melopsittacus undulatus (parakeet) feathers, 7.Felis sylvestris (cat) hair.
Fabrication of electrodes and flow cell
Disposable sensor
Three-electrode devices were mass manufactured in-house by a multi-stage screen-printing process using a DEK 248 machine (DEK, Weymouth, UK). Devices were printed on to 250 µm thick polyester sheet (Cadilac Plastic, Swindon, UK). The circular electrocatalytic working electrode (WE) (planar area: 0.16 cm2) was fabricated from MCA4A, a commercially available carbon powder containing 5% w/v rhodium (MCA Services Ltd, Cambridge, UK), made into a screen printable paste by mixing 1:3 in 2.5% w/v HEC in buffer electrolyte. The sensor consisted of a reference electrode made of 15% w/w silver chloride in silver paste (MCA Services Ltd, Cambridge, UK) and a counter electrode made of carbon.[7] The schematic of the sensor is shown in Fig 1. 

Figure 1. Screen-printed disposable electrode.
[Normal View 12K | Magnified View 28K]
Flow cell
The cell was made of two polymethylmethacrylate (Perspex) blocks having a grooved design to fit the screen-printed electrode (Fig 2) manufactured as described above. The analyte solution was periodically passed through the cell covering the three electrodes by a peristaltic pump at a measured rate. 

Figure 2. Screen-printed flow cell electrode.
[Normal View 6K | Magnified View 16K]
Methodology
The idea of this research work was to develop an easy-to-use device to assess the quality of the environment with respect to allergens and not to identify individual allergens or the total protein content of the allergens. Thus methods were employed to assess the overall allergen content in the environment by measuring responses due to soluble protein in the allergen extract.
Three different techniques were applied to measure the extracted soluble protein content of the allergen samples. The first one used a dual-step potential electrode,[8] where an electrolyte, 0.1 mol L-1 KBr solution in buffer, was first electrolysed, producing bromine, at a high voltage (1.6 V) and the bromine was consumed by protein at a lower potential (0.6 V).[9] During the generation step at +1.6 V bromine was produced from dissociation of KBr according to the reaction: 

1
Almost all amino acids (except hydroxyproline and proline) are -amino carboxylic acids containing hydrogen attached to carbon in the aliphatic chain. Since protein consists of a number of amino acids, bromine undergoes both addition and substitution reactions. Addition of bromine takes place to the double bonds present in a few amino acids while bromine substitutes hydrogen in most of the amino acids. This is oxidative degradation of protein by bromination. At +0.6V in the second step, bromine produced in the earlier step was consumed by protein. The experiments were conducted on screen-printed disposable as well as flow cell electrodes. 
The second technique used a bi-enzyme electrode,[10][11] where the soluble protein was first hydrolysed into amino acid by the enzyme protease and then the amino acid was detected by amino acid oxidase. Protease was used as it displays wide range of substrate specificities since it is a mixture of at least three proteolytic activities including an extra cellular serine protease. 

2


3
The hydrogen peroxide thus produced was measured at 0.35V across the working electrode. 

4
The above two techniques were used to compare the overall protein content in the allergen samples. In the case of the dual-step potential technique the consumption of bromine or the current response is proportional to the protein concentration. For bi-enzyme electrodes the production of H2O2 depends on protein concentration and current response increases with increase in protein content in the sample.
The third one was a standard protein measurement technique, ie Lowry's method.[12] This was done to compare the accuracy of results obtained by these biosensors.
A unique approach was used to immobilise one of the two enzymes, protease, by microencapsulation using a polymer, cellulose acetate butyrate (CAB). The advantages were two-fold. Firstly a separate membrane such as immunodyne ABC was not required to make a barrier between the two enzymes. Secondly due to microencapsulation, the enzyme protease was held firmly inside the microcapsules and these could be used repeatedly since the enzymes might not be washed away by the bulk analyte. In common immobilisation techniques, eg physical adsorption, gel entrapment or cross-linking there are chances of loss of enzyme due to washing or loss of activity due to cross-linking. The screen-printed electrodes were first coated with L- and D-amino acid oxidase. The L- and D- amino acids have different specificities for all amino acids. So an optimised amount of AAO (30 mU L-AAO and 25mU D-AAO) per electrode was used. The response from 26 conventional amino acids with L- and D-amino acid oxidases have already been studied and reported.[7] A two-step emulsification procedure was adopted to produce the protease microcapsules. The first emulsion was produced by water containing required amount of protease and the polymer solution (10% w/v of cellulose acetate butyrate in dichloromethane) using a sonicator (Sonics and Materials Inc, Danbury, CT, USA, VCX 600) with span-85 (200 µL) to make a water-in-oil (w/o) emulsion. This emulsion was slowly sprayed to an external aqueous (15 mL) phase having 0.5% w/v poly (vinyl alcohol) and 300 µL Tween 80 (Sigma Chemicals Co Ltd, Dorset, UK) to yield a water-in-oil-in-water (w/o/w) multiple emulsion. The multiple emulsion was fed to a B-191 (Buchi, Flawil, Switzerland) spray drier to produce microcapsules in powder form. The required amount of this powder was mixed with an aqueous acrylamide solution (7 µL per electrode) and carefully polymerised on the working electrode in the presence of the cross-linker (2 µL) N,N-dimethylene-bis-acrylamide. The resulting modified electrode will be referred in the text as microencapsulated enzyme electrode, MEE.
The mechanism of this electrode involved transport of analyte into the microcapsules thereby generating amino acid which diffused out of the capsules and reacted with the amino acid oxidase enzymes to produce hydrogen peroxide.
Instrumentation
The test procedures were controlled using an AutoLab Electrochemical Analyzer (µAutoLab - Type II) with GPES software (Ecochemie, Utrecht, The Netherlands).
The response of an individual electrode was obtained by deducting the corresponding base line current, from the response at a particular set of conditions. The average value of three such measurements was used in the graphs.
Allergen extracts
Allergen extracts were prepared by the conventional approach of preparing soluble protein samples from a wide variety of source materials including pollens, arthropods, and foods.[13-15] Fifty mg of the solid samples were mixed in 1mL phosphate buffer, 100 µmol L-1, pH 7. These were kept for 24 h at room temperature, centrifuged, and filtered. The product was a clear liquid containing only soluble protein. 5µL of each extraction fluids of allergens was added on different electrodes containing 45µL (10 times diluted) phosphate-buffer with KCl (0.1 mol L-1) in O-rings mounted around the three-electrode sy (iii)
The standard protein measurement technique as described by Lowry.[12]

