For both solutes the rejection improved as filtration pressure increased, with the largest gains being achieved at lower pressures. The data suggest that over the tested pressure range the rejection of 9,10-diphenylanthracene lies below that recorded for iron (III) acetylacetonate; molecular weights were 330 and 353, respectively. Although there is some scatter, the progressive blending of results from the two apparatus vindicates the comparison of data obtained above the hydrodynamic threshold. The rejection of 9,10-diphenylanthracene was further studied in a range of solvents and the results are compared in Fig. 6. In all cases the rejection improved as pressure increased, with rejection from the n-heptane/xylene mixture being comparable to that recorded using cyclohexane; in both these cases ? = 16.8 MPa0.5. Rejection levels with n-heptane were consistently the lowest whilst experiments with xylene displayed the highest rejections. The results confirm the indications from Fig. 4 and strengthen the argument that low-polarity solute rejection is uniquely dependent on the degree of solvent induced swelling. It is noted that the data in Fig. 6 are similar to those reported by Scarpello et al. [1] who suggest that limiting rejection with pressure is caused by compaction of the membrane. Structural change would potentially cause flux to decline noticeably and this phenomenon was not observed in any of the data obtained by the authors. On the contrary, the measured flux/pressure relationships (i.e. Js versus ?P/?) exhibited linearity over the tested pressure range with the slope being determined by the extent of solvent induced swelling. For a given solvent/solute combination, the increased rejection with pressure is apparently not solely a consequence of any change in membrane structure. 
3.3. Effects of concentration
The rejection of 9,10-diphenylanthracene was investigated with a xylene solvent at concentrations of 10–75 ppm. Although still relatively low, the upper limit of concentration is well above the normal levels found in the process fluid of interest. With reference to Fig. 7, rejection is for practical purposes independent of concentration over the range studied. It is considered that solute concentrations in the ppm range are not sufficient to influence the degree of solvent induced membrane swelling, and hence the rejection remains unchanged. Intuitively, much higher solute concentrations may impact on the degree of swelling and rejection will in this case be determined, in part, by the amount of solute. A further factor that could be influenced by solute concentration is solvent flux and Fig. 8 shows example data for xylene determined over the same range of concentration. Again, for practical purposes, the inference is that solvent flux is independent of solute concentration. 
Fig. 7. Typical effect of solute concentration on the rejection behaviour of 9,10-diphenylanthracene. 
Fig. 8. Influence of 9,10-diphenylanthracene solute concentration on xylene flux. 
3.4. Effects of solute size
Experiments with additional PNA, organometallic and sulphur-bearing solutes were chosen to examine the influence of solute size (see Table 1). The limiting rejections of these solutes in xylene as a function of molecular weight are shown in Fig. 9. With the exception of rubrene which gave a rejection lower than expected, the membrane exhibits a molecular weight cut-off in the region of 350–400 g/mol. Such behaviour is indicative of the selective PDMS layer rejecting low-polarity, minimally interacting solutes on the basis of size exclusion. The data in Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, and other data [7] and [14], suggest viscous solvent transport to an extent dependent on the degree of swelling induced porosity. Increasing solute rejection with molecular weight has previously been reported by Gibbins et al. [9] for an MPF-50 membrane where solute molecular weights ranged from 250 to 400 g mol?1. A size-exclusion mechanism seems unlikely for dense membranes like PDMS as solute (and solvent) transport is intuitively diffusive. Although larger molecules can be expected to have very low rates of diffusion through PDMS and thus high rejections, smaller molecules would not be expected to give zero rejections as observed in Fig. 9. The latter could potentially occur through a number of scenarios, including: 
• Solvent is transported via viscous flow and solute flux is diffusive. For this process to occur the solvent and solute transport rates need to be the same.
• Solvent and solute fluxes both occur via a diffusive mechanism at identical rates.
• Solvent and solute are transported via a viscous flow mechanism at the same rate.
Fig. 9. Effect of solute molecular weight on solute rejection from a xylene solvent (CF = 25 ppm; see Table 1 for solute designations). 
In the authors' opinion, the most feasible explanation is the latter where the solvent swells the membrane to effectively induce an ill-defined porous structure in the PDMS, and the zero rejections are due to the solvent and solute moving through the membrane structure "as one' under viscous flow with no separation occurring. Using a more limited range of solutes, very similar behaviour to that shown in Fig. 9 was measured for an n-heptane solvent, albeit with rejections 5% below those recorded for xylene due to the increased membrane swelling. It is noted that zero rejections were previously reported by van der Bruggen et al. [8], who studied the behaviour of a 340 g mol?1 solute in a range of solvents with an MPF-50 membrane. They found that solute rejection was zero in n-hexane (but not in other solvents), and speculatively suggested that contact with organic solvents increases the mobility of the polymeric chains in the membrane to allow unhindered transport of solvent and solute. 
The outlying rejection for rubrene in Fig. 9 questions the validity of using molecular weight to characterise solute rejection. Due to the fine length scales involved in NF, the dimensions of the solute molecule are likely to be an important factor in determining rejection behaviour. Although there are inevitable approximations, representative sizes of the solute molecules were calculated using bond lengths and covalent radii and, where necessary, by resolving bond angles to a single plane. There are several dimensions that could be used to describe the size of a particular solute, for instance, the maximum length of the molecule or the diameter of a sphere that encloses the entire molecule. By way of example, the limiting rejection in xylene as a function of maximum length is shown in Fig. 10; it is noted that the tested solvents have estimated maximum molecular dimensions of 0.8 nm or less. These data give a relatively sharp transition in the region of 1–2 nm and the result for rubrene follows the data for the other solutes closely. With experimentally measured rejections it is possible to use models developed for ultrafiltration to predict an equivalent pore size of the PDMS membrane [15] and [16]. Based on the rejection of 9,10-diphenylanthracene from xylene, the Ferry, Steric-Hindrance-Pore (SHP) and Verniory models, respectively, predict average pore sizes of 2.2, 2.0 and 2.5 nm, which are at the upper limit of the value suggested by Fig. 10. 
Fig. 10. Effect of molecular dimension on solute rejection from a xylene solvent (CF = 25 ppm; see Table 1 for solute designations; Region A: viscous flow, no separation; Region B: viscous and diffusive flow; Region C: size exclusion, high rejection). 
It is noted that the data in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 could be interpreted on the basis of solution-diffusion since the solute diffusion coefficient will decrease with increasing solute size. Although alternative mechanisms cannot be completely dismissed given the current level of knowledge, in the authors opinion the sharpness of the profile in Fig. 10 is more indicative of a size exclusion/sieving mechanism. Considerable coincidence would be required for the sorption and diffusion coefficients of all the tested solutes to align in a manner to produce the results shown. 
3.5. Modelling
In Fig. 10, three distinct regions are evident. In Region A the solvent-induced swelling of the membrane causes sufficiently small solutes to translate directly with the solvent flow. In Region C the solute molecules are sufficiently large for high rejection to occur predominantly via a size exclusion mechanism. In Region B it is envisaged that a mixture of viscous flow and diffusion exists and a new model has been developed to aid interpretation over this region.2 
In the viscous-diffusion model, solvent flux, Js, is assumed viscous and expressed as

where ?P is the trans-membrane pressure, x the membrane thickness and k the membrane permeability induced by the solvent (this parameter also incorporates the viscosity term). Solute flux, Ji, is considered a combination of viscous and diffusive transport and in the general case:

where a is the fraction of solute undergoing transport with the viscous flow, CF and CP are solute concentrations in the feed and permeate, respectively, and D the diffusion coefficient. Solute rejection, R = 1 ? CP/CF, but at low concentrations of solute, CP can be approximated as Ji/Js, giving

which upon dividing by CF and rearranging gives

In Eq. (4), as ?P ? ? so R ? (1 ? a) which is a different result from the solution-diffusion model [5] where R ? 1 and is more in keeping with the behaviour of the solvent/solute systems in Region B of Fig. 10. Noting that the data were obtained above the hydrodynamic threshold, Fig. 11 shows the experimental rejection of 9,10-diphenylanthracene along with the rejections predicted by the viscous-diffusion model. A least-squares analysis was used to fit the model to the experimental data and facilitate determination of the two parameters, a and D; the former has most effect on the magnitude of the limiting rejection whilst D principally influences the form (shape) of the rejection curve. Fig. 11 shows the viscous-diffusion model to fit the experimental data well, which in turn suggests that the concept of a combined viscous and diffusive solute flow may have some virtue (see also [10] and [17]). The value of a is dependent on the solvent type (i.e. the degree of swelling) and the size of the solute molecule under consideration. The model suggests that larger solutes will be rejected by size exclusion, or perhaps transport very slowly via a diffusive mechanism. In either case, solute rejection can be expected to be very high with correspondingly low values of diffusion coefficient. Similarly, small solutes will transport entirely with the viscous flow and undergo very little or no separation. The rejections observed in Fig. 10 support these arguments. In the viscous flow Region A, the parameter a = 1, and in the diffusive or size exclusion Region C, a = 0 and D values are very low. In the intermediate Region B, where the solute molecular weight is of the order of 250–400 g/mol, the viscous-diffusion model is able to predict the relationship between rejection and pressure with values of a and D varying accordingly. 
Fig. 11. Rejection of 20 ppm 9,10-diphenylanthracene from three solvents and corresponding applications of the viscous-diffusion flow model. 
4. Conclusions
The rejection of low-polarity organic solute compounds in organic solvents has been shown to be dependent on solute size, hydrodynamic conditions, operating pressure and the swelling effect of the solvent. A hydrodynamic threshold is considered to exist, above which solute rejection plateau's. For crossflow rates above the threshold, the swelling effect of the solvent was found to be the predominant factor governing solute rejection with a newly developed viscous-diffusion model providing a good correlation to the experimental data. The concept of viscous flow is supported by the observation that the rejection of low-polarity solutes is predominantly one of size exclusion. Poor-swelling solvents yield a lower flux and higher solute rejection than good-swelling solvents. It is postulated that swelling increases the free volume within the membrane, which can be interpreted as an induced pore-like structure or raised porosity depending on the terminology used, and that the Hildebrand solubility parameter is a good indicator of swelling potential for PDMS membranes as well as a good predictor of their likely flux/rejection behaviour. The ability of the viscous-diffusion model to predict the solute rejection provides evidence that a supposedly dense PDMS membrane can exhibit the characteristics of a porous structure when swollen. 

