1. Introduction
Soccer is the most popular ball game in the world, with over 250 million active players and a television audience peaking at 1.7 billion for the final of the 2002 FIFA World Cup championships. Amongst such accessories as soccer boots, gloves, apparel and training gear, the fundamental equipment requirement for the game of soccer is the ball, with annual sales estimated at 40 million units [1]. In addition to equipment and apparel sales and the numerous sponsorship and advertising opportunities, the soccer industry provides leading sports companies with a visible platform to market equipment designs and brand image. The design, development and innovation of soccer balls are crucial activities in order to gain competitive advantage within the market. 
The present day game of soccer is the result of many developments in terms of the physical evolution of players, playing rules and regulations, and the design and manufacture of playing equipment. Throughout a typical soccer match, the ball may be kicked as many as 2000 times, with linear velocities of 25–30 ms?1, spin rates of 5–600 rpm and linear acceleration values of 8 ms?2 [2]. Players are becoming increasingly younger, fitter, more skilful and have an increasing ability to utilise physical phenomena such as the Magnus effect to gain advantage in game situations. 
The technological development of soccer balls has largely been driven by advances in material science. The introduction of vulcanised rubber in the 19th century is heralded as the single most important discovery to enable sports ball development [3]. This permitted the use of inflatable bladders to enable the pressurisation of an outer panel arrangement. Typical contemporary soccer ball designs consist of an arrangement of manually stitched textile reinforced composite polymer panels, pressurised through an internal latex bladder with integral valve. 
In 1996 the Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), soccer world governing body, introduced the Denominations program to ensure the global consistency of soccer balls used in elite competition. This is achieved through a series of laboratory based tests to assess ball performance characteristics, including mass, circumference, water absorption, pressure loss, sphericity, rebound and shape retention after 2000 impacts onto a rigid surface with an inbound velocity of 50 km h?1 [4]. 
The work presented in this paper is directed toward the development of a soccer ball modelling methodology using finite element (FE) technology, which captures the effects of both ball design and material anisotropy. The resulting model allows for a greater understanding of the dynamic performance of soccer balls and provides a predictive design tool in order to assist in the product development process. 
2. Ball construction
The ball structure, or carcass, considered throughout the study is part of a new generation ball type and acts as a stiff support structure for the adhesion of soft outer panels, making the complete ball. The carcass consists of a dodecahedron arrangement of 12 pentagonal panels that are cut from a bi-axial plain-woven fabric, and are machine stitched to one another. The woven fabric based spherical structure is pressurised through an internal latex bladder. Fig. 1(a) provides details of a flattened 2D geometric net of the carcass and shows the principal material directions which lie coincident with the yarn directions associated with the fabric. The carcass is constructed from 6 base unit panel pairs, with each panel pair stitched along the edge that is orthogonal to the yarn directions, as shown in Fig. 1(b). 
Fig. 1. Carcass structure showing: (a) 2D geometric net with principal material directions and (b) base unit panel pair. 
3. Material characterisation
3.1. Woven fabric mechanical attributes
Woven fabrics consist of two sets of interlaced yarn called warp and weft, which are interwoven at crossover points, as shown in Fig. 2. The interlacing pattern concerning the warp and weft yarns is known as the weave, and the undulating nature of interlaced yarns results in the material to exhibit weave crimp. The material bias direction exists at 45° with respect to the warp and weft directions. Bi-axial fabrics generally take the form of repeating patterns of the interlaced warp and weft yarns, and three classes of weave are predominantly used: plain, twill and satin. The plain weave, as used within the carcass, is the most commonly used fabric architecture, where one yarn is repetitively woven over and under weft yarns. Plain weave fabrics give the highest frequency of yarn interlacing, hence the highest level of structural integrity and greater deformability due to the degree of weave crimp [5]. 
Fig. 2. Attributes of a plain-woven fabric material, with a detail view showing weave crimp. 
Woven fabrics can be classified as being balanced and unbalanced, where balanced weaves exhibit identical properties and geometric dimensions in both warp and weft directions. Unbalanced weaves exhibit disparate material or geometric attributes across their warp and weft directions giving rise to the possibility of unidirectional reinforcement. 
3.2. Woven fabric mechanical properties
Fabrics are anisotropic structures as their properties differ significantly when tested in different directions. Hearle et al. [6], Fontaine et al. [7] and Gasser et al. [8] describe three phases involved in straining the material along its yarn directions, including an initial high elastic modulus due to friction between interacting yarns within the crossovers. This is followed by further straining resulting in decrimping whereby undulations within the yarns are removed, giving rise to lower elastic modulus. This is followed by an increase in elastic modulus, as the individual yarns undergo extension. Straining the fabric along the yarn directions results in a higher elastic modulus since individual yarns are being engaged. 
Kong et al. [9], Sidhu et al. [10] and Long et al. [11] report on the phenomena involved with straining in coincidence with the bias. A woven fabric material can be considered to be trellis like, and so the application of a load along the bias results in extension due to rotation of the trellis members, as shown in Fig. 3. This is resisted by the friction that exists between the undulating yarns within the crossover points. As extension proceeds the angle between the initially orthogonal yarns reduces, as shown in Fig. 3. Throughout further straining a locking angle is reached whereby yarn rotation ceases. This results in yarns sliding about their crossover points as they undergo compaction, which gives a much greater elastic modulus as the yarns themselves undergo extension. Straining the material along the bias direction interrogates the structural properties of the fabric rather than the mechanical properties of the yarns. This results in a much lower elastic modulus when compared to straining along the yarn directions. 
Fig. 3. Resulting trellis type of deformation when straining along the material bias. 
The carcass material was subjected to a series of directional tensile tests to allow for the characterisation of material anisotropy. Eleven sets of material tensile tests occurred at angles ranging from 0 to 90° in 10° intervals, and at 45°. Standard tensile test pieces were used, and testing occurred at a strain rate of 1000 mm/min. Five trials were carried out for each test direction, with maximum test strains being approximately 0.6. Fig. 4 shows a 5th order polynomial expression fitted to elastic moduli data. High levels of symmetry are exhibited with similar values of E at both 0 and 90° allowing the fabric to be considered as a balanced plain weave. An elastic modulus of approximately 78 – 5 MPa exists for testing along the yarns and bias directions, respectively. 
Fig. 4. Variations of elastic moduli of carcass material with respect to test angle. 
When fabrics are strained at angles other than their yarn and bias directions, they are characterised by a combination of shear and tensile behaviour. This is shown in Fig. 5 where a longitudinal strain was imposed onto a rectangular carcass material test specimen, which was prepared such that the yarn directions formed an angle of 15° to the direction of tension. The specimen was marked with a cross to enable both the relative movement of individual yarns to be established and the determination of other modes of deformation. It is shown that longitudinal extension and lateral contraction occur as a result of the Poisson's ratio effect [12] and in-plane shear is developed due to the trellis type of deformation as both warp and weft yarns undergo a reduction in angle with respect to the y-axis. 
Fig. 5. Carcass material test showing (a) material in unstrained state, with yarn directions orientated at 15° and (b) shear mode of deformation throughout uniaxial tensile testing. 
4. Carcass impact testing
A number of carcasses were impacted at inbound velocities of approximately 34 ms?1 (76 mph) against a rigid plate, which was orientated at 90° to the direction of inbound travel. The orientation of each ball was altered by creating an axis of rotation at the centre of the edges of two base unit panel pairs as shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 6(a) shows an example of a 0° inbound orientation with the yarn directions being coincident with the direction of travel. Fig. 6(b) shows a 45° inbound orientation, with the yarn directions forming an angle of 45° with the direction of travel. Each carcass was impacted from 0 to 360° in 15° increments. Each impact was carried out using a bespoke 2-wheel ball launch device, which worked by pushing the ball in between two counter-rotating rollers, which launched the ball onto a steel plate. Each impact was recorded using a Photron Fastcam – Ultima APX 120K HSV camera operating at 10,000 frames per second which was triggered to initiate the storage of images into a microprocessor linked to a laptop through a firewire connection. Each avi file was imported into Image Pro Plus (IPP), a powerful 2D image analysis software package, which allowed for the determination of impact contact time, longitudinal and tangential deformation, COR (the ratio of outbound to inbound velocity) and the 2D shape taken up by the ball at maximum deformation. 
Fig. 6. Designation of axis inbound orientation axis of rotation at edge centre of base unit panel pair for (a) 0° inbound orientation and (b) 45° inbound orientation. 
5. FE implementation
The dodecahedron carcass panels were discretised into a mesh of 3D linear interpolated, triangular composite shell elements, with quadrilateral shell elements used to define the stitching region. Pressurisation of the model was permitted through an integral layer of hydrostatic fluid elements, which shared the nodes of the structural shell elements. The fluid elements were coupled with a cavity reference node, which possessed a single degree of freedom to represent the pressure of the cavity. A mass flow rate was applied onto the cavity reference node, which simulated the flow of a compressible fluid within the cavity, in order to represent the air within the physical bladder and allow for pressurisation [13]. 
The use of composite shell elements permitted multiple material models to define each constituent layer of the complete ball material. A triple material model was used where the inner layer corresponded to the bladder material and two layers corresponded to two plane stress orthotropic layers used to define material anisotropy, as shown in Fig. 7. 
Fig. 7. The use of a plane stress orthotropic elastic material definition for material anisotropy characterisation. 
A series of quasi-static uniaxial tensile tests were performed on dumbbell specimens of the bladder material conforming to BS 903 Part A2, using a commercially available tensile test machine. A hyperelastic reduced polynomial strain energy potential equation was calibrated against the material data, through a least squares fit procedure. This procedure was carried out within the FE software and allowed for the characterisation of the bladder material. 
Layers A and B incorporated local material directions x and y and were each prescribed elastic moduli data in the two principal directions, alongside in-plane shear moduli and Poisson ratios. Layer A incorporated Ex and Ey values that corresponded with straining the material along the yarn directions. Layer B incorporated Ex and Ey that corresponded with straining the material along the bias direction, with the material axes offset from layer A by 45° as shown in Fig. 7. 

