 
With the definition of passive euthanasia established, we can now turn to a closer examination of the EAPC Ethics Task Force's views. There seem to be three main arguments for its view of passive euthanasia, and we shall assess each in turn. 



   THE WRONGNESS OF EUTHANASIA ARGUMENT 
 
According to the first argument, euthanasia is always morally wrong. But the behaviour which is described in the standard taxonomy as "passive euthanasia" is not morally wrong. Therefore, it cannot really be a form of euthanasia and so there is no such thing as passive euthanasia. 
Put like this, the argument seems simplistic and implausible. However, there is perhaps a slightly better way of articulating it. Some concepts, so the argument goes, are moral concepts, or at least have a moral dimension. For example, "murder" (understood here as a moral rather than a legal term) is typically defined as wrongful killing. Or, to put it another way, one necessary condition for an act being a murder is that it is wrong. So perhaps euthanasia is like murder and part of its definition is that it is a wrongful act. 
There are, however, a number of objections to this argument. To being with, it assumes too much. It starts from the claim that euthanasia is never justified, and builds this into the definition of euthanasia, excluding on grounds of conceptual incoherence the possibility of there being a permissible form of euthanasia. This not only excludes the possibility of passive euthanasia (assuming this to be morally permissible) but also excludes the possibility of a moral debate about the ethical standing of euthanasia. And surely we should not foreclose on moral debate in this way. It would be better if our definitions at least left open the possibility that active euthanasia is (sometimes) justified, and that passive euthanasia is (sometimes) wrong. 
This point is further strengthened if we consider two "real life" counterexamples. Firstly, of course, there are lots of people who think that active voluntary euthanasia is (sometimes) permissible. This moral belief may or may not be true, but are we really supposed to believe that these people are believers in something self-contradictory or incoherent? Also, what if we were to discover somehow that the view of the "pro" active voluntary euthanasia organisations was the correct one and that active euthanasia is in fact morally permissible. Ought we to conclude from this that there are not really any cases of euthanasia, because all of the apparent cases have turned out not to be wrong, and hence not euthanasia? Surely not. 
Conversely, some moral conservatives believe that even passive euthanasia is wrong. For example, Anne Winterton MP tried (unsuccessfully) to ban passive euthanasia by introducing a private members bill in the UK parliament. The bill said7: 
It shall be unlawful for any person responsible for the care of a patient to withdraw or withhold from the patient medical treatment ... if his purpose or one of his purposes in doing so is to hasten or otherwise cause the death of the patient. 
Presumably we should not rule out completely (and a fortiori not rule out by definition) the possibility that Anne Winterton and others are correct about the wrongness of passive euthanasia. But, if combined with the wrongness of euthanasia argument, what is entailed is that if Winterton et al were somehow shown to be correct, then passive euthanasia could exist after all (since it would, like active euthanasia, be wrong). So the argument is, to say the least, strange insofar as it makes the very existence of euthanasia (both active and passive) dependent on its moral status. 
A fundamental problem with the wrongness of euthanasia argument then is that the evaluation is driving the conceptualisation. It is hard to see why we should give our evaluations priority in this way, and furthermore this is something which the EAPC Ethics Task Force explicitly denies doing. It claims that its definition of euthanasia "say[s] nothing about the norms and values associated with what is defined", and that "whether or not euthanasia may be justified ... is another matter ... A sharp distinction, therefore, exists here between what "is' and what "ought' to be."8 The is–ought distinction which the Task Force endorses here undermines the wrongness of euthanasia argument. 



   THE CAUSATION ARGUMENT 
 
The second argument focuses on problems with causation. Uncontentiously, euthanasia causes death. But, according to the causation argument, omissions cannot cause anything. Passive euthanasia (so-called) is an omission. So passive euthanasia cannot cause death and hence cannot really be euthanasia. 
The causation argument is also seriously flawed. Most importantly, the general claim at the heart of the argument—that omissions cannot be causes—does not appear to be true. What caused the crash at the junction? One of the drivers did not signal before turning right—he omitted to signal his intentions. What caused the clever student to fail her exams? She did not bother to revise for them—she omitted to do any work. We routinely attribute causal explanatory power to a wide variety of omissions. This objection alone seriously erodes the causation argument. But it is not alone; it goes hand in hand with an even stronger objection in the same style. 
There are some circumstances in which omissions can clearly kill. Suppose a patient has a raging infection which the doctor can cure simply by administering antibiotics. But he negligently or malevolently does not prescribe them—he omits to provide the appropriate treatment, thereby killing the patient. Suppose the company refuses to provide safety devices for workers carrying out high risk activities—the boss thinks they cost too much, the money can be more profitably spent elsewhere, perhaps there will not be an accident, at least not this year. And then a worker dies, when if he had been issued the standard (though expensive) safety kit he would have lived. The failure to provide him with these devices killed him. Suppose that a child is drowning in shallow water and that a passing adult, who is a strong swimmer, decides not to save her—perhaps because he hates her parents, or because he is on his way to a football match and does not want to be late. The passer-by decides not to intervene when it would have been easy for him to do so and his non-intervention kills the child. Instances such as these can be multiplied endlessly: omissions can kill. But in that case, passive euthanasia can kill even if, unlike the examples given above, it is morally permissible. 
In response, it might be argued that the moral status of an omission can affect whether it counts as a cause or not (and hence whether it counts as a killing) and in particular that only impermissible omissions can be causes. For example, when parents wrongfully fail to care for their children, or pet owners negligently fail to feed their animals, we naturally regard these omissions as causes of death (when death occurs). The main reason for regarding them as causally efficacious is that that they are breaches of a positive moral duty to act; the people in question are not doing what is expected of them. Crucially, this is what differentiates parents' and pet owners' non-actions from the causally irrelevant non-actions of unconnected others. For it is equally true of both the neglectful parent and of the stranger who lives on the other side of town that but for their not feeding the child, the child would have survived—and so any "causal" difference between them, it could be argued, must be based on the fact that one has a positive duty, while the other (we suppose) does not. 
But our intuitions here are not very stable. Suppose 10 patients are hooked-up to apparatus which is delivering life-prolonging treatment. For seven of the patients, the treatment is in their interests, and should be maintained; for the remaining three, it is not, and in those cases, it would be morally permissible to withdraw the treatment. One switch controls all the machinery and someone deliberately throws the switch. All 10 patients die. Is it plausible to say that in seven of the cases (the seven for whom it would be morally impermissible to withdraw the treatment) throwing the switch was the cause of death, and hence it killed the patients, whereas in the three cases where it was in the patients' interests for the treatment to be withdrawn, throwing the switch was not the cause of death? We are more likely to say that if some of these patients were killed by the withdrawal of treatment, then all of them were. So we cannot securely appeal to intuitions about such cases to enable us to assert that permissible omissions can never amount to killing. (It might be objected here that, in our example, throwing the switch is an action. However, this example would work equally well if failing to throw the switch was used instead as the putative cause of death.) 
Before moving onto the third argument for the EAPC Task Force view, we should briefly mention a supplementary argument that is sometimes used to back up the causation argument. This asserts that in cases of (so-called) passive euthanasia, it is the disease itself which causes death, rather than the withholding or withdrawing of treatment. So, in the context of terminal illness, failing to delay the death need not amount to causing it. This style of argument interestingly mirrors well known remarks by Devlin J (later Lord Devlin) in Adams (a significant English legal case from 1957)9: 
"Cause" means nothing philosophical or technical or scientific. It means what you twelve men and women sitting as a jury would regard in a commonsense way as the cause. Manifestly there must be cases in hospitals that are going on day after day in which what a doctor does by way of giving certain treatment prolongs or shortens life by hours or even longer. The doctor who decides to administer or not to administer a drug is not, of course, thinking in terms of hours or minutes of life. He could not do his job properly if he were. If, for example, because a doctor had done something or has omitted to do something, death occurs at eleven o'clock instead of twelve o'clock, or even Monday instead of Tuesday, no people of common sense would say "Oh, the doctor caused her death". They would say that the cause of death was the illness or the injury, or whatever it was, which brought her into the hospital, and the proper medical treatment that is administered and that has an incidental effect on determining the exact moment of death is not the cause of death in any sensible use of the term. 
The thought here seems to be that the real or underlying or fundamental cause of death is the disease (not the withdrawing or withholding of treatment) and this idea is (supposedly) bolstered by the fact that, were it not for the disease, the patient would not have presented to the healthcare professional in the first place and so questions about withdrawing or withholding treatment would not even have arisen. 
This supplementary argument though is also flawed. For as Devlin rightly suggests, if this argument works at all then it "proves too much", since it applies both to acts and omissions, both to active and passive euthanasia. For one might in the same way argue that, even in cases of active euthanasia, the underlying or fundamental cause of death is the disease (and on the same grounds—that were it not for the disease, the patient would not have presented to the healthcare professional in the first place). So either we must reject this supplementary argument altogether or we must accept it and also accept (at least for patients who are terminally ill) that neither (so-called) active euthanasia nor (so-called) passive euthanasia causes death and therefore that neither practice is really euthanasia. And whichever option we choose, the view that only active euthanasia causes death (and hence that all euthanasia is active) would remain unsupported. 

