ABSTRACT 
 
OBJECTIVE. Our objective with this study was to examine whether observed maternal control during feeding at 6 months of age moderates the development of early infant weight gain during the first year of life. 
METHODS. Sixty-nine women were observed feeding their 6-month-old infants during a standard meal. Mealtimes were coded for maternal use of controlling feeding behavior. All infants were weighed at birth and at 6 and 12 months of age, and weight gain was calculated from birth to 6 months and from 6 to 12 months. Weight scores and weight gain scores were standardized for prematurity, age, and gender. 
RESULTS. Infant weight gain between 6 and 12 months of age was predicted by an interaction between early infant weight gain (birth to 6 months) and observed maternal control during feeding at 6 months. When maternal control was moderate or low, there was a significant interaction with weight gain from birth to 6 months in the prediction of later infant weight gain from 6 to 12 months, such that infants who showed slow early weight gain accelerated in their subsequent weight gain, and those with greater early weight gain decelerated. Conversely, when maternal control was high, infant weight gain followed the opposite pattern. 
CONCLUSION. Maternal control of solid feeding can moderate infant weight gain. 

Key Words: maternal control • infant weight • growth • observations 
Abbreviations: SDS—SD score • ICQ—Infant Characteristics Questionnaire • FIS—Feeding Interaction Scale 
Child weight is one of the most salient aspects of child health and can become concerning when children are either overweight or underweight. When children fail to gain sufficient weight, they can become malnourished, in many cases leading to associated cognitive problems.1 At the other extreme, excessive child weight gain can lead to obesity and the various medical problems that are associated with this increasingly common phenomenon, including cancer, cardiovascular disease, and type 2 diabetes.2,3 
When faced with concerns about child weight gain or weight loss, assuming greater control over child feeding is a common strategy for many caregivers. When children are underweight, parents may pressure their children to eat greater amounts or types of foods, and when children are overweight, caregivers may encourage children to eat healthful foods and restrict the consumption of the amount or type of energy-dense foods.4,5 These types of feeding strategies tend to be correlated, with many caregivers controlling food intake using both restriction and pressure.6 In the short-term, these strategies may prove productive, temporarily producing the desired effects on food consumption and reinforcing their success and subsequent use. However, research suggests that the use of overcontrol when feeding ultimately is a counterproductive activity that can exacerbate the existing weight or feeding problem. Indeed, coercing, forcing, or pressuring children to eat has been linked with poor child self-regulation of intake7 and subsequent refusal and rejection of previously forced foods even in adulthood.8 Moreover, such strategies may condition children to find feeding itself an aversive experience, leading to conditioned food anxiety and avoidance.9 Similarly, restricting children from eating certain types of foods has been associated with increased preference for the withheld or restricted food.4,10 Ultimately, controlling feeding practices have been shown to predict poor responsiveness to internal cues of hunger and satiety. In particular, pressure to eat has been linked with child dietary restraint and emotional disinhibition with food, whereas restriction has been shown to predict external disinhibition,11 eating in the absence of hunger,12 and a more negative self-evaluation of eating.13 
In summary, although previous research has established links among controlling feeding practices, child feeding, and weight,5,11,12 a lack of longitudinal and observational data precludes questions of cause, effect, and reliability. This study addresses these issues using a longitudinal and observational study that was initiated from birth. 
Our aims with this study were to explore whether maternal use of control during feeding observations would moderate the relationship between early (birth to 6 months) and later (6–12 months) infant weight gain. It was hypothesized that infant weight gain between birth and 6 months would negatively predict weight gain from 6 months to 1 year when mothers are less controlling, indicating that infants "regress to the mean" in their weight.14,15 However, it was hypothesized that this relationship would be moderated by observed maternal use of control when feeding at 6 months, specifically, that mothers who are more controlling when feeding their infants would have infants who would show greater stability in their weight gain. This study also examined the relationships among infant temperament, gender, birth weight, and breastfeeding history with infant weight and maternal control to ensure that these factors did not confound the hypothesized relationship between weight gain and maternal control. 



   METHODS 
 
After ethical permission from South Birmingham National Health Service Trust Ethics Committee, United Kingdom, women were recruited during pregnancy to take part in a longitudinal study to explore problems with infant feeding. The data reported here are from a subset of 69 dyads from a larger sample of 87 women recruited; the data reported here represent mothers who gave informed consent to be observed feeding their infants at 6 months of age and for their infants to be weighed at birth and at 6 and 12 months postpartum. The mean age of these women on recruitment to the study during pregnancy was 31.69 years (SD: 5.16). The sample was a nonclinical sample; no mothers disclosed that they had mental health problems or had been referred because of issues such as abuse or neglect, all infants were healthy with no congenital abnormalities or other medical conditions, and none had received a diagnosis of growth faltering (failure to thrive). One boy's weight was below the fifth centile at 1 year, but exclusion of this case did not alter any of the statistical findings. Not all infants were term, the mean age of gestation was 39.68 weeks (SD: 1.82; range: 34–42 weeks), but Pearson's 2-tailed correlations indicated that age of gestation was not significantly correlated with maternal use of control during feeding. Furthermore, infant weight scores were standardized to correct for prematurity. 
Measures
Infant Weight
Infants were weighed at birth in the hospital and were weighed thereafter by the lead researcher at 6 and 12 months of age. Infants were weighed naked with electronic scales, and weight in kilograms was converted into standardized z scores, also termed SD scores (SDSs), adjusting for infant gender and age. Birth weight standardization also was corrected for prematurity such that a child who was born at 38 weeks' gestation was considered to be –2 weeks of age rather than 0 weeks of age. The Child Growth Foundation reference curves package was used to compute all SDSs.16 The package was also used to compute weight gain scores on the basis of total weight gain across 2 time points: converting weight gain from birth to 6 months, and weight gain from 6 to 12 months into SDSs. 
Breastfeeding
Mothers were asked whether they breastfed and, if so, for how long. 
Infant Temperament
For assessment of infant temperament, at 6 months of age, all mothers completed the Infant Characteristics Questionnaire (ICQ).17 The ICQ assesses maternal perception of child fussiness-difficultness, adaptability, dullness, and predictability. The ICQ has been shown to have adequate factor structure, internal consistency, and test–retest reliability and is convergent with other questionnaire ratings of temperament.17 
Observations
All mothers were observed feeding their infants solid foods at 6 months. Mealtimes were observed in the caregivers' homes, and feeding interactions were recorded using a video camera. Caregivers were asked to feed their infants as they normally would to provide as natural an example of feeding as possible. The video camera was placed in an unobtrusive position. Recording started when the mother first offered the infant food and continued until the food was removed. All mothers offered their infants the type of foods that they normally would use to feed, and disliked foods were not offered. The "nonverbal maternal behavior" scale (a measure of controlling maternal behavior) of the Feeding Interaction Scale (FIS) (D. Wolke, M. Sumner, Y. McDermott, and D. Skuse, University of Hertfordshire, unpublished instrument, 1987) was used to code maternal use of control during feeding interactions. The total FIS consists of 8 scales that assess maternal behavior, but for the purpose of this study, only 1 scale was used: maternal use of control during feeding. This scale depends on 1 rating of how much nonverbal control the caregiver asserts throughout the mealtime interaction, with the observer rating the mother within a range from not controlling (allowing the infant autonomy to control his or her own feeding while supervising the infant) to a very controlling caregiver (who is continuously forcing, offering, positioning, or distracting the infant to eat). This scale is negatively coded on a Likert scale from 1 to 9 and provides one total score, with 1 indicating the greatest control and 9 indicating the least controlling caregiver. 
The FIS has clinical validity and has been used to assess mother–child feeding interactions and to diagnose feeding problems.18,19 All feeding interactions were coded by a researcher who was familiar with the coding procedure; 20% of the videotaped interactions were recoded by a second trained observer to ascertain interrater reliability. The intraclass correlation coefficient for this observed behavior was .784 (P &lt; .001). 
Statistical Analyses
After descriptive statistics, independent sample t tests and Pearson's 2-tailed correlations were used to assess whether infant gender, temperament, birth weight, and breastfeeding history were related to infant weight gain scores or to maternal use of observed control during feeding. Next, a Pearson's correlation was used to investigate the relationship between weight gain from birth to 6 months and weight gain from 6 to 12 months. Finally, the moderating role of controlling maternal behavior at 6 months was tested by examining the main effect and interaction effect of early infant weight gain (birth to 6 months) and controlling maternal behavior (at 6 months) in predicting weight gain from 6 to 12 months. The moderator effect is shown when the product term of the independent variable and moderator are significant when their main effects are controlled.20 The effects of the independent variable at various levels of the moderator were tested using simple slope analysis.21 



   RESULTS 
 
Descriptive Statistics
Means and SDSs for infant weight and weight gain during the first year of life are presented in Table 1. Mean infant SDS birth weight was 0.132 (approximately equivalent to a weight of 3.6 kg for a boy and 3.46 kg for a girl at birth). Mean infant weight at 6 months was 0.143 (equivalent to a weight of 8.18 kg for a boy and 7.6 kg for a girl at 6 months). At 1 year, mean infant SDS weight was 0.047 (representing a weight of 10.62 kg for a boy and 9.94 kg for a girl at 1 year). Table 1 also displays descriptive statistics for maternal use of controlling behavior; mean maternal control at 6 months was 5, which indicates that the mother primarily is involved in feeding the infant, with 1 or 2 instances of force-feeding, offering, or positioning. Fifty-one women breastfed their infants, and 18 exclusively bottle-fed. Of mothers who breastfed, the mean length of breastfeeding was 31.73 weeks (SD: 15.85). Thirty-one women were breastfeeding at the 6-month home visit. 



  
TABLE 1 Descriptive Statistics for Infant Weight and Maternal Use of Control 

 
Because of previously identified gender differences in the use and consequences of controlling feeding practices,4,22 independent sample t tests were performed to establish whether mothers of male and female children differed in their use of control when feeding at 6 months or in their weight gain scores. Male and female children did not differ significantly according to their mother's use of control (t67 = –1.476, P &gt; .05), weight gain from birth to 6 months (t67 = –0.376, P &gt; .05), or weight gain from 6 to 12 months (t67 = 0.080, P &gt; .05). Consequently, the 2 groups were homogenized for additional analysis. 



