After discharge into the community, there was a median number of 13 units of contact (130 min) for 28 patients on three occasions. Some of these contacts were by telephone, but the rest were for visits, and travel time was taken into account. In practice many trips by the NST into the community included visits to several patients, especially in the case of residential nursing homes. The number of patients who received NST care decreased over the 12-mo study period as a result of patients dying or resuming eating (and having the PEG removed). Visits in the acute hospital were carried out by the NST nurse (n = 61), and those in the community (n = 92) by the NST dietitian. On only three occasions did the dietitian ask the nurse to attend (in every case because of stoma infection). Overall, this workload amounted to a median of £32 per patient (Table 5). Only 12 (22%) of control patients were referred to the NST and in all cases this was because of stoma infection, and they were seen by the NST nurse. 
Table 5. 
Costs of care 
GP, general practitioner; NST, nutrition support team; PAM, profession allied to medicine; PEG, percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
 Mean ± standard deviation.
† All P values from a two-tailed t test. 
Intervention and control patients generated similar numbers of referrals to PAMs (96% versus 98%), with similar numbers of contacts (52 versus 55) with one or more of these health care professionals. Fewer intervention patients required care and input from general practitioners and district nurses (not significant). 
The number of readmissions and their lengths of stay were shorter with intervention, with fewer required for feeding-related complications in this group (Table 4; not significant). 
Table 4. 
Readmissions 
PEG, percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
† Chi-square test.
‡ Mann-Whitney U test.
§ Log-rank test. 
With the exception of care from the NST, resource use among intervention patients tended to be lower than that among the control group, although none of these differences was statistically significant. In addition, differences in readmission rate and days of feed approached significance (P ? 0.1). 
Table 5 presents results that demonstrate the cost implications of all the various clinical factors described above. In line with previous findings, mean costs per patient were lower for the intervention group for all aspects of care, apart from care from the NST and PAMs. However, the general trend for resource use by the intervention group to be lower led to a reduction in the overall costs of care. The difference between groups in the mean total cost of care per patient was £3519: mean cost of £13330 in the intervention group versus £16858 in the control group (two-tailed, P = 0.27). This represents a difference of 21% per patient between groups in overall costs of care. 
Most of the costs described in this report were specific to North Staffordshire. The key cost drivers were inpatient stay in acute and community settings. The National Health Service Trust Index (part of National Health Service reference costs) [12] indicates that, in the setting for this study, unit costs per day for acute and community patients are 8% and 3% higher than the national averages, respectively. In the intervention group, adjusting costs to national rates decreased acute ward costs to £3949, community ward costs to £7065, and overall ward costs to £11013. In the control group, acute costs were £4988 and community costs were £8947, for total ward costs of £13935. This adjustment did not cause a great change in total ward costs (compare with acute and community costs in the main analysis in Table 5), and the difference in ward costs between the groups remained non-significant (P = 0.25). The difference between patient groups in their total costs of care remained similar (£12813 in intervention group versus £16192 in control group); hence, adjusting ward costs to national averages in a sensitivity analysis did not influence the interpretation of the overall findings. 
Discussion
There have been many studies looking at clinical outcomes of PEG-fed patients, a few of which have included prolonged community-based review [3], [13] and [14], but this is the first to prospectively examine the clinical and financial consequences of two different approaches to patient management. 
The patient groups studied were heterogeneous in terms of underlying illness, but the spread of illnesses and the patient mortality were broadly similar to many other published series and was therefore reflective of normal U.K. practice. It could be argued that it may have been of more use to just study one particular group, such as stroke patients. However, because we were examining the effect of multidisciplinary input on the entire nutritional support service, it was felt to be more relevant to study all patients. Further, it would have been a very difficult and lengthy process even in a big center to recruit enough patients. Only 101 patients were studied, 29 fewer than intended, because of a slower than expected recruitment rate and time constraints on the study. Although there many exclusions from the eligible patients (Fig. 1), these were mainly for logistical rather than clinical reasons, and therefore we are confident that the studied population was representative of practice as a whole. 
The 11 patients who died within 7 d of PEG insertion had strokes and their demise was due to a deterioration of the underlying condition. Demographically, in terms of age, sex, and morbidity, this group was no different from the survivors. Because data collection did not start until day 7, apart from their mortality, no other data were collected, and therefore they could not be included in the overall clinical and economic analyses. Their inclusion into mortality analysis, however, did not alter the result of the survival plot, i.e., there were no differences between the two groups. 
The length of stay in the original acute admission will be more dependent on the underlying disease process and cannot be expected to have been significantly influenced by nutritional care. The similarity between the two groups in this study would support this. Although the proportion of patients discharged to a community hospital will be dependent primarily on overall health and social circumstances (factors unlikely to be affected by nutritional status), length of stay could be influenced by good nutritional care. In these patients there was a 10% reduction in stay for the intervention group. 
The readmission rate, however, was very much lower in the intervention group in terms of total numbers and readmissions for nutrition/feeding-related reasons. The proportion of patients readmitted in this study is similar to that reported elsewhere [4]. 
Over the entire study period only two patients in the intervention group and five in the control group did not develop feeding-related complications. Of the majority that did, there were no significant differences demonstrated, although antibiotic usage was less in the intervention group. Although the information was not specifically collected, this may reflect less severe complications or complications treated at an earlier stage and therefore quicker to resolve in the intervention group. This may also in part explain the more favorable readmissions data. Another benefit seen in the intervention group was the earlier elective removal of PEGs. Although the numbers of patients was not large, subjectively it was felt that this result was directly due to the intervention and earlier reappraisal. 
The only aspect where the intervention fared worse was in terms of the number of contacts between patient and non-medical professionals. This is entirely due to the contact that this group had with members of the nutrition team and therefore is to be expected. The cost of care was calculated by dividing the annual salary (plus on-costs) into 10-min aliquots, which amounted to £2.73 per 10 min for the NST dietitian and £2.87 for the NST nurse. With the intervention group patients receiving a median of 10 10-min contacts each, the total cost of the NST input is relatively small—only £32 per patient in the intervention group. Those patients who survived for the full 12-mo study received considerably more NST care, but this was offset by those patients dying sooner or resuming normal eating. Similar calculations were made for the other health care professionals involved. Although not significant, there were fewer contacts between patient and general practitioner or district nurse in the intervention group. Of the contacts specifically with the NST, 12 patients in the control group were seen by the nurse (none by the dietitian) and all for advice on stoma sepsis or tube blockage. 
There are many models of how a multidisciplinary NST can function effectively. The usual team structure in the United Kingdom consists of a nurse, dietitian, clinician, and pharmacist. The latter tends to be primarily involved in the intravenous feeding service and certainly in this study was not involved at all. The nurse and dietitian undertake most of the day-to-day activities, with the clinical lead providing support and advice as required. In this study there was very little direct input from the clinician and, hence, does not account for any costing. However, the potential for involvement was always present, and this cannot be ignored when looking at the overall cost of such a multidisciplinary service. In terms of apportioning the workload between the nurse and the dietitian, this varies from team to team. As a general principle, there is an overlap of skills between the two, especially when the individuals are experienced. Therefore, it is entirely appropriate, for example, for a dietitian to give initial advice on a minor stoma infection but to call on the nurse should further problems develop. This was the model that was practiced in this study. 
Disappointingly, but perhaps not surprisingly, no real differences were demonstrated in the various quality-of-life measurements, with the exception of the social functioning parameter of the SF36 (beneficial for intervention group). When one considers that the patient group being dealt with had, in the main, severe and/or progressive neurologic disease or cancer with an overall 12-mo mortality rate of 50%, it is perhaps unrealistic to expect a significant enhancement in quality of life by optimizing nutritional care. 
Examined individually, there is no dramatic difference between the two groups for each specific clinical outcome. However, looked at as a whole, there is possibly a trend in favor of intervention. These clinical findings are reflected in the overall cost of care, which was 21% lower in the intervention group. Although our results are not statistically different, economically this potential saving is of greater significance. Of course, not all of these “savings” will be realizable in the short term, e.g., saved bed days will not necessarily result in overt cash savings. However, there are other areas where cash savings will be more accessible in the short term, e.g., costs associated with PEG feeding and the use of antibiotics. Such potential for cost savings will help to address any concerns that nutrition team follow-up is not financially viable. 
In conclusion, it can be stated that prolonged systematic multidisciplinary care for these patients does not lead to any increased cost and possibly leads to savings. Although the study demonstrated no definitive benefit with regard to clinical care and complications, most of the various parameters studied appeared to favor the intervention group. 
The paucity of hospital-based follow-up, the virtual absence of community-based review, and the acknowledged lack of training and experience of general practitioners and district nurses are clear indicators of the very poor standard of care afforded to patients fed by PEG in the community in the United Kingdom. Most authorities would agree that the optimal model for the (nutritional) care of these patients is by using an experienced multidisciplinary nutrition team to support not only the patient but also the primary care team. However, despite clear recommendations from the British Association for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition, little has been done to improve patient care or identify funding. This study demonstrates that commissioning such a multidisciplinary team does not incur extra cost and therefore should be a reassurance to providers. 

