In earthquake
engineering, the hazard is the earthquake and the vulnerability depends on the design,
construction and maintenance of the facility. The risk is the anticipated loss when the
hazard impacts on the facility. For this purpose, buildings are classified into specific
types and a vulnerability index found from a number of assessed indicators. Acceptable
risk has to be decided through the political process. The acceptability or otherwise of two
similar risks is complex since what might be easily acceptable to one person might be
Structural integrity: hazard, vulnerability and risk 121
totally unacceptable to another e.g., dangerous sports can be exciting. One important
aspect is the degree of control felt by the individual. Risks therefore must be set in a
social context and, in a democracy, within a regulatory framework agreed through a
political process.
As stated earlier, risk combines vulnerability and hazard. However before pursuing
this approach in more detail let us look at the chance of the various levels of damage (D)
in a structure leading to ultimate failure (F) of that structure due to hazard (H). To assess
the risk we need to get some measure of chance. This is usually done as a probability.
p(F&amp;D&amp;H)?p(F/D&amp;H).p(D/H).p(H). (1)
This says, in natural (non-mathematical language), that the probability of F and D and H
all occurring together is equal to the probability of F given that D and H have occurred
together multiplied by the probability of D given that H has occurred multiplied by
the probability that H will occur. This expression is a standard piece of probability
mathematics using conditional statements.
To help us understand what this means we can make some further assumptions.
Let us assume that F logically implies D and also that D logically implies H. This means
that D is necessary (must happen) for F to happen. Likewise H is necessary
(must happen) for D to happen. In other words we are restricting ourselves to looking at
failure that can not happen without damage and damage that cannot happen without a
hazard. Figure 1 sets this out diagrammatically. We therefore simplify equation (1) to
p(F&amp;D&amp;H)??p(F/D). p(D/H). p(H). (2)
Figure 1 The sets of hazard, damage and failure
This says, in natural language, that the probability of F and D and H all occurring
together is equal to the probability of F given that D has occurred multiplied by the
probability of D given that H has occurred multiplied by the probability that H will occur.
This is slightly simpler than the previous expression but still requires some interpretation.
Many earthquake engineers (e.g., di Pasquale et al., 2005) use p(D/H) to define
vulnerability. Then p(F/D) is used to express loss so that seismic risk is the product of
loss, vulnerability and hazard.
However we suggest that we think of p(F/D) . p(D/H) as an expression of
vulnerability. It expresses the chance of failure given a specific intensity of earthquake by
looking at the level of damage. A vulnerable structure will have a high value of p(F/D)
for a low level of damage. This is because vulnerability is more than simple susceptibility
to damage. Vulnerability should express the idea of the susceptibility in the sense
that a small amount of damage (that has occurred because of the earthquake) leads to
disproportionate consequences. Note that we have detached p(F/D) from the hazard
itself although it is still related through the level of the damage D. We have made
p(F/D) clearly a property of the form of the structure and the way it responds to
damage – whatever the action that causes it although we recognise it is embedded in a
hazard. If a structure experiences a small level of damage and then "unzips' through
progressive failure to total collapse then it is more vulnerable than one that does not have
that characteristic. This allows us to connect the ideas used in earthquake engineering to
those used in progressive collapse and robustness in other areas of structural engineering
and also to concerns about designing structures that are robust to terrorism.
In earthquake engineering the level of vulnerability is often captured by a
vulnerability index rather than as a probability. These two quantities are distinct but
related and must not be confused. The expression p(D/H) is the chance of a given level of
damage in an earthquake. When the damage causes failure (D = F) it is more usually
called the probability of failure or reliability of the structure. A full probabilistic
analysis is not easy but a deterministic estimate may be derived from a response
analysis of the usual form. This may include (i) a complex non-linear finite element
analysis, (ii) a simpler but still quite complicated push over analysis where a shear force
is applied at ground level and the horizontal sway displacement at the top of the building
estimated, (iii) a vertical pushover test or (iv) at the most simplest a classification of
buildings according to some chosen indicators. Again the measure of p(D/H) is distinct
from the damage assessments often used in practice but they are very likely to vary
proportionately (unlike the many and various vulnerability indices and p(F/H) which may
not vary proportionately).
Finally p(H) is the probability of hazard e.g., an earthquake of a given intensity
or corrosion. Thus we can express the mathematics in words as chance of
failure = vulnerability ??hazard but we must take care over the interpretation of the
vulnerability measure since it involves characteristics of the form of the structure as well
as characteristics of structural response to hazard and loading actions including terrorist
action. We shall demonstrate this in the next section through an example.
4 Vulnerability and risk assessment
Research at Bristol University has focused on how to identify the "weakest links' in a
structure (see e.g., Lu et al., 1999; Agarwal et al., 2001). Figure 2 shows an example of
damage events on a truss structure leading to progressive collapse (ignoring dynamic
effects). Figure 3 gives a schematic view of how a failure scenario may be formed.
The method of finding failure scenarios as series of damage events is based on a systems
Structural integrity: hazard, vulnerability and risk 123
approach to clustering the structure into simple sub-structures and searching for failure
scenarios with high vulnerability index. This kind of vulnerability assessment is one of
the connectivity of form and the absorption of energy. In brief, it requires the following
processes:
??Building a model of the form of a structural system. Graph theory is used as a basis
to develop a model of the form of a structural system. The characteristics of the form
of a structural system are captured in a structural ring in 2D or a structural round
in 3D. A structural ring or round is the minimum structural configuration capable to
resisting loads in 2D and 3D respectively. This enables the development of a
measure of the quality of its form – called "wellformedness'.
??Representing the structure in a hierarchical form. The structural components are
organised into structural clusters according to the quality of their structural form.
A structural system is then represented as a set of these interconnected clusters.
Successive clustering creates a hierarchy. At the lowest level a structure is
represented with its components and at the highest level is the whole structural
system.
??Identifying various failure scenarios of the structural system. A hierarchical model
reveals the form of the structure and enables the identification of weak links at
different levels. A set of such links gives a failure scenario. By analysing the damage
demand and the consequences of various damage events, vulnerable failure scenarios
are identified.
Figure 2 An example of progressive collapse
Source: Pinto (2002)
Figure 3 Trajectories through damage classes
In the vulnerability analysis, the actions causing damage events are not specified initially
but these may include, for example, material defects, material degradation, extreme
natural hazards, accidental damage, fire and so on. Once the vulnerable failure scenarios
have been identified these are considered in turn and an assessment is made about their
likelihood. This requires considering all possible hazards (or threats) and gathering the
corresponding evidence that these hazards will lead to the realisation of damage events.
Table 2 summarises risk calculations for the failure scenario shown in Figure 2.
Different external hazards (column b in the table) are considered and a linguistic
assessment of damage to members is made assuming each hazard existed independent of
the others. For the purpose of this illustration, the likelihood of hazards p(H) (column c)
and damage assessment of members p(D/H) (column e) is based on a simplified
quantitative analysis and/or engineering judgment and a rigorous quantitative analysis for
different hazards would help improve the results. Support for the likelihood of a failure
scenario is summarised in column i. Where a scenario has more than one damage event
careful consideration has to be given to the degree of dependency between them.
Consequences (column j) of different vulnerable scenarios and the chance of failure
(column i) can be plotted in the form of a risk map. However, here a measure of risk
(column k) has been obtained. The two numbers here refer to the lower and upper
bounds. In general there would be a large number of failure scenarios and appropriate
actions can be taken to mitigate critical failure scenarios. These may include
??modifications to the structure
??appropriate measures to limit the hazards.
Table 2 Assessment of structural risk
In recent work (England et al., 2005) various failure scenarios identified through
vulnerability analysis have been considered for changing member properties and
loading conditions to calculate a hazard potential (Figure 4). The measure is based on a
thermodynamic analogy where the hazard potential is analogous to temperature and heat
flow is analogous to change in internal strain energy. As a structure is damaged the
internal strain energy increases until the final damage event when all of the internal
energy is released into kinetic and other forms of energy such as sound and heat.
The hazard potential is the change in strain energy divided by the change in well
formedness of the structure. The resulting curves represent an accident waiting to happen
and provide an important potential way of assessing the vulnerability of individual
important structures (such as hospitals, schools and buildings containing valuable or
potentially dangerous assets).
Figure 4 Hazard potential for structures
Source: England et al. (2005)
Although different tools do help us to identify vulnerabilities and assess risks, it must be
emphasised that the management of risk, hazard and vulnerability ultimately depends
crucially on the competence of the people who are responsible for it.
5 Conclusion
Risk, hazard and vulnerability are words that are used interchangeably in everyday life.
Specific technical interpretations have emerged from these every day meanings.
The difficulty is that different professions and groups are using the terms differently and
this can be confusing unless we are careful.
Structural integrity: hazard, vulnerability and risk 127
The core idea of hazard is potential for danger. Vulnerability captures the concept of
susceptibility to damage – but it is more than that. It is a property of a system where
small damage can cause disproportionate consequences.
Risk is in the future. When we think of risk we are thinking of a potentially dangerous
situation which might or might not exist in the future with consequences we want to
avoid.
Risk combines vulnerability and hazard but we must take care over the interpretation
of the vulnerability measure since it involves characteristics of the form of the structure
as well as characteristics of structural response to hazard and loading actions including
terrorist action.
The method of finding failure scenarios as series of damage events is based on a
systems approach to clustering the structure into simple sub-structures and searching for
failure scenarios with high vulnerability index. The product of vulnerability index and
the corresponding support for the failure scenario due to different hazards gives a
measure of risk.

