Taking the youngest child's perspective
Children as a generational group have become active stakeholders in
the policy making process (Hill, Davis, Prout and Tisdall, 2004). It is no
longer rare for policy makers to involve children in consultation
processes, for instance in city regeneration or in nursery design. More
recently practitioners and academics are examining methods for
engaging with even very young pre-school children to illuminate their
preoccupations, needs and desires in the face of a wide range of social
interventions (Clark, Kjorholt and Moss, 2005). As Fajerman, Treseder
and Connor (2004) declare "Children are service users too'.

The needs of children and youth, particularly with regard to their
living environment, have to be taken fully into account. Special
attention needs to be paid to the participatory processes dealing
with the shaping of cities, towns and neighbourhoods: this is in
order to secure the living conditions of children and of youth to
make use of their insight, creativity and thoughts on the
environment (UNCHS, 1997: section 1.13)
In the field of parental leave policies, asking children directly is of
course not possible, at least in infancy. Instead policy makers and
other adults are required to act as advocates for the infant and for the
infant quality of life model they wish to promote.
Parental leave policies and a good quality of infant life
Specifying the dimensions of a good quality of life for an infant is a
process fraught with political (including gender political) dilemmas and
economic considerations, as well, of course, as relating to the models
of optimal infant development dominant in any one culture at a
particular historical juncture. What is thought to make up the basic
elements of a good or good enough quality of life in the first year
therefore changes over time and place. Most social policy texts quickly
pass on the question, perhaps because of an historic gendered
assumption that only mothers can provide the permitting
circumstances and also because infant every-day life has not
traditionally been considered the province of social policy. But a
consideration of this period is important as the elements make up
potential/hypothetical benefits of any parental leave or "leave' from
employment to care.
Contemporary hallmarks of a good enough infancy depend to some
extent on cultural factors, the theoretical models of psychologists or
sociologists and the age of the child. Psychologists tend to focus on the
personal characteristics of the parents in providing the care
environment such as their parenting style, whereas sociologists pay
more attention to resource and community influences on child
development. Systemic approaches to children's lives have been more
multi-dimensional, attempting to incorporate governmental,
community, family and individual levels in understanding child
development and indeed children's life-worlds (Barnes, Katz, Kolvin
and O'Brien, 2006). In terms of the familial context of infant life, the
main focus of this paper, the quality of care they receive and amount
of time they need are significant themes. Typically, in couple
households, the quality of caring is contingent on the quality of father
and mother involvement, although globally infants are cared for by a
wide range of individuals in diverse setting contexts including kin, nonfamily
members and paid carers. In general, psychologists stress
parenting or inter-personal activities likely to promote an emotionally
secure environment and child well-being in the broadest sense, such
as: warm, responsive and sensitive interaction; monitoring and guiding
behaviour to set limits and protect; and supporting the child's material
needs.
Provision of economic welfare is rarely conceptualised as a form of care
by either psychologists or other social scientists. However, it could be
argued that the manner in which parents collectively as a couple or
household unit provide material well-being, for instance the extent to
which working time is organized in a way that promotes children's
emotional security and well-being, could be included in a "positive care
package'. Clearly higher income parents, those with accessible strong
social and kin support or parents living in countries which devote
significant funds to high quality public care of children have greater
"choice' in the creation of infant or child sensitive care packages.
The daily life of the infant is organized around regular feeding on six to
eight (or more) occasions in a twenty four hour cycle, holding,
soothing, nappy changing, bathing, dressing as well as playful
interaction in between regular phases of infant sleeping. In this highly
dependent phase of childhood the infant needs at least one carer to be
constantly in close physical proximity. All parental/caring activities,
except breast feeding, are theoretically open to mothers and fathers.
These elements of care can be given directly to the infant (e.g. in case
of feeding) or indirectly by providing a facilitating environment (e.g.
father supporting mother in the immediate aftermath of the arrival of
the child; settling older children while the mother establishes breast
feeding), separately (e.g. mother alone) or together (e.g. infants can
gain by receiving a boost of joint parental time investment).
As far as infancy is concerned, there are two particular characteristics
about parenting time and care to highlight:
- 24/7 care. Infants are highly dependent and require continuous
care. The nature of human care fosters infant sociability and intersubjectivity
although there is not a linear association between time
and quality of emergent human relationships (Pleck and
Masciadrelli, 2004).
- Regular feeding by bottle or breast. Current WHO advice is that,
where possible, for nutritional and health advantage infants should
be continuously breast feed for their first six months (Department
of Health, 2000). How can this advice be managed by couples who
also need to work to secure the economic care of their infants - a
further basic requirement of a high quality of life for infants?
A country's parental leave regime is an important facilitating context
for an optimal infant quality of life in the home context in which they
live. For instance, international comparison by Galtry (2003) shows a
positive association between post-birth leave policies and duration of
breastfeeding. She argues that the Swedish model encourages both
high female employment participation rates over a mother's working
life and high breast feeding rates through a parental leave and flexible
working policy, which enables many mothers to be more home based
for the first six months of a child's life and extends men's access to
paid Parental leave beyond the first year of a child's life (for more
details, see Swedish country note). She further argues that a mother's
right to work and breast feed is an equal opportunity issue:
This argument centres on the need to conceive the intersection
of breastfeeding and women's employment as an "equal
opportunity' concern, both for the ability of women workers to
practice breast feeding as well as to ensure the equal
opportunity of infants to good health. (ibid.: 174)
Balancing parental caring and parental employment
during infancy
A good quality of infant life is also dependent on an adequate material
environment. Put crudely it could be argued that infants have a right of
access to parental time and money. The importance of promoting this
multi-dimensional sense of child well-being has been a central goal of
Parental leave policy in Sweden:
The most important condition for children's well-being is
families' economic stability. Parental leave is seen as
guaranteeing that people can have children and return to their
jobs without adverse consequences, thus ensuring children's
well-being. Children are also seen as benefiting psychologically
from mothers and fathers being home with them during their
first months of life, without parents feeling economic stress from
unemployment. Swedish children have a legal right to have a
relationship with both parents, and fathers' ability to take
Parental leave is one way men can develop their relationship
with their children (Haas and Hwang, 1999:49)
What do we know about the best balance of caring and working? The
relative influence of money over quality of care and the optimum
engagement of mothers and fathers in both domains has rarely been
fully captured in most research designs. Engaged, sensitive care from
both parents, if they are present, may be desirable, but at what point
does a reduction in the time available to, for example, sensitively
engage with an infant outweigh the financial advantage gained through
hours spent in employment? We know that children benefit from the
attention and support of both maternal and paternal relationships
(Lamb, 2004). The literature on parenting and children's welfare is
now extensive and shows that children are at risk, or benefit, from the
life histories both parents bring to their parenting. Current reviews of
parenting practices in the round stress similarities between parents,
rather than the unique qualities of mothers and fathers. As Lamb and
Tamis-LeMonda describe: "Sensitive fathering - responding to, talking
to, and teaching and encouraging their children to learn – predicts children's cognitive and linguistic achievements just as sensitive
mothering does' (Lamb and Tamis-LeMonda, 2004: 4).
In addition, father involvement can act to protect child well-being in
dual earner families where mothers work in the first year of children's
lives (e.g. Gregg and Washbrook, 2003). But paternal income remains
an important predictor of children's well-being (e.g. Ermisch and
Francesconi, 2002) and the dilemma for many contemporary men is
that when they become fathers they need to maximise their economic
potential. This context creates a different pattern of work-life balance
preferences for fathers and mothers, at least in the short term with the
current gender pay gap. Clearly in all types of families, for all ages of
children, parental involvement is a trade-off between money, time and
care. The extent to which investment in care can be offset against
investment in financial resources in bringing up children, or the
balance between "market and non-market behaviour' as Milkie et al
(2003) describe it, is still uncertain.
Fitting parental leave into the quality of infant life jigsaw:
what are the benefits of parental leave for children?
(i) Methodological issues
In attempting to understand the impact of parental leave policies on
child well-being there are three important methodological
considerations. Firstly, internationally parental leave is a black box of
diverse arrangements. Apparently similar entitlements do not
necessarily mean similar levels of exposure to the entitlement - as we
show in this volume take-up rates vary considerably. Secondly, in
attempting to understand the specific impact of parental leave on child
outcomes it is important to contextualize parental leave as part of a
public investment in children matrix. As such it can be difficult to
disentangle the effect of parental leave policies from, for instance,
total GDP devoted to child welfare. Thirdly, there is still surprisingly
little empirical research on what parents "do' during Parental leave and
as such understanding the mechanisms by which Parental leave may
operate to promote child well-being are still unclear. Despite Nordic
innovatory research (e.g. Haas, 1992) empirical enquiry into the
specific personal and family experiences and impact of maternal,
paternal and Parental leave is still relatively undeveloped, although
more in-depth qualitative studies of parental perceptions' of child
benefits are emerging. Some main findings are summarized.
(ii) Infant mortality and morbidity gains - basic conditions
of well-being
Ruhm (2000) and Tanaka (2005) have conducted large-scale
secondary analyses of parental leave arrangements and child health
outcomes for 16 European and 18 of 30 OECD countries respectively.
Both programmes of work suggest infant mortality and morbidity gains
associated with Parental leave. Tanaka's analysis, which attempted to
control for some confounding variables, in particular national
investment in child welfare, found a positive independent effect for
paid parental leave on specific child health outcomes, notably infant
mortality. The strongest effect was on post neonatal infant mortality
(28 days to one year of age) when compared to neonatal mortality
(under 28 days) suggesting that parental availability to care beyond
the first month may be an important parenting practice to enhance
child outcomes. Further positive gains were indicated for
immunization. The particular features of parental leave provision which
were most significant in promoting child-welfare were difficult to
disentangle but the secondary analysis suggests that internationally
parental leave positive child effects are maximized when the leave is:
paid and provided in a job secure context. In both sets of
investigations maternal rather than paternal leave taking was the
subject of enquiry.

