3. Modelling instability risk
3.1. Model description
To make an assessment of landslide risk with a view to developing appropriate intervention methods, a software approach that incorporates the dominant elements of the controlling instability processes is required. The CHASM software is a physically based combined soil hydrology and slope stability model that comprises fully integrated hydrology, surface cover (vegetation) and stability components as illustrated in Fig. 2. We have described certain of the main features of the model elsewhere (Anderson et al., 1997; Bishop, 1955; Wilkinson et al., 2000; Premchitt et al., 1986; Wu and Sidle, 1995; Janbu, 1977), but it is appropriate to provide an outline description here, together with the extensions implemented in the code for this application. 
Fig. 2. Outline of the core processes incorporated in CHASM. 
3.2. Modelling soil water conditions
The procedure adopted to model the hydrological system is a finite difference scheme in which the slope is divided into a series of rectangular columns, each subdivided into regular cells. The model simulates detention storage, infiltration, evapo-transpiration, and unsaturated and saturated flow regimes. Rainfall is allowed to infiltrate the top cells governed by the infiltration capacity. Within CHASM, infiltration during rainfall is calculated using Darcy's law and vertical flow in the unsaturated zone is computed using Richards' Eq. (1) solved in explicit form.

where ? is the pore pressure head (m), K the soil conductivity (m s?1), ? the moisture content (dimensionless), z the elevation and t the time. To account for unsaturated conditions, the soil conductivity K is adjusted according to the pore pressure head using the Millington and Quirk (1959) procedure. Below the water table, the flow between columns is modelled using the Darcy law, i.e. the gradient of the water table is used to determine the quantity of water moving from one column to the next between time steps. 
The numerical stability of the solution to the Richards equation is dependent on the time step. Hornberger et al. (1985) provide a method of deriving the required time step to maintain numerical stability based on the distance between the computational nodes, the gradient of the suction–moisture curve at a given suction value and the flow velocity. For most applications the commonly recommended spatial and temporal resolutions are an individual cell size of 1×1 m and 60 s time step. 
3.3. Modelling three-dimensional topography
Within the integrated model structure (Fig. 2), the hydrology scheme represents slope plan curvature (convexity and concavity) by varying the column breadth. The effect of the three-dimensional topography on water fluxes can thus be investigated (in a suitably approximate manner) and its impact on stability estimated. This approach requires identification of the zero flux boundaries at either side of the slope—the degree of convergence or divergence of which defines the downslope change in column breadth (Geotechnical Control Office, 1980). The generated pore pressure field is then used as input to standard two-dimensional stability analyses where the slip surface is located within the mid-plane of the three-dimensional structure (Fig. 2). 
3.4. Slope stability analysis
At each hour of the simulation, the predicted hydrological conditions are exported to a limit equilibrium method for determining slope stability. CHASM uses Bishop's (1955) simplified circular method for estimation of the slope's factor of safety (FOS) with an automated search procedure (Wilkinson et al., 2000). Pore pressures, both negative and positive, are incorporated directly into the effective stress determination of the Mohr–Coulomb equation for soil shear strength. This allows derivation of the minimum FOS, with temporal variations arising from hydrodynamic responses and changes in the position of the critical slip surface (Wilkinson, 2001). 
3.5. Modelling surface cover
The numerical scheme includes a surface cover model, which allows comprehensive investigation into the hydrological and geotechnical effects of vegetation on slope stability. Vegetation affects slope stability through the following principal mechanisms; interception, evapo-transpiration, change in hydraulic conductivity, root reinforcement and surface loading. All of these process elements are represented in the model. 
The procedure adopted in CHASM to represent interception depends on the type of vegetation. For example, dense stands of tall grass can be flattened by intense rainfall to form a semi-permeable barrier. This process, the "thatch effect', is incorporated into CHASM by reducing the effective rainfall (the amount of rainfall allowed to infiltrate), for the grid columns containing vegetation according to:

where R is the rainfall rate, Re the effective rainfall available for infiltration and sv a shedding factor which depends on rainfall intensity. Premchitt et al. (1986) and Lamb and Premchitt (1990) provide graphical results from both grass and tree covered slopes to facilitate an estimation of the shedding factor. 
The impact of vegetation on soil hydraulic conductivity as a result of the presence of a root network is modelled in CHASM by increasing the soil conductivity according to an equation relating the root area ratio to the saturated hydraulic conductivity

where ?K is the increase of conductivity in m s?1 due to the root network and Rv is the root area ratio. Collison (1993) undertook a major field programme to establish this relationship for residual volcanic soils; soils of the same type as those at the Trou Rouge site. 
Mechanically, vegetation affects slope stability through the process of root reinforcement and vegetation surcharge. The interaction between roots and soil can be quantified using a simple root model (Wu and Sidle, 1995). The vegetation components discussed above are incorporated directly into the limit equilibrium method for deriving the FOS. 
Following Wilkinson et al. (1998) and Wu et al., 1979, cv is calculated with the following formula:

where Tv is the root tensile strength and Rv is the root area ratio. 
3.6. Modelling point sources
On slopes of the type shown in Fig. 1, mains metered water is supplied to the many unplanned houses. Grey water from sinks and bathrooms is often discharged directly to the slope. Foul water drainage goes to a septic tank or pit latrine usually within a few metres of the property, the outflow from which returns flow to the slope. It is possible within CHASM to assign leakage at defined points on the slope surface, with specified flux rates by increasing the effective rainfall to the grid columns where water leakage into the slope has been identified. 
3.7. Modelling structure loading
On slopes typified by those shown in Fig. 1, housing density can approach 70%. The loading of the slope due to the weight of buildings therefore needs to be taken into account when establishing the comparative influences on slope stability. This is done by increasing the weight of the slices used by Bishop's method of slices if buildings are located on the slice. 
3.8. Accounting for earthquake triggering of landslides
CHASM can estimate the Peak Ground Acceleration (PGA) required to reduce a given factor of safety to 1 using the following empirical equation established by Charalambous (2003):

where PGA is the peak ground acceleration (m s?2) required to reduce the FOS to a value of 1 and ? is the slope angle (degrees). This is only an approximate method but nonetheless provides an additional method of assessing the performance and appropriateness of the model for comparison with detailed tabulations of regional probabilistic peak ground acceleration. 
4. Model limitations
In accounting for topographic divergence and convergence, surface cover effects and metered water being returned to the slope from households, CHASM represents an acceptable platform to determine the dominant influences on slope stability in vulnerable areas of unplanned housing. However, inherent within the model structure and approach are limitations that relate to process representation and numerical implementation. It is of vital importance, as for any software model, to understand the model constraints and limitations for the purpose of parameterisation and directing the scope and nature of the intended application. 
Within CHASM, the limitations relate to the assumptions made within the hydrology scheme and the method of stability analysis. For the hydrology model the simplifying assumptions primarily relate to flow representation. Soils exhibiting strong anisotropy in hydraulic conductivity or those dominated by macropore flow are not capable of being modelled by CHASM. For the stability assessment component the use of limit equilibrium methods in CHASM results in the imposition of the failure mechanism. Thus, stress strain and progressive failure mechanisms cannot be accommodated. In addition the real kinematics of slope failure, being three-dimensional, are simplified by consideration of only 2 dimensions. 
Notwithstanding these issues, the integrated model aims to improve on the present widely applied limit equilibrium methods of analysis in defining the functional stability of a slope by providing an holistic approach driven by acceptable and robust parameterisation needs. In this context the limitations outlined above are not considered restrictive, but should be noted in order that the process mechanics in any application of the model are not "over described'. A further final issue is that with development of integrated models of the type outlined here, there is an increasing awareness that modellers fail to declare models "invalid' largely because there are so many variables capable of adjustment to limited field data. In particular, a critical general issue is one of distinguishing a good fit of an over-parameterised model from a good fit based on accurate process description (Anderson and Bates, 2001). It is therefore important to seek confirmation of the inferred process controls with other related evidence. It should always be borne in mind that whilst such results may be encouraging, they are not definitive (Anderson and Bates, 2001). In the application that follows we seek such process corroboration of CHASM from seismic trigger estimation, resistance envelope methods of estimating the role of pore pressures in controlling stability, and of landslide runout estimation methods. By seeking such process confirmation, and not simply determining apparent agreement between FOS and observed instability, greater weight can potentially be accorded to the robustness of the model and the inferences drawn (Anderson and Bates, 2001). 
5. St. Lucia case study
5.1. Site description
Surrounding the city of Castries, St. Lucia West Indies is a range of steep hills many of which have been the subject of both unplanned housing and significant instability both in the past and currently. One such community within the Castries basin area is Trou Rouge. This community is located on slopes that range from 25° to 60° on grade 6 material overlying weathered andesite (grade 5). The slope is currently experiencing instability. Fig. 3 shows a cross-section through a currently active slide area which has an approximate housing density of 25%. The houses in the unplanned developments on such slopes have metered mains water supply, but no drainage provision. There is no drainage provision of any significance on the slope. Fig. 4 shows conditions at the upslope and downslope areas of the sliding mass. A slope area immediately adjacent to the Trou Rouge community was the subject of a major slide in October 1999 which necessitated the relocation of families from approximately 40 properties (Teams, 1999). The very significant relocation costs of US$ 8 million add urgency to the provision of a comprehensive model to evaluate the potential in such environments for inexpensive remedial action to avoid the very significant financial and social costs of relocation. 
Fig. 3. Cross-section of Trou Rouge site, Castries, St. Lucia, West Indies. 
Fig. 4. (a) Failure towards top of landslide area caused the collapse of concrete house structure (see Fig. 3). (b) Failure towards toe of landslide area causing severe structural damage (see Fig. 3). 
5.2. Model parameterisation
Appropriate model parameterisation is important if dominant stability influences are to be identified. Central to this question is the reliability of strength testing to deliver geotechnical material properties. Whilst developing counties may have certain equipment, it may not be maintained to appropriate standards and there is the possibility of operating methods not being formally adhered to. However, it is possible to calibrate equipment with results reported from well documented testing laboratories. 

