To test whether
rate of change in pleasantness over time for the caffeine- and placebo-paired flavours differed
between choosers and nonchoosers, the slope of the individual regressions relating changes in
pleasantness for the two drinks as a function of exposure was contrasted using a two-way
ANOVA, with condition (caffeine or placebo) and group (chooser or nonchooser) as factors.
This analysis revealed an overall effect of condition, F(1, 18)_5.71, p_.05, but no effect of
group or Group_Condition interaction. Thus the pleasantness of the drink paired with caffeine
increased at similar rates with exposure in both groups (3.8_1.3 in choosers, 4.3_2.0
in nonchoosers), contrasted with a tendency for pleasantness of the placebo-paired flavour
to decrease (_2.1_2.1 in choosers, _0.3_3.3 in nonchoosers). Why then did some participants
show an overall preference for the placebo-paired flavour after exposure? Although overall
pleasantness of the flavour of the two drinks did not differ between conditions at pretest
(mean pleasantness of the caffeine-paired flavour was 52.0_5.0 compared with 49.5_6.6,
F(1, 18)_0.25, ns), there was a tendency for higher pleasantness ratings for the juice than
for the tea (juice at baseline, 53.2_6.2 relative to 48.3_5.4 for tea), F(1, 18)_2.47, ns, which
Figure 2. Mean (_SE) rated pleasantness of caffeine-paired (shaded) and placebo-paired (unshaded) drinks on the
four conditioning trials depending on whether the consumer went on to select the caffeine-paired drink (choosers:
n_14) or placebo-paired drink (nonchoosers: n_6) at the subsequent drink choice test.
did not interact with condition F(1, 18)_1.87, ns. However, although this tendency for a baseline
preference for the juice had no systematic effect on the overall outcome (i.e., including
drink flavour as a variable in any of the analyses above had no effect on the overall significance
of either the overall Condition_Time interaction or the linear contrast of pleasantness as a
function of time), chance differences in pleasantness of the two drinks at baseline meant that
for some participants the increase in pleasantness of the caffeine-paired flavour was never sufficient
to reverse the initial preference for the flavour paired with placebo, especially when tea
was paired with caffeine. This effect is easiest to understand with some specific examples. Thus
for one nonchooser (P5), pleasantness of the caffeine-paired flavour (tea) increased from 28 to
52 units on the rating scale, while ratings for the placebo-paired flavour (juice) remained relatively
constant (74 on Day 1, 76 on Day 4). Thus this person's large initial preference for the
juice masked the increase in pleasantness of the caffeine-paired drink (tea). In contrast, in
chooser P4 the increase in rated pleasantness for the caffeine-paired flavour (tea) from 42 to 50
was accompanied by a decrease in pleasantness of the placebo-paired flavour (juice) from 60 to
42 rating units, thereby reversing the initial preference for juice. Thus there is no difference in
the response to exposure in choosers and nonchoosers, but baseline differences in some individuals
prevented the changes in pleasantness that resulted from conditioning from reversing
initial drink preferences.
Debriefing
During the debriefing subjects were asked what they thought the experiment was about,
and no participant mentioned caffeine in their response to this question. Of those who made
any comment, the majority responded in terms of effects of drink on mood (n_10), in line
with what they were informed prior to participation. When caffeine was specifically mentioned
in the question “Did you think the experiment involved caffeine?” only 4 out of 20 subjects
responded positively, of which only 1 subject believed caffeine had been added to the drinks
they received and thought it was in both drinks. In response to the questions “Did you think
there was caffeine in the tea?” and “Did you think there was caffeine in the juice?” 17 participants
said no, or were unable to give an answer, for both drinks, while two subjects thought
there might have been caffeine, but were noncommittal and said “Maybe” to both questions.
One participant correctly identified the presence of caffeine in the CS_ but not in the CS_
drink. These data confirm that the attempts to disguise both caffeine administration and the
purpose of the study was successful.
Discussion
The outcome of the present study further confirms the ability of caffeine to reinforce
increases in flavour pleasantness and the absence of any ability of caffeine to act as an aversive
reinforcer, in caffeine-deprived moderate caffeine consumers. Importantly, this is the
first study to report these effects using a differential conditioning paradigm with both a
CS_ and a CS_ tested in the same participant. Thus, concerns that the results of previous
studies that contrasted CS_ and CS_ conditions in different participants may have
resulted from a form of pseudoconditioning, whereby the flavour was evaluated in the context
of a more or less enjoyable experience across the study, are not supported. Thus it is more
plausible to suppose that the changes in the rated pleasantness of the flavours reported here
is a consequence of conditioned associations between the flavour and either the effects of
caffeine (where flavour acted as CS_) or absence of caffeine effects (where flavour acted as
CS_) in the period following ingestion of the drink.
One potential problem in studies using the differential conditioning paradigm to assess
the effects of contingent pairings of two flavours with either the presence (CS_) or absence
(CS_) of a US with postingestive consequences is that there is much greater opportunity
for stimulus generalization to interfere with the rates of learning than is the case in studies
that can use CSs with different sensory modalities. Thus, although the present study (where
sensory differences were maximized by using a flavour/temperature/colour combination)
found evidence of differential changes in liking for CS_ relative to CS_, other studies in
our laboratory that have attempted to use two distinct flavours (e.g., two forms of fruit juice,
two forms of herb tea) have not dissociated CS_ from CS_. Thus generalization between
the flavours is likely to restrict the ability to detect differential conditioning in studies of
human flavour–consequence learning. Future studies of flavour–consequence learning in
humans need to maximize sensory differences between CS_ and CS_ to minimize interference
from generalization.
As well as confirming that changes in liking can be measured for caffeine-paired flavours in
a differential conditioning paradigm, the present study also suggests that subjective evaluations
of liking in the form of pleasantness ratings were more sensitive than a simple choice measure
postconditioning in assessing changes in liking. Thus, although more participants selected the
caffeine-paired than placebo-paired flavour, this effect was not significant whereas changes in
rated pleasantness overall were significant. Further analysis suggested that initial preferences
for the placebo-paired drink were not overcome by increased liking for the flavour of the
caffeine-paired drink in those participants who selected placebo postconditioning. Overall the
present data are better interpreted as a lack of power in the choice test, rather than a fundamental
distinction between measures of hedonic valence (pleasantness) and preference (drink
choice).
One potential confound in the present study was the decision to dissolve the caffeine in
the drink vehicle. In this context caffeine can be considered to have two properties. First, the
psychopharmacological postingestive effects of caffeine act as the US, probably by reversing
the effects of long-term caffeine dependence (Tinley et al., 2003). However, caffeine itself has
a bitter taste, and the presence of caffeine could, potentially, have modified the flavour of the
drink acting as the CS. An important issue, and the potential confound, is then whether it was
the full flavour of the CS with caffeine, or the specific bitter taste of caffeine, that was detected
as the predictor of the postingestive effects of caffeine in this context. However, the present
data, along with the outcome of previous studies, all suggest that the presence of caffeine in
the drink is not important in this context. First, since bitterness is disliked, if the concentration
of caffeine in the test drink was discernible this should have resulted in an initial dislike
for the caffeine-containing drink relative to the drink containing maltodextrin (which has a
neutral taste). However, there was no difference in initial pleasantness of these two drinks.
Second, the increase in rated pleasantness over the four consumption trials for the drink containing
caffeine in the present study did not differ from the increase in pleasantness reported
in a previous study where caffeine was administered in capsule form, rather than in the drink,
so avoiding any contribution of caffeine bitterness to the drink flavour (Yeomans et al., 2000b).
The complexity in these studies relates to the nature of the flavour CSs themselves, which
contain both gustatory and olfactory components, and thus existing tastants (bitter and sweet
components) along with the predominant olfactory stimuli will both contribute to the flavour
of the two CS used here. The lack of difference in rated pleasantness or bitterness of the two
drinks when evaluated with and without the added caffeine suggests that the strength of the
existing flavour was an adequate mask for the presence of caffeine. However, future studies
should either use caffeine administered in capsule form or use a pharmacologically inert
bitter agent as placebo.
One important issue in studies of human classical conditioning is the degree to which
participants are aware of the specific contingent relationship between CS and US. Indeed it
has been suggested that contingency awareness is necessary for human conditioning, based
primarily on studies using electrodermal conditioning procedures (Lovibond &amp; Shanks,
2002). As in our previous studies with flavour–caffeine associations, the present study
attempted to fully disguise the nature of the study to minimize the likelihood of expectancy
effects interfering with drink evaluations. However, a consequence of this was that participants
self-reported minimal awareness of the association under test. At face value this
implies minimal contingency awareness. However, the study was not designed to explicitly
measure awareness, and self-report data based on retrospective evaluations may be a weak
measure of contingency awareness (Lovibond &amp; Shanks, 2002). Future studies might evaluate
in more detail the extent of contingency awareness in human flavour–consequence
learning, and if the lack of understanding implied in studies to date is confirmed, this
will challenge the prevailing view that awareness is a prerequisite for all examples of human
conditioning.
Changes in liking for flavours can also be achieved by conditioned association of a
hedonically neutral flavour (CS) with a second, hedonically significant flavour (US) in the
flavour–flavour evaluative conditioning paradigm. Thus, repeated pairings of a neutral
flavour CS with an aversive US (Tween) resulted in decreased liking for the CS alone
(Baeyens, Crombez, De Houwer, &amp; Eelen, 1996; Baeyens, Crombez, Hendrickx, &amp; Eelen,
1995a; Baeyens, Eelen, Van den Bergh, &amp; Crombez, 1990). Unusually, this decrease in liking
appeared resistant to extinction (Baeyens, Crombez, Van den Bergh, &amp; Eelen, 1988; Baeyens,
Eelen, &amp; Crombez, 1995b; Baeyens, Eelen, Van den Bergh, &amp; Crombez, 1989), in contrast
to our findings using the flavour–caffeine model (Yeomans et al., 2000b). However, although
repeated pairing of a CS with an aversive US results in reliable decreases in liking, the equivalent
pairings of a neutral flavour CS with a positive US (sucrose) has not generally produced
reliable increases in liking for the paired CS (Baeyens et al., 1990; Rozin,
Wrzesniewski, &amp; Byrnes, 1998), although one older report did find evidence of enhanced
liking for flavours paired with sucrose (Zellner, Rozin, Aron, &amp; Kulish, 1983). Thus, the
flavour–flavour model of human evaluative conditioning appears to be most reliable where
the US is an aversive flavour. This implies two distinct differences between hedonic changes
arising from flavour–flavour and flavour–caffeine associations: the extent to which these
changes are resistant to extinction and the extent to which increased hedonic evaluations are
found with flavour–flavour pairings. Thus, whether flavour–caffeine associations can be
considered as a different form of evaluative conditioning will depend on greater understanding
of the underlying associative structure of these two models of learning.
Overall the present data provide further support for the idea that flavour–consequence
conditioning underlies the ability of the presence and absence of caffeine to modify the
perceived pleasantness of novel drink flavours, opening the way for future studies to utilize
this paradigm to further evaluate the intrinsic nature of learning in this context.

