The publication of four volumes of edited diaries, written for the social research organization Mass-Observation (M-O), in the space of 13 months is an unusual and welcome event for historians, signalling a revival of interest in the richest and least used collection of material in the M-O Archive. The 500 personal diaries are the largest collection of diaries from the 1940s Britain, easily exceeding the second biggest collection of diaries at the Imperial War Museum. The diary collection, which approaches one million pages in length, has not been included in the Adam Matthew project to make more of the M-O Archive available on microfilm. This decision reflects the fact that many researchers find the diaries, which haven't been indexed or summarized, too dense to use effectively and chose to concentrate on the topic collections and file reports. Given that resource constraints force researchers to adopt a strategy of picking the lowest, ripest fruit first, the publication of a handful of these diaries in an accessible and affordable format is good news for historians with limited time and money. Nella Last's War, the first edited M-O diary to be published back in 1981, is now a standard source for historians, cited regularly in articles and monographs on everyday life in wartime Britain. Extracts from Last's diary have been included in a recent anthology of war diarists.1 In time, the four edited volumes of diaries will become standard sources too. 
The 12 diaries in the edited volumes represent a fraction of the diaries collected by M-O between 1939 and 1967. Solicited diaries were an integral part of the M-O project to create "a social anthropology of ourselves' as they were an excellent way to study the feelings and activities of ordinary people. M-O recruited a "panel' of volunteers to complete a monthly questionnaire, called a directive, and write accounts of what they did on the twelfth of every month starting from February 1937. After a year M-O stopped collecting these monthly day surveys, although panel members were occasionally asked to keep a diary on special days such as Armistice Day.2 Within days of the declaration of war in September 1939, M-O sent a "Crisis Directive' to members of the panel asking them to "keep a diary for the next few weeks, keeping political discussion at a minimum, concentrating on the details of your everyday life, your own reactions and those of your family and others you meet'.3 Many panellists kept a diary for several months and some for several years, whilst a handful continued to keep a diary throughout the war and well into the post-war period. The diaries edited by Garfield, Malcolmson and Searby come from this collection of "War Diaries'. 
The panellists who kept a personal diary had widely varying interpretations of the instructions in the Crisis Directive as Simon Garfield highlights in his introduction to Our Hidden Lives. 
Some people wrote three pages a month, some wrote forty. Some commented merely on the weather and their journey to work; some wrote predominantly about the contents of the newspapers; but some kept highly compelling and detailed journals containing almost every joy, disappointment and quirk of their lives.4 
In the introduction to Love and War in London, Malcolmson discusses the attitudes of panellists to their diaries in more detail. 
Diary writing was not, of course, for everyone. Many people who started a diary gave up quickly. Others wrote only intermittently. Some 475 wartime diaries are held in the M-O Archive, but many are very brief; only a minority represent sustained, uninterrupted writing over a period of at least two years. Conscientious diary-keeping was demanding, and many well-intentioned people found that as their lives unfolded with wartime bringing various unexpected challenges, they had neither the time nor the energy for daily writing, and M-O heard from them no more. Or perhaps they got bored with what they came to see as repetitive and banal reporting of everyday events.5 
The diaries edited by Garfield, Malcolmson and Searby are not a representative selection of the war diaries as they have chosen to edit diaries kept by the minority of panellists who wrote consistently and well for a sustained period. This minority of panel members enjoyed writing, had time to write a diary and possessed a legible hand or a typewriter. Most of these committed diarists were middle-class women with centre-left views. Commenting on the appeal of the M-O project to such women, Angus Calder and Dorothy Sheridan argue that M-O's interest in the everyday valued women's lives.6 
All the panellists expected their diary entries to be read within a month of them being written by social investigators working for M-O who would use the diaries in their research. How they pictured these investigators influenced the form and content of their diary entries. The monthly directive apart, diarists learned more about these Mass-Observers through a weekly newsletter during the first half of 1940 and a bulletin from 1946 to 1957. Many read newspaper articles written by Tom Harrisson, who co-founded M-O with Charles Madge and Humphrey Jennings, or listened to him on the radio. As the public face of M-O, Harrisson came to personify the organization for many volunteer writers and was the person who they imagined would read their diary entries. From Harrisson's articles and radio broadcasts, panellists got a sense of the themes M-O was interested in. There was, however, another way for the diarists to discover what M-O wanted of them: reading extracts from panellists diaries reproduced in articles and books about M-O.7 
M-O's staff made limited use of the diaries in their published and unpublished reports. Investigators filed the typescript and manuscript diaries by month, gender and surname, but M-O did not have the resources to index or summarize all the diaries. There does not appear to have been a sustained effort to analyse the diaries: plans for a proposed book on the war diaries came to nothing.8 Occasionally, investigators would go through the diaries to extract passages about a particular topic to illustrate points in a report or add colour.9 Trawling the diaries was a labour-intensive exercise that rarely resulted in a good catch of material for inclusion in M-O file reports or publications. Consequently, investigators relied heavily on evidence from directive replies, direct observation and printed material. The diaries were most useful to investigators when assessing public reaction to a discrete event such as the introduction of clothes rationing.10 Over the past 35 years, the M-O Archive staff has tried to make the diaries more accessible, developing finding aids to allow researchers to use the diaries, which contain information about the diarists and the period their diaries cover.11 Nevertheless, the diaries continue to be a source too rich for researchers to digest in their entirety, which is why edited diaries and diary extracts in anthologies have become a standard source, and the historians, including the author, use the diaries to look at popular attitudes to discrete events.12 
The four recent volumes are not the first M-O diaries to be edited for publication. Since Sussex University agreed to house the Mass-Observation Archive in 1970, three individual diaries have been edited for publication as well as numerous diary extracts have been published in M-O anthologies and academic publications.13 Malcolmson chose to edit the diary of Olivia Cockett, a single woman in her 20s, living in London, working at New Scotland Yard and having an affair with an older married man, and (with Peter Searby) the diary of Rachel Dhonau, a married woman in her 30s, whose husband had been called up leaving her to raise their son in Sherringham while working in the local Food Office. Malcolmson and Searby transcribed the monthly instalments and organized them into a continuous narrative, the unintended consequence of which is to give the impression that Cockett and Dhonau kept conventional diaries which they could pull out of drawer, or off a shelf, and reread at their leisure. Although Malcolmson's and Searby's approach to editing the diaries is conventional, they have supplemented the diary with extracts from other personal writing. Replies to M-O's monthly directive, which encouraged the women to reflect on their lives, are woven into the text enriching the diary and helping to develop a stronger sense of the women's character. In the Cockett diary, Malcolmson is also able to include entries from a more intimate journal alongside the M-O diary which reminds us that the M-O diaries were public documents which omit deeply personal topics. No matter how frank some of the M-O diaries appear to be, they cannot be compared with the unpublished personal diaries deposited at the Imperial War Museum. These diarists did not expect anyone to read their entries for years. Simon Gardener has taken a very different approach to the M-O diaries, by selecting five contributors to the M-O project for each book and arranging their entries in chronological order. At least one of the diaries, that of Maggie Joy Blunt, could have been edited for publication in its own right. His original approach succeeds in giving the reader an impression of the richness and variety of the M-O diaries. It also allows the reader to compare the style and content of the diaries. Malcolmson's inclusion of extracts from other women's M-O diaries at points in Cockett's diary allows the reader to make a narrower comparison. 
All four volumes have been carefully edited. Gardiner's books contain biographical information about the diarists prior to the commencement of the diaries and an indication of what happened to them after they ceased keeping a diary for M-O. Most importantly, the books contain an index and a chronology. Given that the books are aimed at a wide readership, the biographical information and index are not as full as historians might like. Malcolmson and Searby, both academic historians, have produced an excellent edition of Rachel Dhonau's diary. The biographical information about Dhonau is very full; there are maps of the local area; footnotes are used to explain terms and allusions in the diary entries; personal photographs are included to help the reader to imagine Dhonau and her world and the index is good. Malcolmson and Searby also include three appendices listing references to films, books and radio programmes in the diary. Historians interested in cinema-going, reading and listening will find these a very helpful addition to the text. Malcolmson's edition of Olivia Cockett's diary replicates these virtues with the exception of the appendices: the discussion of the M-O diaries in the introduction is particularly noteworthy and should be required reading for anyone intending to use the M-O diaries. 
Although I do not have the space to summarize the contents of the edited diaries here, I can highlight some of their themes that might be of interest to other historians. Garfield's books allow readers to get a sense of the popular mood during the Phoney War period and the immediate post-war years. Historians of the Home Front will not be surprised at the complacency, boredom, frustration and tension revealed in We Are At War. The earlier volume Our Hidden Lives, which covers the period 1945–48, is more interesting as it covers the optimism associated with the Labour government's honeymoon period and the growing resentment at continued shortages. Most edited diaries of the 1940s cover the war years only, so that the publication of diaries covering the years after 1945 will help scholars of the period. In fact, all four volumes reviewed here challenge conventional periodization, looking at different phases of the war or the immediate post-war years, referred to as the transition period in official documents. As aforementioned, Garfield's approach will also enable researchers to compare and contrast the diaries which will be of great use to those interested in life writing and the construction of the self. Two of Gardiner's diarists stand out in particular due to current research interests: those of B. Charles, a gay antiques dealer in Edinburgh and Herbert Brush, a London pensioner. 

