Relevant to the subject of this paper is the addendum on
research in the early and mid-1960s which he produced in Map of educational research
(Thouless, 1969). Harold Butcher, who had been at Manchester from 1953 to 1963,
returned as professor in 1966 from Edinburgh University and rapidly established a
reputation as a leading authority on intelligence and on creativity, publishing in 1968
both an admired monograph on Human intelligence and joint work with the American
scholar R. B. Cattell in a notoriously difficult area in The prediction of intelligence and
creativity. His work on human abilities increasingly investigated research problems in
higher education, and in 1970 he took a chair at the University of Sussex attracted by
the multidisciplinary nature of courses at that institution (Turner, 1979). Other
major researches at Manchester included the development of the British intelligence
scale, later renamed the British ability scales (Brown, 1982), the work of Dr Eric
Lunzer and colleagues on learning and thinking, and of Dr Ronald Goldman on religious
concepts. The pioneering special needs researches carried out in the Hester
Adrian Research Centre by Dr Peter Mittler, promoted to a chair of special education
in 1973, made Manchester an international centre for the investigation of learning
processes in the mentally handicapped (Mittler, 1970; Mittler, 1973; Robertson,
1990; Hegarty, 1996).
The University College of Swansea, which had played little part in psychology of
education research in Wales since it opened in 1921, became a major contributor
after Charles Gittins was appointed Professor of Education in 1956. As a career
educational administrator and a former Director of Education for Monmouthshire,
Gittins realized the need to establish for the benefit of teachers and local education
authorities new and prestigious professional courses of training in educational
psychology, in special education and in counselling. All should be grounded on a
strong research base. He made gifted appointments in these areas and his department
and faculty quickly developed a national reputation, which, by the end of the decade,
had assumed an international significance: "The department work in identifying the
effect on pupil educational progress of material, social, and emotional disadvantage
gained an international reputation' (Jones, 2004). A full and unduly modest account
of this work by two of the major researchers is given in Chazan and Laing (1981). A
representative publication may be seen in Response to special schooling by Philip
Williams and Elizabeth Gruber, published in 1967. In addition to the important work
of these research terms, one notes the considerable psychological output of R. R. Dale
(Swansea 1946–72, retiring as Reader in Education), with many papers and books on
coeducation and on school failure and underachievement, and the work by Leslie
Button on sociometry and informal group work which had an enduring influence on
pastoral care in schools and in youth leadership education. Douglas Hamblin joined
the department in 1969 and gained a reputation for his training courses and publications
on counselling.
University research arose both from individual scholarship and from new external
funding sources in the 1960s, though, as Wiseman noted, this growth "increased the
trend towards immediate-problem research and away from basic research' (Wiseman,
1969), especially in the developing field of curriculum studies, where psychology
could be usually applied to curriculum issues, as in the Schools Council funding of
special needs work at Swansea. The same department received £2500 from the
Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation towards the cost of the one-year diploma course in
the professional training of educational psychologists (University of Wales, 1964).
The generosity of the Sembal Trust helped fund the launch of the Hester Adrian
Research Centre at Manchester (Mittler, 1969). The Ministry of Education was
supporting 20 research projects as at 27 March 1963, of which 12 were awarded to
university departments of education. All of them had a psychological input and
included streaming in the secondary modern school (Leicester), learning and social
class (University of London Institute of Education), longitudinal studies of child
development (Cambridge) and the education of the educationally subnormal child
(Swansea). The Department of English at Leeds University shared a research grant
with the Birmingham Department of Education to research the development of oral
language tests in English. Other funded departments were Sheffield, Nottingham and
Manchester (Ministry of Education, 1963b). The Ministry of Education in 1963 also
funded Research Units in four departments of education, including Bristol, where the
unit under Alan Brimer provided research services for staff and students, supervised
national projects and set up research groups for local teachers. Within a decade it was
not unusual for total annual funding in the Bristol unit to reach £250,000 from
government, the Schools Council, the SSRC and other bodies (Humphreys, 1976).
This increased volume of research and scholarship in university education departments
was accompanied by an expansion of advanced courses. These ranged from
certificates through diplomas to higher degree level. The taught higher degrees, and
some diploma courses, contained a research project or dissertation. These advanced
qualifications were either generalist, containing some psychology of education, or
specialist, entirely devoted to psychology or applications of psychology to special
aspects of teaching. Courses were offered full time, part time and sometimes in
combination. Thus in 1964 some 1500 teachers were attending part-time courses, of
which 965 were on certificates and diplomas, 60 on courses dealing with "backward'
or ESN pupils and 443 teachers were on the higher degree courses (Conference of
Institute Directors, 1964).
Generalist postgraduate courses often contained a common course in psychology,
as did the MA in Education at Sussex University, in 1966, where social and educational
psychology was one of two compulsory courses with three further psychology
courses in a list of nine options (Conference of Institute Directors, 1966). Other
generalist higher degrees included the MEd degrees at Durham and Newcastle, both
with educational psychology components (Willatt, 1969; Hockey, 1970). Other
universities had specialist degrees in either psychology of education or in child development.
Some MEd degrees, such as that at Swansea, gave students graduate
membership of the British Psychological Society if they chose modules of which the
Society approved and carried out a dissertation in a psychological subject. The higher
degrees of MA or MEd by study and dissertation were taken by a minority of
students, the majority studying for a wide range of specialist diplomas and certificates
which contained either a theoretical course in psychology of education or a practical
course with a professional application in schools. Obvious examples of the latter are
courses in special education such as diplomas in special education at Birmingham,
Manchester and the University of London Institute of Education. At Leeds, in
September 1957, Kenneth Lovell had been appointed as an educational psychologist
with special responsibility to run the new full-time diploma in the education of "backward
children'. Similarly, Maurice Chazan moved from the school psychological
services in Liverpool to take charge of the equivalent diploma in Swansea: "The
history and development of special education is inextricably linked with corresponding
developments in educational psychology' (Sugden, 1991). Other diploma courses
in the 1960s with a strong psychology content included a diploma in residential
education at Newcastle, in a prospectus of further professional studies linked by an
emphasis on child development (Davies-Jones, 1990); and those in educational guidance
at Manchester, social psychology of education at Leicester, experimental educational
psychology at Cambridge and child development at London (Ministry of
Education, 1963a). Some university courses used psychological theory to apply to
problems in teaching curriculum subjects or wider issues of curriculum policy. Thus,
Hull in 1963 had the Diploma in Specialist Studies (Mathematics), which examined
general learning theory, adolescent development and mathematical concept formation
(Conference of Institute Directors, 1963), and Aberystwyth had a number of
advanced courses on bilingual education underpinned by psychological research in
the department (Evans, 1992). Diploma courses for good honours graduates in
psychology and providing professional training for educational psychologists were
established in seven universities by 1964, including an innovative four-year, part-time
course at Swansea. This combined teacher training, two years of teaching experience,
further study in educational psychology, child development, statistics, relevant medical
studies, special educational treatment and special topics. The course included
school and clinic placements and was 50% theory and 50% practice (Conference of
Institute Directors, 1962).
The development of such a range of advanced courses and the simultaneous development
of them in colleges of education increased the need for the provision of good
introductory texts on educational psychology which would serve students on both
initial and advanced courses. The market for such texts was increased further by the
advent of the BEd degree, which by 1969 was being offered by 21 universities (Ross,
1990). In the 1950s the available textbooks included the best-selling work, Psychology
and its bearing on education by C. W. Valentine, first published in 1950 and which after
ten reprints saw a second edition in 1960. A well-organized synthesis of both educational
and child psychology, it provided over 600 pages of research-based and nondoctrinaire
theory and practice. Admirable as it was, it was replaced by Kenneth
Lovell's Educational psychology and children; first published in 1958, this book went
into a 10th edition in 1969, making it the textbook of the decade in psychology of
education. As eclectic and comprehensive as the Valentine text, it provided students
with both a scholarly overview of the field and extensive references to contemporary
literature. The large number of journal citations made it particularly useful for
advanced study, and it was aimed specifically at the postgraduate student of education
on initial and in-service programmes. However, though the book was generally
excellent and much used by students and their teachers, it might be argued that
Lovell had a traditional and orthodox approach to curriculum content in psychology
of education, one which other psychologists might regard as all too embracing and
lacking in focus, with its inclusion of child and adolescent growth seen as better dealt
with in a developmental psychology text. Edwin Peel had published The psychological
basis of education in 1956, and by 1967 it had appeared in its second edition. Though
emotional and social development is looked at, the core of the book emphasizes learning,
personality, individual differences, individuals in society and school assessment.
This is a narrower and more focused approach than Lovell's, and in some ways, with
its grounding in experimental science, it is more demanding than earlier texts in the
field. Edgar Stones, a colleague of Peel at Birmingham, signalled a marked break with
the past in An introduction to educational psychology, published in 1966. Stones
believed that the purpose of educational psychology was to help teachers maximize
optimum intellectual and emotional environments to provide a stimulating learning
context in classroom and school. Thinking, language and learning were thus
presented as the core elements of the curriculum in his view of educational psychology.
This clear emphasis on cognitive factors was also present in Stones's Readings in
educational psychology, published in 1970 (Gilroy, 2005). There was a return to the
older tradition of including child development in an educational psychology text with
the publication of H. S. N. McFarland's Psychological theory and educational practice,
in 1971, with an emphasis on human development, learning and assessment.
The present historical account of developments in educational psychology in the
expansive decade of the 1960s raises as many questions as it tries to answer and
suggests a number of avenues for further research. Aspects of the curriculum, such as
creativity or self-esteem studies, might be looked at through a detailed examination
of syllabuses, textbooks and journals. Individual case studies of departments and
prosopographical studies of leading scholars might show how the subject became
institutionalized within the wider discipline of educational studies, how it related to
academic departments of psychology and how new areas of research developed within
the research community of educational psychologists. Hopefully, a full developmental
account of the growth of psychology of education in higher education would be
not only a contribution to the history of the related disciplines of education and
psychology, but a major addition to the historiography of British universities.

