ABSTRACT
This article applies narrative methods to an analysis of the meaning of British
domestic culture. The data are from an exploratory study investigating how and
why people displayed objects in their homes. Although mantelpiece displays were
the principal focus, other display areas were considered, and interview respondents
were invited to tell stories about the provenance and meaning of objects.
Analysing such narratives as social performances demonstrates the extent to
which the apparently "private' experiences of the self are manifested by means of
display objects and domestic artefacts. Narratives and objects inhabit the intersection
of the personal and the social. An analysis of four narratives that two
women related during interviews in their homes shows how people account for
themselves in recounting stories of their home possessions. In conclusion, a
research strategy combining narrative accounts with an interpretation of photographic
data is suggested.
KEY WORDS
consumption / home / identity / interview / material culture / narrative
Narrating Materials and Reading Rooms
his is a discussion of material culture in the home. It explores the display
of material culture as an everyday practice. The construction of narratives
around objects displayed in the home is the focus of the article. This process
is examined through a detailed analysis of informants' accounts. Rather
than conceptualizing the meaning of objects as inherent and fixed, this
approach takes meaning to be contingent and co-constructed by informant,
researcher and objects within their domestic setting. Interview accounts are one
method of exploring the situational, interactive production of meaning.
Analysis of these accounts demonstrates how individuals who are often conceptualized
only as consumers become producers of meaning through their
domestic stories. By constructing narratives around visual productions in the
apparently private space of the home, people participate in the ongoing accomplishment
of social, moral identities. Thus, the practice of producing narratives
around objects contributes to the personal work of autobiography and renders
objects as meaningful participants in the social work of identity-building.
Initial theoretical discussions locate the topic within existing studies of
home and material culture and narrative methodology. Questions concerning
the dominance of the unstructured, in-depth qualitative interview as a social
scientific method, and in particular of the "narrative turn', are raised briefly in
the introductory discussion. Following an analysis of four narratives related by
two people in an ethnographically informed project, a final reflection returns
to the question of method. In conclusion, an approach recognizing both the
visual and storied aspects of material cultures is suggested for the study of
domestic display.
The Meaning of Home, Consumption and Material
Culture
As a substantive topic, domestic display inhabits a growing literature on the
construction of home through consumption. This is at the nexus of three existing
fields of study: the meaning of home, material culture and consumption.
For an overview of the literature on the meaning of home, which cannot be
covered here in full, see Mallett's recent discussion (2004). The home is a site
for consumption practices and the establishment of social and economic relations
(Jackson and Moores, 1995; Wilk, 1989). As the articles in edited collections
by Cieraad (1999) and Miller (2001) all demonstrate from a variety of
perspectives, agencies of material culture, the house and the individual interact
in an ongoing construction of meaning. Domestic settings can also be a domain
of cultural anxiety, in that the "private' space of the home may be implicitly felt
to be the object of potential surveillance and judgement by visitors or a "generalized
other' (Allan and Crow, 1989; Darke and Gurney, 2000; Hunt, 1989).
Homes are also a setting for the enactment of self, where the "otherness' of previous
owners and potential visitors must be managed – even exorcized
(Gregory, 2003; Hockey, 1999). Thus, the management of domestic display has
been conceptualized both as performance for others and a marking practice
contributing to negotiations of identity within a network of relations.
The empirical findings in this research also help to illuminate
Featherstone's discussion of the "aestheticisation' of everyday life (1991),
although it is not clear that the findings posited here represent a distinctively
postmodern consumer. Miller (2002) and Clarke (2002) both emphasize the
materiality of home and things as constitutive of social processes, rather than
an abstracted notion of home as symbol. Moreover, research from the perspective
of design history (Forty, 1986; Kwint et al., 1999; Rybczynski, 1986)
stresses the continuities of domestic space and everyday objects in the ongoing
historical mundane practices of the social accomplishment of identity. As
Kopytoff (1986) emphasizes, things have a "cultural biography' and are
embedded in frameworks of time and memory (Tilley, 2001). Biographies of
things are important in the construction of individual and family autobiographies
(Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton, 1981; Woodward, 2001). By
appropriating mass-produced objects to create "meaningful décor' (Chevalier,
1999: 94), people can move from being supposedly alienated or passive consumers
to active producers of meaning (see also Cieraad, 1999; Didau, 2001;
Jackson and Moores, 1995; Miller, 1988, 1995, 2001). Therefore, empirical
studies of interactions between people, their homes and material culture suggest
that there is an active meaning-making process in which all three play a
role (Dittmar, 1992).
In particular, Riggins' useful insights into ethnographic study of the domestic
living room complement the analysis provided here (1990, 1994). His
approach to analysis, "mapping' and "referencing' to render objects meaningful
both in personal autobiography and within the realm of public cultural values,
is one way of making sense of domestic space and material culture. The analysis
presented in this article focuses on the personal, since, as is argued in the
conclusion, narratives are one method of framing the relationship between individuals
and domestic displays.
Interviewing and Narrative Approaches
The article is based on empirical research, which used interview and narrative
methods for exploring the social world. The "narrative turn' in social science
research has been evident for the last 20 years. As Mishler (1986), Riessman
(1993, 2002), and Cortazzi (2001) – among many others – have established,
the analysis of personal, narrative accounts is a powerful means to understand
the construction and performance of selves. The analysis of biographical and
autobiographical materials – spoken and written – provides a valuable
resource in the exploration of moral careers and transformations in identity
(Evans, 1993; Plummer, 1993, 2001; Stanley and Morgan, 1993). Narrative
illuminates the intersection of biography and history, the focus of sociological
study (Mills, 1959).
In some cases, however, people do not tell long stories about the objects
they were displaying in their homes, and the interview structure remains stichomythic.
This broken rhythm of talk consists of short questions being met
with equally brief responses. This problematizes the concept of the "narrative
turn' in social science research, which gives primacy to one particular social
practice and form of interview talk. There is a danger in ignoring the fact that
not all informants participate in the popularized social scientific practice of the
unstructured or in-depth qualitative interview. In taking the interviewer's role
to be one of providing opportunities to the interviewee to relate their "own'
story (Mishler, 1986), this approach places the interviewee in the role of a container
of stories that can be mined, rather than as a co-constructor of knowledge
(Holstein and Gubrium, 1995). The social character of these stories must
be recognized, since in the "interview society', it is recognized that interview
narratives are not transparent reflections of lived experience or the self, but are
interactive performances (Atkinson and Silverman, 1997; Gubrium and
Holstein, 2002; Holstein and Gubrium, 1995; Kvale, 1996). As Atkinson and
Silverman point out, the emphasis on narrative in interview interactions results
not from an essential superiority to this type of subject, but from a "preferred
subjectivity' (1997: 19) that is currently popular not only in the social sciences
but more widely in society. With reference to the topic of this article, Coolen et
al. (2002) express concern about empirical studies of the meaning of home in
particular, which have tended to use small-scale, qualitative interview samples
for data collection to the exclusion of other approaches.
The Study: Dismantling Mantelpieces
The original focus of the study was the display of material culture on domestic
mantelpieces. These were, for many generations, conventionally thought of as
the focal point of the living room (Lawrence and Chris, 1996). In 1937 and
1983, Mass-Observation asked their respondents to list what was on their mantelpieces
or equivalent space and those of acquaintances and family (Mass-
Observation Archive, 1937, 1983). There were responses from 120 people: all
but one had a mantelpiece. Now, central heating has negated the need for "real'
fires, yet even in newly built houses, fireplaces and mantelpieces continue to be
a feature, although figures are not available. In this study, 100 of the 140
respondents to a postal questionnaire had one or more mantelpieces.
Informants from a new housing development who had mantelpieces said that
they "made sense' of a room, giving it order and symmetry, in a way that a shelf
unit or television did not. Nevertheless, all the people I interviewed commented
on the many focal points in their homes, in the living room and beyond. These
were not just display spaces, but also sites where family and individual stories
were constructed around individual objects and assemblages of photographs
and collections of artefacts.
The narratives discussed here are taken from an empirical study of domestic
display in Cardiff. Thirty people and their families agreed to be interviewed
following analysis of postal surveys returned by 140 households. In-depth interviews
that were guided by their questionnaire responses and also focused on the
displays as "talking points' were taped in the living rooms of their homes. The
four narratives were carefully selected for their salience in illuminating themes
that emerged from an extensive analysis of narrative sections of all the interview
transcripts. The analysis was conducted according to guidelines discussed by
Riessman (1993, 2002), Coffey and Atkinson (1996), Kvale (1996) and
Czarniawska (2004).
Exploring the narratives about things emphasizes what mantelpiece displays
(or other domestic display areas) are accomplishing in the home. Their
materiality is not bound by temporal and spatial limits, since they are the
material with which people build stories of absent presences, a horizon beyond
which the past and future, the otherworld and ideal self dwell (Didau, 2001).
The mantelshelf provides a formal structure for this display, a highly traditionalized
and normalized form of revelation, which, like the "once upon a time'
narrative motif, can be conceptualized as a formal structuring device. These
devices are not necessary for narrative or aesthetic accomplishment. In reading
the poetics of living rooms, however, mantelpieces do predicate and delineate
display space at the room's central point, in a way that perhaps no other architectural
convention has done. It therefore seemed appropriate to apply narrative
methods of data collection and analysis to the topic.
The focus of the interview seemed ideal for inviting informants to tell
stories, and this was usually successful. In order to put their room displays into
wider autobiographical context, I often asked them to tell me about their housing
histories. Each object could also be made the subject of a narrative, as I
asked individuals to tell me about the origins of the vase, or clock, or ornament.
At other times, the information they had written in the questionnaires
concerning childhood memories, or why they did not want a mantelpiece, suggested
a narrative pathway. Objects were not only props to life histories but
essential players; we were host and guest, yet also presenter and listener, judge
and defender. The narrative was doing work, often in allowing the teller to display
other worlds in an otherwise limited environment. She could show, by
means of the narrative, that she had other identities, societies and values. Also,
future narratives or narratives of intent were also constructed around domestic
material cultural displays, as is discussed in the last case of the empty photograph
frame.

