We had a priori hypotheses about the extent to which sense of agency and sense of ownership would involve localised body awareness. Specifically, we predicted that active movement would induce a more coherent, less localised proprioceptive awareness than equivalent sensory stimulation. We therefore performed a directional planned comparison to compare the inverse transfer measure following active movement with that following passive movement. The difference between active and passive conditions was significant (t(11) = 1.84, p &lt; .05, one-tailed). This arose because perceptual shifts in the active, but not the passive condition, spread from the stimulated to the unstimulated finger. The difference between active movement and tactile stimulation were also significant (t(11) = 1.98, p &lt; .05, one-tailed), for the same reason. Overall, these comparisons support the hypothesis that active movements would reduce the localised pattern of proprioceptive shifts reported in Tsakiris and Haggard (2005a). 
The above results show that the sense of body ownership generated by voluntary action transfers well from one finger to another. Is this transfer a psychological feature of body representation, or simply a low-level motoric effect, due to the fact that moving a single finger results in widespread contraction of several muscles (Schieber &amp; Hibbard, 1993)? We investigated whether spread of muscle activity from the moved finger to the other finger could underlie the observed pattern of results in a control experiment. Participants actively raised and lowered either their index or little finger in the same way as in the main experiment. Participants were instructed to move their index or the little finger in different blocks, while trying to keep the other fingers still. They were asked to perform this active movement 10 times with the index finger and 10 times with the little finger. The order of blocks was counterbalanced. Participants had direct vision of their hand. EMG was measured from the first dorsal interosseus (1DI) and from the abductor digiti minimi (ADM) of the right hand with bipolar recording from surface Ag/AgCl electrodes, amplified and digitised at 4 kHz. Four participants (mean age 25.5, 4 female) participated in this control experiment after giving their informed consent. 
mean amplitudes were analysed using ANOVA. Fig. 4 shows the mean peak-to-valley EMG amplitude across conditions. 
Fig. 4. Mean peak-to-valley EMG amplitude measured from the 1DL and ADM muscles during active movement of the index or little finger. Error bars indicate standard deviation. 
The mean EMG activity per participant per condition was submitted to a 2 × 2 ANOVA. The first factor was the finger moved (index or little), and the second factor was the muscle measured (1DI vs. ADM). The main effects were not significant (F(1,3) = 2.06, p &gt; .05 for the finger moved, and F(1,3) = 1.44, p &gt; .05 for the muscle measured). However, the interaction of the two factors was significant (F(1,3) = 40.54, p &lt; .01) because active movement of one finger did not elicit a muscle contraction of the other finger. Thus, this control experiment showed that the movements studied were truly individual finger movements, whose control was essentially limited to the single intrinsic hand muscle acting as prime mover for that digit. We saw no evidence for transfer or spread across fingers at the level of motor activity, ruling out a low-level motoric explanation of the inter-finger transfer of the sense of body ownership generated by active movement. 
4. Discussion
We compared the influence of agency and sensory afference on body-awareness using a version of the RHI. In particular, we used a quantitative measurement of the RHI, namely a drift in the proprioceptively sensed position of one's own hand towards the rubber hand, to investigate the way efferent information influences the perception of one's own body. First, we showed that the manipulation of the video-projection of one's own hand induces a similar effect to the original RHI. Specifically, significantly larger proprioceptive drifts towards the video image occurred after synchronous vs. asynchronous visual feedback, leading to a mislocalisation of the fingers. The results suggest that touch (tactile stimulation), proprioception (passive movement) and action (active movement), all constitute sources of bodily awareness (Tsakiris, Haggard, Franck, Mainy, &amp; Sirigu, 2005). 
Even though a significant RHI, measured as the difference in proprioceptive drift between synchronous and asynchronous conditions, was present in all three conditions, the size of the RHI, was not constant. One surprise in this data was the high level of proprioceptive drift due to asynchronous active or passive movement. An artefact may explain why asynchronous active movement caused a very large drift. When people make active movements, the perceptual consequences of those actions are temporally attracted towards the action itself. This intentional binding effect (Haggard, Clark, &amp; Kalogeras, 2002) would lead to asynchronous active movements being perceived as more synchronous than they really are. This would in turn increase their ability to induce an RHI. Turning to the passive movement condition, the high drift in the asynchronous condition may reflect the poor temporal resolution of proprioceptive information, which is known to be worse than the temporal resolution of efferent information (LaRue et al., 1995 and Tsakiris et al., 2005). It is also possible that the reported proprioceptive bias towards the midline (Beers et al., 1995, Ghilardi et al., 1995 and de Graaf et al., 1995) interacted with the visual pattern of stimulation in an unknown way. However, these are post hoc explanations. Two points remain critical for the present experiment. First, the difference between synchronous and asynchronous conditions, and thus the RHI, was present for all three types of stimulation. Second, this overall level of the RHI is logically independent of the spatial distribution of the RHI across stimulated and unstimulated fingers. 
Having established the presence of the basic phenomenon of altered body awareness, we then investigated how localised and finger specific the phenomena were. The degree of localisation is a measure of body-unity, which can be compared across different stimulation conditions. Therefore, we also looked for differences in the spread of the RHI across fingers for these three sources of bodily awareness. 
The pattern of localised perceptual shifts, originally reported in Tsakiris and Haggard (2005a), was replicated in the tactile stimulation and passive movement conditions of the present study. In the tactile condition, the perceived location of the stimulated finger shifted towards the video image location in the same way as in the original RHI. However, when participants judged the proprioceptive position of another finger which had not been stimulated, the shifts were significantly reduced. In the passive condition, we observed a similar pattern across fingers, even though the overall level of perceptual shifts was rather lower than in Tsakiris and Haggard (2005a). The present results suggest that both touch and passive movement produce a relatively fragmented perception of one's own body, in which a sense of ownership is associated with individual body parts, and does not transfer to others. What can account for the similar pattern of shifts found in the tactile and passive movement conditions? These two conditions share a common characteristic, namely the absence of any active movement by the participant. Moreover, tactile and proprioceptive representations in the cortex show a similar somatotopic organisation, and many neurons respond to both cutaneous and proprioceptive inputs (Fitzgerald et al., 2004 and Iwamura et al., 2002). 
In the active movement condition, the perceptual shifts were lower overall than the tactile and passive conditions. However, the perceptual shifts were statistically reliable, and moreover the differences between synchronous and asynchronous conditions were comparable to those observed in a passive condition which involved identical finger movements. More importantly, the distribution of the perceptual shifts across fingers differed between active and passive conditions (see Fig. 2). Passive movement stimulation induced perceptual shifts largely localised to the stimulated finger, with minimal transfer to the unstimulated finger. Following active movement, in contrast, the proprioceptive judgments demonstrated a coherent representation of the hand, in which both the stimulated and unstimulated fingers showed proprioceptive positions shifted towards the video image. The “inverse transfer” measure for the active condition was not reliably above zero, confirming that the RHI spread across fingers. This contrasts with the fragmented percepts found during tactile stimulation and passive movement. Action seems to produce a bodily coherence which is absent following passive movement. 
Could the spread of RHI in the active condition arise because moving one finger inevitably led to active contraction of other muscles too? Certainly, movements of individual digits can involve contraction of several muscles (Schieber, 1995). However, the control experiment suggests that in the paradigm used in the present study, active movement of the index finger did not involve contraction of the ADM muscle, and vice versa. That is, spread of activation between the index and little fingers did not occur at the muscular level. Studies of primary motor cortex coding have shown that single neurons may be activated during movement of any of a number of fingers (Schieber &amp; Hibbard, 1993; for a review see Schieber, 2001), and the cortical territories associated with movements of the different fingers in man show considerable overlap (Hlustik et al., 2001). Thus, a distributed and overlapping population of central neurons may be involved in the individual finger movements studied here. This distributed cognitive coding of simple motor action may explain the spread of sense of body ownership induced by action. The functionally integrated control of action may have important consequences for subsequent body awareness. 
Recent work on self-consciousness has argued that highly abstract cognitive representations, such as “self,” may be understood in terms of their sensory-motor bases (Bermúdez et al., 1995 and Roessler and Eilan, 2003). The RHI allows a simple experimental test of bodily self-consciousness, by comparing the perception of a single entity, the rubber hand, which either is or is not treated as part of one's own body. One current view holds that proprioception is a primitive form of self-consciousness (Bermúdez, 1998). The present study shows that self-generated movement produces a different kind of body awareness than purely afferent signals. The active body is experienced as more coherent and unified than the passive body (see also Gallagher, 2005). Since unity and coherence are key features of self-consciousness (Kant, 1881/1996), we suggest that action plays an important role in the sense of self, over and above that of proprioception. Other studies have also shown an efferent benefit for proprioceptive precision (Paillard &amp; Brouchon, 1968, chap. 3), for somatosensory prediction (Blakemore, Wolpert, &amp; Frith, 1998), for action-recognition (Knoblich and Flach, 2001 and Knoblich et al., 2002) and self-recognition (Tsakiris et al., 2005). 
In a recent study on self-recognition (Tsakiris et al., 2005), participants experienced a passive extension of the right index finger, either as an effect of moving their left hand via a lever (“self-generated action”), or imposed externally by the experimenter (“externally generated action”). Visual feedback was manipulated so that participants saw the passive extension of either their own right index finger or someone else's right index finger. Participants judged whether the right hand they saw was theirs or not. This self-recognition task involves an explicit judgement of body awareness. Self-recognition performance was more accurate in the self-generated action condition, and dropped to near chance levels when only proprioceptive afferent information was available. In that experiment, the movements were confined to one finger, and had minimal spatial detail. Therefore, we suggested that self-generated actions provided a precise temporal signal which could be used to predict proprioceptive and/or visual feedback. In the present study, the difference between action and passive movement was studied in an off-line, rather than an immediate test, using a spatial rather than a temporal measure. Taken together, the observed differences between active and passive conditions reflect a distinctive contribution of efferent information to both temporal and spatial aspects of body awareness. 
To conclude, the fragmented pattern of perceptual shifts seen following tactile and passive stimulation, suggests that the proprioceptive sense of body-ownership is local. During voluntary action, the perceptual shifts were generalised across the whole hand. Therefore, the motor sense of agency influences the proprioceptive sense of body ownership. Agency is responsible for the coherence of body ownership. Sensory mechanisms generate a sense of body ownership based on fragmented local representation of individual body parts, but action provides a coherent sense of bodily self. It seems that the unity of bodily self-consciousness comes from action, and not from sensation. 

