1 Introduction
Immigrants contribute signi¯cantly to the overall economic performance of their host
economies. It is therefore not surprising that a large literature is concerned with
the earnings mobility of the foreign born population, both in isolation, as well as
in comparison with those who are native born.1 But immigrants have not only an
immediate e®ect on wealth accumulation and earnings and skill composition. They
transmit their earnings status, as well as socio-economic and cultural characteristics
to the next generation. The economic adjustment process within the immigrant's
own generation has long been recognised as an important step in understanding the
economic e®ects of immigration. For understanding the long term consequences of
immigration, assessment of intergenerational mobility in immigrant communities is
perhaps equally important.
While the process of intergenerational economic mobility has been intensively stud-
ied for majority populations (see Solon 1999, 2002 for reviews), less is known about
intergenerational transmission in immigrant communities. For the U.S., early studies
by Chiswick (1977) and Carliner (1980) compare earnings of immigrants with their
descendants and their children. More recently, Borjas (1992, 1994) emphasises that
intergenerational economic mobility among immigrants may be more complex, and
estimating the usual models of intergenerational income mobility may miss out an im-
portant aspect of this process. Borjas emphasises that the skills of the next generation
may not only depend on parental inputs, but also on the quality of the ethnic environ-
ment of the parent generation. Borjas terms this ethnic capital. In later work Borjas
(1995) shows that one reason for the external e®ects of ethnicity is segregation into
1See the early papers by Chiswick (1978) and Borjas (1985), and Borjas (1994b) for a survey.
1
particular neighbourhoods - a point that has been re-emphasised in work by Nielsen,
Rosholm, Smith and Husted (2001).
This paper focusses on another important characteristic of immigrant communities
that may a®ect the process of intergenerational mobility: the probability the immigrant
family attaches to a permanent migration as opposed to a future return to the home
country. There are a number of papers that show that return migration may a®ect dif-
ferent aspects of immigrants' behaviour. Work by Galor and Stark (1990) suggest that
positive return probabilities may a®ect savings behaviour. Dustmann (1997) provides
evidence that married immigrant women whose husbands plan to return to their home
countries have a higher labour force participation rate. Dustmann (1999) develops a
model that suggests that immigrants who have higher probabilities of returning are less
likely to acquire human capital speci¯c to the host country economy. He ¯nds evidence
for this by investigating their investment into language skills. In a recent paper, Cortes
(2004) explains the higher rate of human capital accumulation by refugee immigrants
in the US with lower probabilities in their return migration.
Similar considerations may hold in an intergenerational context. In this paper,
we investigate how parental probabilities of a permanent as opposed to a temporary
migration a®ect investment into their children. Our empirical analysis is for Germany,
and based on detailed data from a long panel that oversamples immigrants. The data
includes unique information on parental return intentions which we use to construct our
measure for a permanent migration probability. To motivate our analysis, we develop a
simple model, following previous work by Becker and Tomes (1979) and Solon (2004),
which suggests that parental investment into the child increases with the probability
of a permanent migration.
A second contribution of the paper is estimation of intergenerational mobility coef-
2
¯cients. Our analysis therefore extends some previous work on Germany by Couch and
Dunn (1997) and Wiegand (1997) for the native born, but provides more robust esti-
mates based on a longer panel. The panel nature of our data allows us to address the
problem of measurement error in permanent parental earnings which bedevils studies
of intergenerational transmission (see Solon 1989). In addition, we distinguish be-
tween immigrant and native father-son pairs. To understand the precise nature of
how parental background may a®ect earnings in the next generation, we also estimate
investment equations, and equations of educational mobility.
Our results suggest that intergenerational earnings mobility from native born fa-
thers to their sons is larger than from foreign born fathers to their sons. This di®erence
may be due to di®erences in direct investments, or di®erences in unobserved external-
ities across the two communities, conditional on ethnic capital. Estimates that relate
educational achievements to permanent parental earnings show similar relationships for
immigrants and natives, which suggests that di®erences in intergenerational earnings
mobility are due to di®erences in unobserved endowments.
We also ¯nd that educational achievements of immigrant parents are not correlated
with educational achievements of their children. This is in contrast with previous
work by Card, DiNardo and Estes (1998) for the U.S., who show that much of the
intergenerational link between the economic status of immigrant fathers and their sons
and daughters works through education.2 Our ¯ndings are in line with similar results
reported by Gang and Zimmermann (2000). One explanation for this weak link in
educational outcomes for immigrants is that it is the permanent earnings position of
the father that matters for son's educational attainment; father's education is then
2Similar results are reported by Riphahn (2001), Bauer and Riphahn (2004) and van Ours and
Veenman (2003).
3
only correlated with son's education if education is a good predictor for earnings. We
show that in our sample, this is not the case for immigrants.
We ¯nd consistent evidence that higher probabilities of permanent migration of the
father increase permanent earnings as well as educational achievements of the sons of
immigrants. This is an important results, in particular in light of the renewed interest
in temporary or guest-worker type migration schemes in both Europe and the US. It
suggests that such schemes may have possibly detrimental e®ect on the children of
those immigrants who do not return.
The paper is structured as follows. In the next section we develop a simple theo-
retical model, and discuss its empirical implications. In section 3 we describe the data
and the sample. Section 4 presents the results, and section 5 concludes.
2 Theory
Our model is a permanent income model of intergenerational mobility with parental
investments into child's earnings potential, following early work by Becker and Tomes
(1979) and Solon (2004). It extends Solon (2004) by taking account of the way the
probability of a permanent migration as opposed to a future return may a®ect the
decision of the parent to invest into the o®spring's human capital.
We consider a one-person household with one child. There are two periods. In the
¯rst period (period 0) both parent and child live in the host country. In the second
period (period 1), the parent returns to the home country with probability 1 ¡ p, and
remains in the host country with probability p. The parent retires in period 1, and has
earnings in period 0 equal to y0. The child is in full time education in period 0, and
participates in the labour market in period 1, either in the parent's home country, or
4
in the host country.
The parent is altruistic and maximises an intertemporal utility function, by choosing
¯rst period savings s0, and investment into the child's human capital in the ¯rst period,
I0. When making these choices, the parent attaches the same probability p to his child's
location choice in the second period than to his own. This assumption simpli¯es the
algebra, but can be relaxed without a®ecting the key implications of our model, as
long as the parent perceives the child's probability to remain in the host country to
increase in his probability of remaining.
The parent's inter-temporal utility function is given by
V = u(c0) + p [u(cI
1) + ° v(yI
1 )] + (1 ¡ p) [u(cE
1 ; b) + ° v(yE
1 )] ; (1)
where u(:) and v(:) are the the parent's and the child's utility functions, de¯ned over
parental consumption in period 0, c0, and parental consumption and child's earnings
in period 1, cJ
1 and yJ
1 . Here J = E; I stands for Emigration or Immigration country
respectively. The parameter ° is an altruistic weight. If ° = 0, the parent does not
consider the child's welfare in period 1. The parameter b is a preference parameter,
re°ecting a taste for consuming at home over consuming abroad. If b > 1, more utility
is obtained from consuming in the home country as compared to the host country.
We assume that parental investments translate into human capital of the child (h1)
according to the following production technology:
h1 = µ log I0 + e0 : (2)
The parameter µ is a technology parameter measuring the productivity of invest-
ments. The term e0 is the human capital the child receives without any direct parental
investments (see Becker and Tomes, 1979 and Solon, 2004 for a similar formulation).
5
This term represents the child's endowed attributes, depending on characteristics of
the parent, the child's upbringing, genetic factors, environment, and luck. It may also
depend on existing networks, as well as the lack of opportunity to move out of social
and economic structures from one generation to the next. This latter factor may be
particularly important for immigrants, and we will discuss its implications later. It
includes what Borjas (1992) calls "ethnic capital" - the quality of the environment in
which parental investments are made.
Human capital translates into earnings according to the following relationship:
log yj
1 = ¹j + rj h1 ; (3)
where j = I;E. Our formulation allows for di®erent base wages ¹ as well as di®erent
returns to the child's human capital rj in the two countries. It follows from (2) and (3)
that the child's earnings in the second period are related to parental investments as
log yj
1 = ¹j + rj µ log I0 + rj e0 : (4)
The parent's consumption in period 0 equals c0 = Y0 ¡ I0 ¡ s0, where Y0 is ¯rst
period earnings. As the parent retires in period 1, period 1 consumption is equal to
period 0 savings.
Choosing a simple logarithmic utility function, and substituting (4) for child's earn-
ings into (1), the optimisation problem of the parent can be expressed as
max
s;I
V = log Y0 ¡ I0 ¡ s0 + p [log s0 + ° (¹I + rIµ log I0 + rI e0)] + (5)
(1 ¡ p)[b log s0 + °(¹E + rEµ log I0 + rE e0)] :
6
Maximising (5) w.r.t. savings and investment, and solving the ¯rst order conditions
for the optimal investment I0 yields:
I0 =
°µ(p rI + (1 ¡ p)rE)
°µ (p rI + (1 ¡ p) rE)) + (1 + p + b(1 ¡ p))
Y0 = ¡(p; rE; rI ; b; °; µ) Y0 : (6)
The term in the numerator, which is equal to the ¯rst term in the denominator,
is the expected utility gain to one unit of parental investment into the child's human
capital. The second term in the denominator is the expected lifetime utility from one
log unit of additional consumption.
Simple comparative statics show that investment into the child's human capital
increases in p, the probability of a permanent migration, as long as the return to
human capital investments is higher in the host country (rI > rE). Furthermore, a
lower probability of a permanent migration increases the expected gain in utility by
consuming in the home country, as long as b > 1: the parent prefers to save more
resources for future own consumption, thus reducing investment into the child. The
combined e®ect leads to an increase in investment with the probability of a permanent
migration. Finally, investment increases with altruism ° and productivity of investment
µ.
Now consider the relationship between child's earnings and parent's earnings for
children who are observed in the host country in period 2. Substituting (6) into (4)
and re-arranging terms yields
log yI
1 = ¹I + rI µ log ¡ + rI µ log Y0 + rI e1 : (7)
Equation (7) is similar to the relationship between son's earnings and father's earn-
ings, as derived in Solon (1999, 2004), except for the term ¡.

