Thus, although nominally the 1988 Education Act offers parental choice, the
reality is one of a market in which there is great competition for popular choices.
Although the new procedures appear to be designed to minimize the extent of "game
playing' by well-informed parents, it remains highly likely that the most active
choosers will be the middle class seeking out high performing schools such as those
mentioned above. In this rapidly changing field the middle class ability to find
relevant information will continue to be put to full use: whereas previously it might
have been more about how to "play' the admissions game and hold multiple
applications, it is now more likely to be about seeking out appropriate schools and
preparing the child for the sort of criteria published in the example above.
To date, in gentrified areas of inner London education concerns featured low on
initial reasons for moving into an area, but become dominant ones once children
enter the household (Butler &amp; Robson, 2003a). Generally, but not always, selection
of a suitable primary school has been seen as relatively non-problematic; concerns
about education increase as the eldest child approaches the primary/secondary
transition. At this stage a number of parents either make the move into the private
sector (assuming they can get a place), move out of London altogether or, in some
cases, within London; for example an oft-quoted move was to the Muswell Hill catchment
area of Fortismere School. Not a single respondent in a survey of gentrifiers in
Islington undertaken in 2000 (Butler &amp; Robson, 2003a) had a child in a state secondary
school in Islington. Islington has one of the worst performance records in the
country, with only 45% of the children in its primary schools moving on to a secondary
school in the borough. Parents in Islington were transferring their children from
what they agreed were perfectly satisfactory primary schools at the age of seven to
private preparatory schools in order to obtain an advantage in terms of admission to
the relatively few private secondary schools in North London (Butler  &amp; Robson,
2003b). For many parents there is a clear and often desperate trade-off between the
attractions of remaining in a mixed and vibrant inner city environment near to work
and cultural activities and concerns about social reproduction which point to a flight
to the suburbs and beyond. Many of the worst performing inner London boroughs,
such as Hackney, have in fact made significant progress in improving their achievement
scores, particularly at primary school level, but nevertheless middle class
parents normally steer clear of them—largely on achievement grounds but also, it
would seem, because of fears of an ethnicized social mix. However, it is important to
recognize that there is a minority of middle class parents who deliberately choose to
educate their children in such schools because they value the benefits of such a mix
(Reay, 2005). Anecdotally, there is some evidence that such parents often choose to
live in London's north eastern quadrant, which includes our study area.
Understanding school choice in East London
This paper is written as part of a wider project about gentrification, ethnicity and
education in East London.1 East London is one of the last parts of London to become
gentrified and the research investigates the relationship between ethnicity and education
and the relative late gentrification of this quarter of London—to what extent has
its ethnic composition and relatively poor reputation for educational attainment
discouraged the white middle classes from moving to East London, despite the
attractions of its relatively undervalued housing market? There is an increasing presence
of middle class professionals from minority groups in East London, and we wish
to understand the strategies which they have adopted to secure suitably acceptable
educational provision for their children. There are, therefore, two major, but related,
research questions here. To what extent are concerns about education inhibiting
gentrification in East London and how and in what ways are existing middle class
residents managing the local education markets for the benefits of their children? The
first question is a broader one which lies outside the scope of this paper and will be
addressed by fieldwork-based research that we are undertaking. The second question
also forms a key part of the fieldwork, but we can begin to provide some general
answers to it through analysis of the PLASC dataset. In this paper, therefore, we
examine the relationship between school and home in relation to two key variables—
home background and average school performance at GCSE. In what is generally
accepted as the most deprived part of London, even in its suburban fringes, we would
expect to find generally poor education provision and that there would be considerable
competition for admission to the better schools. This is likely to be met, on the
one hand, from a series of tightly defined middle class catchment areas and, on the
other, by competition from the wider sub-regional area for any remaining places. We
hypothesize that, in turn, some schools will encourage such strategies in order to
maximize their attainment in the key league tables.
An initial task of our research is, therefore, to establish how the performance of
schools in East London compares with those in the rest of the capital. Exploring
geographical variation in performance and comparing it with the distance between
pupils' homes and school will allow us to reveal the extent to which parental decisionmaking
on educational choice differs according to social background. East London
has a reputation for poor schools, but this is an unfair judgement in terms of overall
performance. It is the relatively advantaged inner London boroughs such as Islington
that perform particularly badly. Two of the suburban boroughs (Redbridge and
Havering) in the East London study area are amongst London's better performing
boroughs (at positions 6 and 10, respectively). Whilst Newham and Tower Hamlets
regularly top area deprivation league tables, this is not the case in educational
performance; Tower Hamlets is ninth from bottom and Newham is thirteenth. The
association between socio-economic deprivation and poor education performance is
complex. Whilst Tower Hamlets is the worst performing borough amongst this group
of boroughs in terms of educational performance, it has the highest proportion of residents
in NS-SeC class 1 (higher managers and professionals) of the East London
boroughs; at the same time, it is high up the national deprivation league tables. It also
has a large minority ethnic population, approaching half of its population (mainly of
Bangladeshi heritage).
Figure 1 indicates the geography of educational attainment in East London by
school, showing those secondary schools with above average GCSE points scores
(white dots) and those with below average points scores (black dots).2
Figure 1. Average GCSE points score: secondary schools in study area (source PLASC, 2003) For greater visual clarity the reader can find colour copies of all maps in this paper
and other supporting material at http://www.kcl.ac.uk/geography/staff/mir.html.
Contrary to what might be expected, there is no distinct geography of achievement
and failure—a reasonable assumption might be that educational attainment would
rise as distance from inner London increases, but this is not the case. In the next
section we describe how we investigated patterns of school recruitment (or parental
choice) in relation to where pupils lived, the backgrounds they came from and how
these factors related to school performance in the six inner and outer London
boroughs that make up East London. We have defined East London as comprising
six boroughs fanning out from the city eastwards north of the river Thames to the
M25 motorway. They are Tower Hamlets, Newham, Waltham Forest, Redbridge,
Barking &amp; Dagenham and Havering.
The Pupil Level Annual School Census (PLASC) is constructed from data gathered
from every English state school in February on each pupil registered at the school
on the census date. The data are very comprehensive and include students' education
performance, their home postcode, ethnicity and whether they qualify for free school
meals. This last variable is the only indicator of social background and is generally
accepted to be only indicative of a high level of deprivation. In other words, although
the indicator identifies schools with a high proportion of pupils from highly disadvantaged
neighbourhoods, it can provide little help in distinguishing pupils from highly
Figure 1. Average GCSE points score: secondary schools in study area (source PLASC, 2003)
privileged neighbourhoods as against those of lower but not of exceptionally low
incomes. In order to compensate for this, at least partially, and to allow us to make
some broad categorizations about pupils' social background, we have been able to
attach "Mosaic' codes to the data. These geodemographic codes, designed by Experian,
allow individual pupils to be allocated to one of 61 different types and 11 groups
on the basis of their home postcode. Unlike bands on a composite deprivation ranking,
this classification is multivariate in nature, classifying home neighbourhoods
according to approximately 300 attributes. This enables us to examine patterns of
school choice and performance in relation to students' Mosaic classification.
Although this study focused on six boroughs in East London, it paralleled similar
work undertaken at a national level which looked at such issues as ethnic segregation,
school performance and peer group effects (Burgess &amp; Wilson, 2005; Johnston et al.,
2005). In this paper we concentrate on investigating the recruitment patterns of the
best and worst performing schools in terms of the home background of their pupils
and where they live in relation to the school.
In the next section of the paper we discuss Mosaic as a method for analysing the
social backgrounds of pupils in the PLASC database and the level of confidence we
can place in this as an indicator of social stratification. Following this discussion we
present our analysis of the PLASC data for secondary age children living in the six
East London boroughs which form our study area. Finally, we draw some conclusions
from this analysis.
Mosaic and geodemographic data
Geodemographics, as a way of typifying residential areas in social terms, has been
used for several decades, but has become increasingly popular in recent years, not just
with those involved in marketing but also those concerned with monitoring public
service provision. It was originally designed to enable better targeting of aid to
deprived neighbourhoods. The best known and longest established geodemographic
classification systems are Acorn and Mosaic,3 both of which are based around postcode
clusters. In both systems these groups of households are then allocated to a
particular "type', which is then fully and often fulsomely described in terms largely of
the consumption habits of its members (holidays, preferences for alcoholic drinks,
newspapers, food and cars). These classifications are usually given appropriately
descriptive names, as for example:
"partially gentrified multi-ethnic areas' and are found … almost exclusively in inner
London. These highly cosmopolitan neighbourhoods contain a mix of rich and poor and
people from different ethnic backgrounds living side by side … . (www.upyourstreet.co.uk/
inf/msc/det/?location1=SE14+5LX; accessed 17 April 2002)
Mosaic is the most developed example of this approach:
When considering this application it is important to realise that the granularity of the
geographical areas which they classify are often substantially lower than the granularity of
neighbourhoods as would normally be described by most sociologists. In the UK for
example the residential areas classified by Mosaic extend to the level of the unit postcode,
an average of 17 addresses. (Webber, forthcoming 2007)
This is a somewhat different approach to social classification from that used in
academic analysis, which broadly takes social position as an outcome of position in
the occupational hierarchy and allocates individuals to broad social classes, notably
the working and middle classes. The means by which these classifications are derived
is based on a set of principals set out by Webber (2004). There have been two major
concerns about the use of geodemographic analysis in academic and policy-related
research: firstly, that the codes are based on clusters of households and there is thus
a danger that individual characteristics are imputed from those of the group (the
ecological fallacy); secondly, that the groups themselves are statistically as opposed to
theoretically derived (using techniques such as cluster or principle components
analysis). 

