Introduction and background
Innovative methods to provide effective learning and teaching are under
investigation in most universities in the UK. Some have focused upon the
potential benefits of virtual learning environments (for example, Crawford
et al., 2001; Morris and Rippin, 2003; Ramsey, 2003; Broad et al., 2004)
and new "technology-led' computer-assisted learning packages (for
example, Lane and Porch, 2002). This article examines the use of the
Personal Response System (PRS) to improve the level of classroom participation.
The necessity for involving and encouraging participation of
students from the Far East is an important issue for many universities in
Anglo-Saxon countries that have been taking an increasing number of
students from the Far East in recent years (Ottewill and Macfarlane, 2003).
Cultural differences between students from the Far East and the West, and
the impact on student interaction and participation have been documented
(for example, Cortazzi and Jin, 1997; Cortazzi, 2002; Turner, 2003). In an
attempt to stimulate discussion and encourage greater class participation, I
wanted to test the use of the PRS. Specifically, I wanted to find out whether
using the PRS technology in my classes would overcome their inhibition
towards making a contribution to class discussions. I also hoped that using
the PRS would enhance the learning process for all of the students on my
course.
The PRS technology offers the lecturer the opportunity to ask a group of
students a series of Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs). Students reply individually
to each question posed by selecting a button on a hand-held
wireless transmitter. This is similar to "Ask the Audience' on the television
game show "Who Wants to be a Millionaire?' (Seenan, 2000). At present,
only a few companies manufacture the PRS, and to my knowledge, there is
not widespread use of this technology in UK universities. However, some
studies have found clear benefits of using the PRS in large undergraduate
classes in the UK (see for example, Elliott, 2002, 2003; Williams, 2002;
Madill, 2003).
On an accounting postgraduate level course at Lancaster University, I
tested out the use of the PRS and examined students' reactions to the technology.
In particular, I was interested in the reaction of students from the
Far East to the PRS as compared to other teaching methods.
This article describes the rationale for using such technology before a
discussion of how the PRS works. There will then be consideration of both
my own and the students' reactions to using the PRS. The article concludes
with a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of using the PRS and
suggestions for future wider use of PRS technology.
Background and rationale for using the PRS
The idea of using MCQs in lectures is not new: before the PRS was
developed, lecturers used MCQs in lectures, asking students to respond by
raising different coloured cards to vote (see for example, Harden et al.,
1968; Dunn, 1969) or raising their hands. Harden et al. (1968) suggests
that although lecture preparation time is increased if MCQs are used, more
effective teaching and learning during class time takes place. Draper et al.
(2002) detail the many pedagogic uses of the PRS, which include formal
assessment and the provision of formative feedback to students and lecturers
on a real-time basis. Prior evidence suggests that the PRS is useful in
many subject areas at the undergraduate level. For example, Hake (1998)
concluded that the PRS improved students' problem-solving skills and as a
consequence students performed better in subsequent testing. Cue (1998)
found that the PRS stimulated student interest for the subject and increased
the depth of student learning. Elliott (2002, 2003) found that the PRS is
useful for generating and maintaining student interest and checking
students' understanding. Therefore a body of literature exists that suggests
there are many potential benefits of the PRS at the undergraduate level.

However, to the author's knowledge, there is little evidence of postgraduate
students' reaction to the PRS.
I experimented with the PRS on a course which is a compulsory
component for students registered on the MSc in Accounting and Financial
Management. In recent years students from the Far East have dominated the
student cohort. For example in academic year 2002/03, just over half of
the class cohort had Chinese nationality, with the remainder of students
originating from the UK and mainland Europe, Brazil, India, Malaysia and
Taiwan. There can be up to 60 students in this class, although I have also
used the PRS successfully in much larger undergraduate classes.
The act of "making sense' of course material and reconstructing knowledge
is an important part of the learning process for students (Jonassen,
1992). There are two extreme learning approaches highlighted by the
literature: surface and deep learning strategies. The surface approach involves
the student skimming over the material and tending to learn things by "rote'
without understanding, rather than considering the linkages between
concepts. The deep approach is where the student engages fully with the subject
matter. A deep learning approach enables the student to make various
linkages between topics and see the course as a whole, rather than a series
of independent topics (Lucas, 2001). Biggs (1999) suggests that students
taking a deep approach will be less likely to have "knowledge boxes' and
fragmented understanding. Such students will therefore be more likely to
integrate knowledge and understanding. I particularly wanted to encourage
students to make a more active contribution to discussion during class
time, to promote linkage between various topics and encourage deep
learning to take place.
The PRS encourages students to engage in active learning, maintaining
their concentration and attention span in lectures. The course does not have
any formal tutorials or seminars for discussion of problems/issues,
although I used a number of formats in the sessions including traditional
lectures, debate of controversial issues and problem classes. The course
sessions were one-and-a-half hours long, thus creating the need for small
tasks and short breaks during the lecture to maintain concentration. Maintaining
interest and attention is important and MacManaway (1970) and
Gibbs et al. (1987) suggest that the average student has an attention span
of only around 20 minutes. The PRS was very effective for breaking up the
sessions and maintaining student interest. Following the use of the PRS,
some time was allocated for discussion. This provided an opportunity for
questions of clarification, which is another important component in the
learning process (Bligh, 1998). Where a majority of students provided the
incorrect answer to a question, there was a period of class discussion/
debate used for clarification purposes.

Interaction is an important element because it encourages students to
express an opinion on the issues for discussion. These sessions give the
opportunity for students to practise their communication skills in a group
setting. The PRS is a stimulus for discussion and interaction. It does not per
se encourage this unless the lecturer stimulates discussion of material after
the votes have been cast. I found that the PRS's graphical representation of
student responses was a "talking-point' and I used this to engage students
with course material to promote deep learning approaches.
Students of Far Eastern origin, like all others, have perceptions of what
makes good teaching. Xiao and Dyson (1999) suggest that, for Chinese
students, these include an in-depth knowledge of the subject, the use of
effective and interesting teaching methods, an organized and clear presentation
of material and an aptitude for encouraging further self-study. Thus
it emerges from Chinese students' perspective that good teachers should be
able to encourage and motivate self-study rather than participation in the
classroom per se. However, there is some change emergent in Chinese
universities. There has been an attempt to incorporate wider skills development
and encouragement of greater participation in class discussion in
Chinese universities, although there is inertia and traditional approaches
still dominate (Lin and Deng, 1992; Cooper et al., 1994).
The learning preferences of students from the Far East contrast with the
typical learning and teaching style used in UK universities. For example,
Cortazzi (2002) suggests students from Chinese universities are used to
"learner-trained' teaching. Students typically recite, memorize and learn
material and much of students' learning takes place during self-study. This
approach to study is often misconstrued as "rote memorizing' and taking a
surface approach to the material (Watkins and Biggs, 1996; Prosser and
Trigwell, 1999). However, this is clearly not the case as such students can
be deeply engaged in the subject and they often complete vast amounts of
self-study (Cooper, 2004). These students are simply not used to responding
instantaneously and are often therefore reluctant to contribute to class
discussions for fear of giving the wrong answer and "losing face'. It is
probably true to say that such students believe they can learn more from
the teacher than from their peers (Cortazzi, 2002). This may lead them to
believe there is little that can be achieved and gained through class
discussion, despite our emphasis on the importance of debating key issues.
The PRS enables students to answer questions anonymously. The lecturer
reveals how many students have voted for each option and then there can
be a debate about which is the correct answer. Students from the Far East
are not used to this type of class discussion. Hence, the students' lack of
responsiveness to the prompts for class discussion that I, and doubtless
others who teach such students, have experienced in the past is not entirely
surprising. It is also important to acknowledge that not all students "learn
in the same way'; each student has their own preference and this may
change over time (Marriott, 2002; Marriott and Marriot, 2003).
What is the Personal Response System and how
does it work?
The PRS is used to test students' understanding through a series of Multiple
Choice Questions (MCQs). Each student is provided with a handset with
buttons for use with MCQs to register their vote. The format of MCQs is
flexible and it is possible to use MCQs with up to 10 possible answers.
When I used the system, I limited MCQs to five possible answers to ensure
questions did not take too long to read and attempt, allowing sufficient time
for discussion and debate of student responses.
Following voting there is a wireless transmission of responses to portable
receivers placed at the front of the lecture theatre. The receivers are
connected to a computer with specific software that collates responses and
displays results in the form of a bar chart. I displayed the MCQs on an
overhead projector and projected the PRS visual display on to another
screen at the same time. Prior to voting a screen of empty cells is shown
on the visual display. As each student votes for a particular alternative, a cell
is highlighted on the PRS display. It is possible to allow students to vote
with "high' or "low' confidence, which provides the lecturer some idea of
a student's certainty of their answer being correct. When the student inputs
a confidence rating before voting this will be indicated by a different colour
in the cell on the visual display. This confidence rating is also reflected in
the graphical display of results.
There is a time limit for voting during which students have the opportunity
to change their vote. (It is possible for the lecturer to vary the amount
of time given per question and the number of changes students can make
to their vote, depending on the difficulty of the question.) The lecturer asks
the question and starts the clock on the programme. The time remaining
to answer the question is shown on the visual display. A record of the
number of handsets used to vote and the number of attempts made by each
handset for each question is kept by the system. The lecturer may retrieve
this at a later date. When the voting time is over, a bar chart summarizing
the voting for that particular question is shown on the screen. This provides
feedback to students and enables the lecturer to see what is well understood
and the certainty of students' responses.
It is possible to use the system in either a named or an anonymous mode. In
the anonymous mode, as students vote the cell is highlighted and the number
of their handset is displayed within this cell.
