


   Methods 
 
Secondary analysis was undertaken on the 1999 Office for National Statistics survey of the mental health of children and adolescents in Great Britain.19 Relevant data files20 were obtained from the UK Data Archive. Full details of the design, instrumentation, and sampling procedure have been presented previously.19 
Sampling and data collection
The survey collected information on a multistage stratified random sample of 10438 children between 5 and 15 years of age (83% of the target sample of 12529 eligible children). The sample was stratified by age and sex within 475 postal code sectors in England, Scotland, and Wales. Information was collected by interview with the child's primary carer (in 94% of cases the child's mother) and, wherever possible for children aged 11 years or over, interview with the child themselves; psychometric testing of all children; and by postal questionnaire to the child's teacher. 
Measures
We constructed a series of binary measures of child and adolescent health based on informant responses to survey questions. We grouped these measures under nine categories of health status. Within the limits of the study, these categories captured children's developmental health2 as well as current health conditions and their experience of accidents. The categories were current health status; current physical illness; sensory impairment; physical disabilities; speech/language problems; accidental injury; psychiatric disorder; specific learning disabilities; and intellectual disabilities. Table 1 details the items included in the nine health categories and the sources of information used for each item and category. 


Table 1 Measures of child and adolescent health 

 
Overall morbidity was defined as having a disorder in any of the above nine categories. Co-morbidity (for two or more and three or more disorders) was determined by summing the number of the above nine categories for which the child scored positive. 
Equivalised household income was the primary measure of socioeconomic circumstances, based on reported gross weekly income from all sources. Data were adjusted (taking category mid-points) for household composition using standard housing costs equivalisation scales.24 We also extracted information on family social class based on the standard Registrar General's classification self-identified head of household, parent's (usually mother's) educational attainment (equivalent to less than or equal to GCSE grade C or above), household composition, child age, sex, and ethnicity. 
Analyses
We split the sample into quintiles on the basis of equivalised household income. Dependent variables were the nine categories of developmental or current health described above, overall morbidity, two measures of multiple morbidity, and the nine individual illness/disability categories that occurred with an overall unweighted prevalence of &gt;1% in the data set, giving a total of 22 dependent variables. To test for evidence of equalisation between childhood and adolescence we followed West15,16 in defining adolescence as those aged 11 years and older. We used logistic regression modelling to calculate odds ratios for univariate and multivariate analyses. In the univariate analyses we examined the simple association between equivalised household income and the dependent variables separately for boys and girls for the two age groups of 5–10 and 11–15 years. In the multivariate analyses we examined the association between equivalised household income and the dependent variables for the two age groups, while controlling for child age, sex, ethnicity, household composition (lone parent status and number of children living in the household), family social class, and level of parent education. 
Ethics
Ethics committee approval was not sought as the study involved the secondary analysis of anonymous publicly available data. 



   Results 

 
For the majority of health indicators (13 of 22), low levels of equivalised household income were associated with poorer health in either the 5- to 10-year age group or 11- to 15-year age group (odds ratio P &lt; 0.01 for one or more income quintile). There was no statistically significant association in either age group between equivalised income and (i) the three general categories of current physical illness, physical disabilities, and sensory impairment and (ii) the specific physical illness categories of hayfever, glue ear, digestive problems, and food allergies. Inverse health gradients were observed for eczema (for boys in the age range of 11–15 years and girls in the age range of 5–10 years) and non-food allergies (for boys in the age range of 11–15 years). 
Table 2 presents the association (odds ratios) between income quintile and health indicators for boys (upper panel) and girls (lower panel). Also included is information on the unweighted prevalence of the indicator, an indicator of the predictive power of income in accounting for variation in the prevalence (Nagelkerke pseudo R2) and an indication (P-value) of the statistical significance of the overall regression model. Results are only presented for those health indicators significantly associated with income at an alpha level of 0.01. Full tables are available on request. 


Table 2 Unadjusted odds ratios for prevalence of disorders by income quintile and age group 

 
For boys, low income was associated with poorer health status on 12 indicators in the age range of 5–10 years, and 10 indicators in the age range of 11–15 years. For girls, low income was associated with poorer health status on six indicators in each age range. We tested for evidence of the equalisation of health inequalities by comparing across the two age ranges (i) the predictive power from statistical analyses of the predictive power of income (Nagelkerke pseudo R2) and (ii) the odds ratio for the lowest income quintile. For girls, we found no evidence of equalisation of health inequalities (R2 Wilcoxon Z = –0.29; P = 0.773; OR Wilcoxon Z = –0.59; P = 0.556). For boys, we found that, while there was no change in the predictive power of income (R2 Wilcoxon Z = –0.09; P = 0.926), there was some evidence for health equalisation in that the odds ratio for the occurrence of health indicators in the lowest income quintile was marginally lower in the 11- to 15-year age range when compared with the 5- to 10-year age range (OR Wilcoxon Z = 1.74; P = 0.083). 
We then conducted multivariate analyses on the 22 indicators of health status. The aims of these analyses were to attempt to control for cohort effects associated with variations between the two age groups with respect to child gender and ethnicity and to examine the separate contribution of household income after taking account of other dimensions of negative socioeconomic circumstances in childhood and adolescence likely to moderate the strength of the association between household income and health. In these analyses, we included parental occupational status, informant (primarily maternal) educational attainment, and household composition (lone parent or couple and number of children in the household).6 The characteristics of the two age cohorts with respect to these variables is presented in table 3. 


Table 3 Socioeconomic characteristics of the two age cohorts 

 
Across the 22 indicators and two age groups equivalised household income was associated with variations in health status in 15 analyses. Of the control variables informant educational attainment was associated with variations in health status in 11 analyses; lone parent status in 8 analyses; parental occupational status in 3 analyses; and the number of children in the household in 2 analyses. 
Results are presented in table 4 for those dependent variables significantly associated with income at an alpha level of 0.01. In this table we also, as previously, report an indicator of the predictive power and statistical significance of the logistic regression model. In addition, we list the other variables related to socioeconomic status (social class, educational attainment, and household composition) that were significantly associated with health outcomes. Full tables are available on request. 


Table 4 Adjusted odds ratios for prevalence of disorders by income quintile and age group 

 
We again tested for evidence of the equalisation of health inequalities by comparing, across the two age ranges, the odds ratio for the lowest income quintile. We found little evidence of the equalisation of health inequalities, with little change in income-based inequalities for overall health, total morbidity, and co-morbidity and an exacerbation of income-based health inequalities for psychiatric disorders and intellectual disability. For only two of the disorders included in the index of "current physical illness' (digestive problems and headaches), was there evidence for the equalisation of income-based health inequalities between childhood and adolescence.

Discussion 
 
Principal findings
Our results suggest that (i) equivalised household income is associated with adverse health outcomes for children and adolescents across a range of indicators and that (ii) this association holds true after controlling for parental occupational status, maternal education, and household composition. Overall, our data did not support the hypothesis that adolescence represents a period of "relative equalisation' of health inequalities. 
Strengths and weaknesses of the study
The main strengths of our study derived from the use of a large nationally representative sample of children and adolescents, with a high response rate and multiple indicators of health. The main weaknesses were the absence of self-assessed measures of health, the unknown validity of the measure of self-reported household income used in the study, and the impossibility of attributing causality to the result of a cross-sectional study. 
Measures of health based on self-assessment are increasingly used in studies of adolescents15,16,25,26; at younger ages, parents continue to be used as the primary informants.26,27 As our study required comparable health data for children aged 5–15 years, the measures were inevitably limited to those based on parental report and professional assessment. With regard to the measurement of household income, we consider it probable that the use of broad bands of income in the analyses (equivalised income quintiles) is likely to reduce the degree of error in the data. The use of a cross-sectional design meant that we could only compare the socioeconomic patterning of health among children of different ages and not among the same children at different time points. While we cannot rule out the possibility of cohort effects, we consider that they are likely to be modest, given the relatively narrow age range (age 5–15 years) of the study. 
Meaning of the study
Our results add to the growing body of evidence relating to the existence of health inequalities among children and young people.6–11 They also extend this literature, which has primarily focused on the association between parental socioeconomic position (proxied by parental occupation) and child/adolescent health by pointing to the importance of household income. 
Household income avoids the limitations of occupation-based measures used in UK studies from which the equalisation hypothesis has been generated, in two important ways. First, it provides a direct measure of the material circumstances in which children and young people live and one equivalent across households. Occupation-based indicators are known to poorly characterise the SEC of children in households outside the labour market. In addition, the conventional social class classification (the Registrar General's classification) used in UK studies is acknowledged to provide less precise differentiation of the SEC of female-headed than male-headed households and of ethnic minority households than white households.28,29 Second, the use of household income goes some way to addressing the problem of the non-equivalence of parent-derived measures of SEC for children and adolescents. It has been argued that, with children increasingly shaping their own socioeconomic trajectories as they move into their teenage years, parental occupation provides a less relevant and less reliable measure of the SEC of adolescents than of younger children.30 While not wholly avoiding the problem, household income reduces potential biases in results due to the non-equivalence of the SEC measure. 
Within the multivariate analyses, equivalised household income was more frequently associated with health outcomes than any other indicator of socioeconomic circumstances. As such, our results suggest that the traditional UK practice of defining children and young people's SEC almost exclusively in terms of parental occupational status may underestimate the strength of socioeconomic gradients in child and adolescent health. The use of income-based indicators is consistent with current approaches in the UK to the measurement of child poverty.31,32 

