However, the majority of these studies may be criticized on the grounds of relatively small and/or unrepresentative samples (for an exception see Beange et al. 1995b) and their reliance on simple bivariate analytic procedures (for an exception see Robertson et al. 2000). The aim of the present paper is to present data derived from a relatively large-scale study of weight and exercise undertaken among adults with ID in supported accommodation in Northern England.
 
Sampling
The data were collected between 2000 and 2002 across nine geographical localities in Northern England in the context of audit-based reviews of the quality of supported accommodation (Bliss et al. 1999). Supported accommodation included all forms of support provided to enable people with ID to live outside of their family home. It included examples of supported living, group homes, hostels and village communities. Of the nine areas, six fell within the 20% most socially deprived districts in England, two within the 21–40% most deprived and two within the 41–60% most deprived (Department of the Environment, Transport, and the Regions 2000). Within each area sampling strategies were determined by local managers. These included sampling all people with ID receiving supported accommodation from a particular provider organization and a variety of random and nonrandom sampling strategies. Information was collected on a total of 1542 adults with ID. The number of participants per locality ranged from 42 to 373. Given sampling was undertaken by local organizations in the context of service audit, it was not possible to determine response rate.
Measures
NW Audit of Quality in Residential Supports (Bliss et al. 1999) involves the collection of basic information from a key informant (e.g. keyworker, first line manager) on the characteristics of people with ID and the nature of the supported accommodation they receive prior to a visit by an external audit team. The pre-visit information includes: height and weight (from which BMI is calculated), the Physical Activity Scale used in the Health Survey for England between 1993 and 1998 (e.g. Bennett et al. 1995) and the Learning Disability Casemix Scale (Pendaries 1997) to measure overall level of adaptive and challenging behaviour. Height and weight data were extracted from existing service records. The Physical Activity Scale collects information on the number of times the participant engaged in moderate to vigorous physical activity during the 4 weeks preceding interview. Sports and exercise activities were only included if they lasted for 20 min or more. All other moderate or vigorous activities were included irrespective of duration. The Health Survey for England defines people as 'inactive' if they have engaged in fewer than 12 bouts of moderate or vigorous activity in the preceding 4 weeks. The Learning Disability Casemix Scale (Pendaries 1997) is a simple 23-item behaviour rating scale from which levels of adaptive behaviour (most able, moderately able, least able) and challenging behaviour (no/little, moderate, severe) can be derived. The scale has acceptable psychometric properties including good convergent validity with the AAMR Adaptive Behavior Scale (Nihira et al. 1993) and acceptable levels of inter-informant and test–retest reliability (Comas-Herrera et al. 1999).
Comparative data
In order to make comparisons with adults who do not have ID, data on BMI were obtained from the Health Survey for England 2001 (National Centre for Social Research 2003) and data on physical activity were obtained from the Health Survey for England 1998 (National Centre for Social Research 2002), the last year in which the Physical Activity Scale was used in the form used in the present study. The Health Survey for England 2001 contains information on BMI for a nationally representative sample of 15 647 people in England aged 16 or over. The Health Survey for England 1998 contains information on physical activity for a nationally representative sample of 15 908 people in England aged 16 or over. 
 
Participants
Information on the characteristics of the participants and the nature of the supported accommodation they received is presented in Table 1.
Obesity
Information on BMI was available for 1304 (85%) of participants. Overall, 14% of participants were underweight, 28% overweight and 27% obese. These data (and comparative data from the Health Survey for England 2001: National Centre for Social Research 2003) are presented in Table 2. For adults with ID, prevalence rates of obesity were greater for women at the 35–44 years (Fisher's exact P = 0.042), 55–64 years (Fisher's exact P = 0.028) and 65–74 years (Fisher's exact P = 0.002) age groups than for men.
When compared with men in the general population, prevalence rates for obesity were lower among men with ID only within the 65–74 years age group (z = 2.37, P &lt; 0.05). When compared with women in the general population, prevalence rates for obesity were higher among women with ID within 16–24 years (z = 2.17, P &lt; 0.05) and 35–44 years age groups (z = 3.68, P &lt; 0.001). There was no association between activity level and obesity.
Underweight
There were no statistically significant differences between men and women with ID in the prevalence of underweight at any age range. However, men with ID were more likely to be underweight than men who did not have ID at all ranges (16–24 years age group: z = 2.14, P &lt; 0.05; all other age ranges: P &lt; 0.001). Similarly, women with ID were more likely to be underweight than women who did not have ID at all ranges above age 35 (P &lt; 0.001).
Physical exercise
Information on physical activity was available for 1458 (95%) of participants. Overall, just 4% of participants with ID met the criteria of being 'physically active'. A significant minority of participants (635; 44%) were reported by informants to be 'physically incapable' of at least one of the 12 categories of physical activity measures in the Physical Activity Scale. If these participants are excluded, 8% of the remaining 823 meet the criteria for being 'physically active'. These data (and comparative data from the Health Survey for England 1998: National Centre for Social Research 2002) are presented in Table 3. Men and women with ID were less active than men and women without ID in all age groups (P &lt; 0.001).
Information on the extent to which men and women with and without ID have participated in any heavy housework or gardening in the preceding 4 weeks, or regularly participate in vigorous exercise or sport, is presented in Figs 1 and 2.
Predictors of risk
A series of bivariate and multivariate (binary logistic regression, variable entry P &lt; 0.05, variable removal P &lt; 0.1) analyses were undertaken to identify personal and support variables associated obesity, underweight and physical inactivity. The results of these analyses are presented in Table 4.
As can be seen: women were at significantly greater risk of physical inactivity and obesity; the most able and moderately able people with ID were at greater risk of obesity; the least able people with ID were at greater risk of being underweight and physical inactivity; younger people were at greater risk of being underweight, older people were at increased risk of obesity. Of particular interest was that, once personal characteristics were controlled for, geographical location and level of community involvement were associated with an increased risk of obesity. 
Discussion
 
The results of the study indicate that, when compared with men and women in the general population, men and women with ID who are receiving supported accommodation are at increased risk of being significantly underweight and physically inactive. Women with ID who are receiving supported accommodation are at increased risk of obesity. The results also suggest that, within the population of people with ID who are receiving supported accommodation increased behavioural health risks are associated with gender, severity of ID, age and location.
These results do, however, need to be treated with a degree of caution. First, while the sample size is relatively large, it cannot be assumed to be fully representative of all adults with ID receiving supported accommodation in England. Comparison with available national data suggests that study participants: were marginally older (mean age 49.3 years in the present study, 45.4 years in the UK 1991 Census: Emerson &amp; Hatton 1996); contained a representative proportion of men (54% in the present study, 55% in the UK 1991 Census: Emerson &amp; Hatton 1996); were living in slightly smaller units (mean size 4.5 in the present study, 6.1 in England in 2001: Department of Health 2001). No national information is available to judge the extent to which our sample was representative with regard to ethnicity. Second, while the data collection utilized instruments with acceptable psychometric properties, no within-study check was made on the reliability or validity of data collection. Third, it needs to be kept in mind that all participants with ID were receiving some form of supported accommodation. It is possible that different patterns and predictors of activity and BMI may be apparent among people with ID living in their family home. Finally, we were only able to examine associations between a restricted range of predictor variables and BMI/activity.
The results of the study are broadly consistent with previous research that has suggested that people with ID are at increased risk of being underweight, obese and leading sedentary lives (Beange et al. 1995a,b; Kennedy et al. 1997; Turner 1997; Wells et al. 1997; Messent et al. 1998; Robertson et al. 2000; Hove 2004), although the increased risk of obesity appears to be specific to women with ID. These results must be of serious concern given the significant risks of mortality and morbidity associated with deviation from normal weight and lack of exercise.
Underweight is associated with increased susceptibility to infection and reduced work capacity; obesity is associated with increased risk of coronary heart disease, ischaemic stroke, type 2 diabetes, osteoarthritis and cancers of the breast, colon, prostate, endometrium, kidney and gallbladder; physical inactivity is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease, some cancers and type 2 diabetes (World Health Organization 2002). In addition to these risks to physical health, physical activity may reduce depression (Lawlor &amp; Hopker 2001), challenging behaviour (Lancioni &amp; O'Reilly 1998) and cognitive decline in middle and old age (e.g. Richards et al. 2003).
Effectively addressing these health inequalities is likely to require a multilayered approach (Lennox 2002). It is, of course, both possible and desirable to develop specific targeted programmes to increase exercise, encourage more healthy patterns of eating, reduce obesity and improve nutritional intake (Beange et al. 1995c; Kennedy et al. 1997; Martin et al. 1997; Lancioni &amp; O'Reilly 1998; Health Promotion Information Centre 1999; Jobling 2001). It is likely, however, that strategies will need to be complemented by interventions that address the broader social determinants of health (Marmot &amp; Wilkinson 1999).
Messent et al. (1999), for example, identified a range of barriers to increasing physical activity among people with ID. These included: unclear policy guidelines in residential and day service provision; resourcing, transport and staffing constraints; participant income and expenditure; and limited options for physically active community leisure. While such factors are undoubtedly important, it is notable that levels of domestic activity in the present study were also low among people with ID (Fig. 1). This is consistent with the results of more general studies of engagement in activity in domestic settings which suggest that people with ID are not effectively supported to take advantage of the everyday opportunities for activity which are routinely available (Felce &amp; Emerson 2004).
At a much broader level, long-term sustainable improvements in the health and the health behaviours of people with ID may be dependent on addressing the wider social determinants of health such as poverty, housing, unemployment and the social capital available in the communities in which people live (Marmot &amp; Wilkinson 1999; Health Development Agency 2000). For example, Coggins et al. (1999), in discussing strategies to increase levels of physical activity in the population, point to the importance of initiatives that reduce social exclusion, reduce crime, build a sense of community and improve the physical environment. Policy and practice relating to people with ID would benefit by making connections with such initiatives.

