Introducing the approach and the authors
As sociologists, we would argue that there is a relationship between auto/biography, theory, and research: 
You must learn to use your life experience in your intellectual work: continually to examine it and interpret it. In this sense craftsmanship (sic) is the centre of yourself and you are personally involved in every intellectual product upon which you work (Mills, 1959, p. 216).
Thus, like C. Wright Mills and, more recently, Ribbens (1993) and Okely (1992), we believe that a critical and reflexive scrutiny of the self and ones own experience is an essential sociological endeavour, and further that writing ones autobiography always includes reference to the biographies of others (see for e.g. Mykhalovskiy, 1996). Sociological auto/biography highlights the dynamic relationship between the individual and the social and challenges the sociological orthodoxy, which is expressed by a masculine discourse or voice (Mykhalovskiy, 1996). 
All of the authors in this special edition engage with the auto/biographical: some detail their own experiences, others engage with the biographies of others—drawing on empirical research, group work, and activism. As such, this special issue represents a vibrant consideration of the issues and challenges for women in higher education today. 
Down at heal?
The relationship between academic feminism and women's experience of living in the world is complex and dynamic. There is a relationship between activism and academic feminism and in turn between academic feminism and activism; yet, this relationship is structured by time and place. Thus, not only does women's studies represent a challenge to traditional authorised knowledge, but it has at times itself been challenged for its narrow focus on particular experiences in particular locations. As feminists within the academy, our challenge is to make a difference both in the thinking of the women and men whom we teach and, through research and activism, in the lives of women in the wider community. Torry Dickinson's article shows us how activist scholarship can change women's lives in academia and in applied social change projects globally. Drawing on her women's studies teaching and her research in U.S. urban areas, she demonstrates the connections between theory, social action learning, and research and the development of innovative social change projects. Dickinson demonstrates how women's studies can be strengthened through activism, providing a means to study and opportunities to participate in projects with women at community level, in order to bring about long-term change. 
It is important to note, however, that the position and placing of women within the academy may make it hard for us to find the time or the energy to engage in such activity. Female academics, support staff and service staff in the academy, as in other male dominated institutions, are disproportionately represented in the lower grades; there are more women on fixed, short-term and part-time contracts, and women are paid less (see Anderson &amp; Williams, 2001, Morley, 2003 and Trowler, 1998). There is also much evidence that women experience sexism at work from male colleagues and that marginalisation is accentuated by other differences such as age, sexuality, ethnicity, and disability (Anderson &amp; Williams, 2001 and Howie et al., 2002). Despite, or perhaps because of this, Keller and Moglen (1987, p. 505) note, the Women's Movement's "emphasis on mutuality, concern, and support' can be "tremendously difficult to implement in the real world situation of the current academic market'. Although feminists have stressed collaboration rather than competition sometimes, this is difficult to achieve, for, as Barbara Bagilhole (1994) and Lesley Kerman (1995) both suggest, women working in male dominated environments have few others to collaborate with. Several of the articles in this edition highlight these tensions. 
Paula Black considers the relationship between gender and class in higher education and draws on the auto/biographical writings of women within the academy. Black argues that the audit and accountability culture within academia is implicated in the process of identity formation for contemporary academics and suggests that the institutionalised process of audit “allows the formalisation and even measurement of insecurities, or lack of "correct' cultural assets, which may already haunt academic and research staff from working class backgrounds”. She concludes by arguing that more research focusing on class and higher education is needed. Jen Marchbank, writing about her own experience of UK academia, considers the relevance of her own class status, sexuality, gender, and parenting identity to her experience within the academy. Marchbank provides an historical reflection on her higher education experience and considers how at times different aspects of her multiple identity is more significant than others. Both of these pieces highlight the reality rather than the rhetoric of working in the academy. However, as Zoe Morrison, Mary Bourke, and Caroline Kelley argue there is a growing view among academic policymakers and academics themselves that gender discrimination is not an issue in higher education. Perhaps, this is because, at least to some extent, discrimination remains hidden. Morrison et al. provide empirical research from data collected with students that demonstrate persistent gendered prejudice and discrimination. Yet they also found that many students (including women students) were reluctant to admit that this was happening. They suggest that this is not only indicative of a post-feminist view that gender discrimination is a thing of the past but also a "coping strategy' within gender-biased institutions. 
Gender is significant at all levels of the academic hierarchy as the article by Colleen Chesterman, Ann Ross-Smith, and Margaret Peters demonstrates. Chesterman et al. discuss the experiences of senior women executives in Australian universities, their impact on management cultures, and the strategies and support systems they employ to sustain them in management roles. They note the diverse pathways to senior management taken by women executives and their atypical career patterns when compared with men. Significant issues include discrimination encountered and resistance to gendered ideologies, which mediate against women's opportunities for promotion. The authors explore traits of reticence and ambivalence, which contribute to women's reluctance to apply for senior positions. They conclude that overcoming this reluctance is a significant problem for universities in shifting male dominated management roles. 
Challenging problems?
As noted early, there are more women, students, researchers, teachers, and managers in further and higher education than ever before, and as Mary Evans (1995) argues, education is no longer just about DWMs (dead white males). In many subjects and on many levels, there has been a concentrated challenge to the orthodoxies of the past. The curriculum has broadened and is less rigid in its subject demarcation and the critique of knowledge production is part of (some) academic study. Feminists and others working outside of Western assumptions have been influential in these changes. As Evans (1997, p. 122) notes: 
…feminists can claim to have developed one of the now great critical traditions within the Western academy, that of suggesting that the universalisitc assumptions of knowledge in our society are false, and partial, because they are drawn from the experience of only one sex.
With reference to our own discipline, as Abbott and Wallace (1997) note, sociologists can no longer afford to ignore women and gender divisions and there is much discussion about the changes needed for the biases of the past to be overthrown. Yet, they add, the struggle is ongoing and feminist sociology is still ghettoised and marginalised by many. Or (and perhaps this is worse) the approaches and methods of feminist academics are adopted by mainstream writers with no acknowledgement of the debt to feminism. Michelle Webber explores student resistance to feminist approaches both on women's studies courses and on social science courses taught by feminists. Drawing on interviews with teachers and students, she discusses the forms of resistance encountered and the strategies employed to deal with it. Some feminist teachers found less resistance to gender issues if the feminist content of their courses was not identified overtly as such. Others named their material as feminist, but in either case, all experienced resistance from students to some degree. This might be anonymously through course evaluation or more blatantly and directly in class. Webber shows how resistance to feminist materials operates to dismiss feminist knowledge and documents the subtle interplay of gender, power, and survival in the feminist classroom and the wider academy. 
As Deborah Lee's article tells us, the most extreme resistance to feminism results in violence and abuse. Drawing on a case study taken from her research in this area, Lee highlights the bullying and harassment to which feminist teachers can be subjected by anti-feminist male students. Furthermore, the discussion makes clear the lack of support offered to women in this position by senior male managers who may accept students' complaints uncritically. Lee links this to the marketing of higher education where students are defined as customers and customers must be prioritised at all costs. She calls for a feminist campaign against the "double bind' in which many feminist teachers are caught up: unacceptable student conduct and subsequent victim-blaming by management. Lee suggests that "contrapower sexual harassment' is a useful theoretical tool to employ in such resistance, inviting us to acknowledge that persons with less formal power (students) are able to sexually harass persons with more formal power (academics) particularly when the latter are women in the feminist classroom. 
Resistance to feminism is not the only concern for the (pro) feminist academic. Phrases such as "quality audit and quality assessment', "publish or perish', and "managerialism and enterprise culture' cause all contemporary academics concern. Yet, as Louise Morley notes, there is a contrast between the speed of the changes and the slowness of gendered change in universities. She also notes that much of the debate focusing on gender equity and higher education takes place within high-income countries and "there has been little sustained attention globally to the role that higher education plays in challenging and reproducing gender privileges and disadvantages'. In response to this, Morley's article considers writing on gendered change in Commonwealth higher education institutions and analyses some of the issues that emerge. 
Places of higher education, like families, are "greedy institutions' (e.g. Acker, 1980). All this means that women in the academy often suffer from the "double bind' (having to be professional and having to be "womanly') and the "double burden' (of labour at home and labour at work). Helene Cummins examines the issue of "mommy tracking' women with partners and children and applies it to single, childless women academics. She argues that such women are often "tracked' in the same way as women who have children, yet receive little formal support in recognition of the caring responsibilities that they may carry. Instead, it is assumed that such women have more time for tasks at work and for family-related tasks. Cummins uses auto/biography and interviews with other women academics to demonstrate how single women can be overburdened by the demands of their department and its students in a way that married women with children are not, because they choose to work shorter hours in order to care for their families. Consequently, married women with children tend to be disadvantaged in the promotion stakes although policy initiatives and formal support are in place to address this. Cummins' point is that single women can find themselves similarly disadvantaged. She argues that the formal support for married women with children should be extended to single women and that university policies in this area be inclusive and open to all. 
Finding solutions?
In recognition of the tensions and problems for women in higher education, Gray (1994, p. 75) argues that it is necessary to remain ambivalent about our position in the academy as this enables "reflexivity, negotiations, movements, and communication'. This is better than either complete acceptance of the "current systems' or rejection of academia. 
An example of this ambivalence is provided by Paula Barata, Sandeep Hunjan, and Jillian Leggatt who write about 10 women graduates' experience of a feminist research group. Barata et al. reflect on the positive and negative impact of feminism on the lives of the women in the group and the associated tension concerning managing home and work; the relationship between feminism and their discipline (psychology); self-identity and public and personal relationships with men. As members of the group themselves, Barata et al. reflecting on their own place within the group and as authors of the paper urge others to engage in such collaborations. 

