Alongside external inspection runs the never-ending tracking of students, which feeds
an insatiable audit trail linked to the funding of colleges. For Paul, who works in a
highly flexible working environment, where adult students sign themselves in for
registration at different points in the day and week, keeping track of their attendance
is difficult. He reflects here that students sometimes forget to register and that
constantly chasing up and registering "hard to reach' students (although their attendance
is often good) is not conducive to a high-trust working relationship.
… It feels to me like the audit process assumes a certain mode of learning, the students
turn up and sit in classrooms, which we simply don't do.
If this tension between auditing systems and the flexible nature of FE programmes
appears innocuous, it is at the root of an accountability system where discrepancies
can lead to cuts in teaching hours, resources and staffing (Holloway, 1999). At the
same time practitioners are conscious that in a climate of college mergers and reorganisation
their jobs may be on the line if the link between student recruitment, retention
and achievement is not maintained. Tutors often include strong pastoral elements
in their tutorial work, sharing telephone contact numbers, visiting students in the
workplace, as well as counselling students in their own time. Celia, an experienced
Business Studies tutor has, for example, been using text messaging with her students
as a way of improving communications with the college on what she calls "on their
terms'. To date most of her tutor group use the text message system to communicate
about lateness or absence, although not exclusively, as the following clips indicate:
? Assessment issues and crises (e.g. "we r waitin outside staff rm 2 give our assignments
but there is no1 there what shall we do').
? Family "policing' (e.g. "i it is X's brother would it be possible to come see you')
followed by a message from X ("my bro don't know ive got a fone or a bfriend he
fink im in college all week &amp; the days off ive had he don't know about them').
? Academic worries (e.g. "I am so worried about this presentation … pl tell me u r
not goin to ask questions sorry abt txtn u on weekend').
? Crises and other complaints (e.g. "[she] shouted at me in front of every1 only bcuz
we were laffin in leson, I did all my wrk &amp; she flipped at me').
For Celia text messaging has enabled her to produce a register that is less threatening
to her students: it is also filled with "notified' absences, which meets registration and
audit criteria (Anderson et al., 2004). This is also a way for her to reconcile the
conflict between her sense of professionalism as a tutor (knowing about and effectively
helping her tutees) and the bureaucratisation of the tutor's role (its reduction
to the tick boxes on the register showing "notified' absences). While Celia is aware
that a number of the reasons given for lateness may be invented, this is not the issue.
What matters is that the students have recognised their responsibility for reporting
absence or lateness. This is a "success' that can be chalked up. Moreover, once in
touch, Celia feels that she can watch out for students who are in difficulty and to offer
help in a more meaningful way than scheduled progress tutorials allow. The text
messaging example reveals a critical and creative way in which practitioners seek
creatively to resolve "duality' in the contradictions between agency and structure
experienced in the context of their work (Bathmaker, 2001b; Colley &amp; Hodkinson,
2002; Gale, 2003). In the following section we return to the broader sociological
implications of such analysis with reference to FE professionalism in the wider
context of public accountability.
FE professionalism in and beyond regulation
From the evidence so far the idea that there exists a "community of professional practice'
in FE is a misnomer (Lave &amp; Wenger, 1991). The challenge is to build one
around recognition of some of the high-trust working practices that have informed
this paper. Building professional capacity in FE requires new theories of professionalism
that can guide pedagogy and practice since, as we have noted, the pragmatism of
FE practice—referred to by Scaife (2004) as the culture of the now—is incapable of
achieving such change alone. It also requires forms of research that challenge the
prevailing culture of technicism on which narrow regimes of inspection, audit and
accountability feed. In the current volatile environment of FE the way in which
research might influence FE practice is, however, limited, as a recent TLC-FE
Project Report (2004) has noted:
… external pressures, arising from college reactions to the national policy and funding situation,
have predominantly negative impacts upon learning quality. Examples include
increased group sizes, serious reductions in resources and contact time, and the loss of
high quality teaching staff, for example, through redundancy. In some circumstances,
learning cultures and the quality of learning are only sustained because tutors put in significant
amounts of extra time and effort. The current climate in the FE sector as a whole is
generally hostile to research capacity building, though unintentionally so. Except for a few
pockets, research is seen as a luxury that can only be afforded at times of plenty, and FE
has very few of those. (Hodkinson et al., 2004, p. 4)
What the narratives in this study reveal so far is a disjuncture between the policy rhetoric
of FE as a high-skill vocational route, characterised by greater social justice and
inclusion, and the reality as it is experienced by professionals "on the ground'. To say
that such disjuncture reflects the contradictory nature of education practice is to state
the obvious. What we have sought to demonstrate is that professional knowledge is
constructed and sustained through the working out of tensions experienced between
external criteria of performance and those "ecologies of practice' (Stronach et al.,
2002) that frame identity and reality making among FE professionals. Another possibility
is to understand issues of identity as a basis for rethinking how professionalism
can be reworked in preferred ways. Seddon et al. (2003), for example, emphasise the
way that liberal market reform is changing the boundaries of professional practice,
challenging occupational standards and reshaping the work place, including broader
articulations of power, knowledge and community in the wider politics of civil society.
In their study Management Lives Knights and Wilmott (1999) demonstrate how such
lived experience enables practitioners to define their professionality in practice, rather
than to interpret the experiences as eroding creativity and autonomy.
As the more disembodied elements of performance management come under
scrutiny, the intriguing question is raised whether marketisation has had the paradoxical
effect of restoring professional power by reconstructing professionalism
through compliance or contestation (Ranson, 2003). According to Stronach et al.
(2003) such identity formation constitutes a powerful narrative ethic that allows
professionals to "re-story' themselves in and against the audit culture. At one level
this manifests itself in creative and routinised compliance, rule following or rule
breaking, resulting in the fabrication of activities designed to meet targets with
which professionals do not readily identify (Ball, 2001). At another, it involves
mediation, contestation and redefinition among professionals negotiating or exploiting
contradictions where audit cultures do little more than hold professionals and
students to account.
Such analysis prompts questions about the nature of social partnership work and workers,
their relationship with various political rationalities and political projects, and the way
these activities map across the wider social structures in terms of gender, ethnicity, class
and in relation to the state. (Seddon et al., 2003, p. 18)
In the context of FE the potential of professionals "restorying themselves' (Stronach
et al., 2003) alone is questionable. It is also contingent on the restoration of wider
forms of democratic governance and accountability that grow out of cultural capital
and citizenship, which transcend market narratives and consumerist concerns (Bourdieu
&amp; Wacquant, 1992). If part of this process involves democratic governance it is
also dependent on more transparent forms of plurality, contestation and accountability
at the centre of the public sphere (Hood et al., 1998). According to Marquand
(2000) a priority for modern social democracy is to both retrieve and reinvent the
public domain, which can erect barriers against unaccountable incursions of the
market. Central to this process is a balancing of "agreement making' (Nixon &amp;
Ranson, 1997) between government, professionals and local communities concerning
the objectives, strategies and forms of accountability that form part of a wider
democratic conversation. For Lauder et al. (2004) this involves a relational understanding
of the critical importance of both agency and structure in addressing policypractice
discrepancies.
Notions of agency and structure are potentially important in drawing attention to power
relationships that lead to inequalities in life chances', equally explanations of how the
individual relates to society are central to citizens' social and democratic understanding of
their place in the world, what has been called reflexive solidarity. (Lauder et al., 2004,
p. 19)
Reflexive solidarity and restorying oneself is easier said than done in the market economy
of FE. While reflexive modernisation, in which professionals (re) invest their
selves in the risks and opportunities of the market, can be a simultaneously creative or
restrictive experience, it is not a clear-cut process. Reflexivity, involving the ability of
professionals to reflect on their actions and conditions, and to change and modify
these in the light of practice and experience, is an overworked sociological concept. It
places a premium on the transformative side of identity (agency) to the exclusion of
"supply side' factors (structure) that affect the way professionals operate in and mediate
the interplay between agency and structure (Martin &amp; Wajcman, 2004). Missing
in the analysis is a relational understanding of political interest and regime change
that intersects professional and public issues at different levels (Wright-Mills, 1968;
Bourdieu, 1977). This is not a process driven by dualism, but rather one that articulates
a theory of professional authority grounded in the contexts of civic society
through which more robust forms of professionalism can expose political rhetoric to
public scrutiny (Ranson, 2003).
Conclusion
Addressing such issues turns on relational forms of discourse that position professionalism
alongside more transparent democratic forms of accountability at the centre of
civic society. This offers a different view of modernising agendas and partnership
agreements that accommodate professionals within highly prescribed performance
criteria. If this sounds a familiar argument in support of strengthening professionalism
against market interests, it is more than that. It addresses wider forms of "duality'
around which both structure and agency challenge dualism and, in the current context
of professional practice, give voice to critique and ideas emerging from the tensions
between education policy and practice. In this context FE professionals, as experts
and citizens, prowl the boundaries of public and private spaces in brokering the interface
between citizen, state and consumer interests. In a multi-million pound sector,
linking school FE/higher education and work—incorporating over four million
students of all ages and backgrounds—FE practitioners are well placed to engage with
this process. In this respect their professional narratives becomes inseparable from a
critical discourse of public accountability, fashioning more authentic forms of authority
and voice linked to local conditions of democratic governance. According to
Crouch (2003) both policy and professional agendas mutually inform one another,
which, in principle, allows local contexts (colleges, schools, hospitals, universities,
welfare and community organisations) to mediate between national and global agendas.
This we argue, brings FE professionalism in from the cold by challenging the
conditions of dualism that have constrained professional practice as either self-serving
or in the service of a performance society, and moves it toward a more critically
engaged position in public life.

