Going to the Source 

by Stella Duffy



The Brescians will also tell you about their favourite industry. How this town and the villages around are famed for their arms manufacture. That the castle has a display of military artifacts. Iron and gunpowder. Fortification. And then, unlike my guide book which is a little too interested in monasteries and women-only convents-turned-hotels and yet one more hard to find but well worth the trip trompe l'oeil/fresco/stucco church, the Brescians will tell you about their guns. The Brescians will tell you about the Beretta. The taxi driver will tell you about the Beretta and the receptionist in the newly refurbished hotel across from the train station will tell you about the Beretta and the old man in the dark and tatty student café up by the ruins of the Roman Theatre will tell you about the Beretta. The gypsy woman and her loud snotty children outside the hotel entrance. The man selling gelati. The old woman begging on the old duomo steps. They are proud of their gun manufacture here. Even the ones with peace signs and rainbow paz flags hanging out their windows, they are still proud. This is what they do in this city. In this industrial town with its embarrassing fascist square. And the American army buys their guns and the LAPD buys their guns and so do the US Marines, Coast Guard, Navy, Air Force, and Border Patrol. And so do I. That's why I've come. On the train and the plane and the bus and the taxi. Journeyed to the source. To get the best. To sort out my little problem.

I had arranged to meet a man. It's not hard you know. The internet has made arranging to meet a man, any man, one of the simplest things in the world. In the old days you might have had to talk to the cousin of a friend who knows someone who knows someone else. Now you go online, type your request into a search engine and wait. Within five seconds I had three hundred and sixty eight responses to my query. One for every day of the year and a couple of leap years thrown in. I narrowed the search, came up with a few names and website addresses, carefully phrased my inquiry and left it at that. The next morning I had four useful replies to my newly obtained email address. Just in case. By that afternoon I had made contact with Fabio Vidani. Three brief emails later, and I was on my way to meet him. I booked the tickets online as well. Virtual shopping, real time travel. No matter what they say, there's nothing quite like going there yourself.

The Beretta family have been gunmakers for fifteen generations. I read it in the guidebook and I read it online. They are the toast of the gunmaking world, internet heroes. Bartolomeo Beretta was a maestro de canne at the beginning of the 1500's. His sons followed him into the business and their sons and their sons. I expect they've even allowed the occasional daughter to flourish in the industry as well. And there are other Beretta manufacturers, of course there are. In St Etienne France, Accokeek in Maryland USA. There are outlets in Athens and New York and Alexandria, Virginia. And it would probably have been far easier to buy the gun in the United States. Get the permit, travel with it, full and legal permission to own one of the finest handguns in the world. But Granny always said to go to the source, and I wanted to do this right. So I went to Fabio Vidani and we had a coffee and later he showed me the red tiled roofs of the Fabrica d'Armi Pietro Beretta S.P.A on via Pietro Beretta, in the once-was-little village of Gardone Val Trompia, Brescia, Italy. It's a big factory. Fabio was a small man. But he knew what I wanted and he knew how to help me.

He doesn't work at the factory you understand. Please don't think I'm accusing any Beretta employee of this - this meeting. I'm sure every single one of them works always and only within the law. For Fabio, that afternoon, the law stretched just a little. A little flexibility here, a lot of cash in his bank there. Dinner and coffee, a small glass of grappa to help with the digestion. And then, in the street, in front of the shallow steps of the small Duomo - the old one, not the new one - he handed me a box. It could have been a shoe box. Like the one we buried Granny's budgie in, digging a too-big hole and dropping it in far and low so the fox wouldn't find it. It could have been that kind of a shoe box. It wasn't. I thanked Fabio and left him outside the old church. He was going in to light a candle for his family. I considered lighting one for Granny, but I knew she'd disapprove of such obvious popery.

In my hotel over the road from the train station I opened the box. There were layers of pink tissue paper. A box of ammunition. The gun. Not any gun. The gun. The Beretta. It was brand new and beautiful. Just as the website said it would be. As Fabio said it would be. It was heavier than I expected. Not heavy, but heavier than I had thought. It sat still and quiet in my hand and there was a weight to it. The Beretta knew its own importance. I looked at myself in the mirror, holding the gun, holding it out in front of me, my hand moulded itself to the correct position to fire, fingers shaped and ready. I took up the stance as I had trained. We looked good.

I slept well that night. Long and well. In the morning my breakfast was a good slow meal. I was ready to leave Brescia. Ready to go home.

Yes, it's true airport security can be a problem these days. I guess it always has been, but now? Killers and terrorists all over the place. You can't be too careful. Belt and braces as Granny used to say. Belt and braces. So I took two precautions against getting caught. Found myself a flat right by the airport. Found myself a local bar and waited. Late shift security officers always like a bit of a drink. All those other people flying off to the world while they stay at home checking passports and running their hands over sweaty breasts and dirty back pockets. Shitty job. Shitty people sometimes too, these jobs attract them I guess. Like to like, as Granny ... well, you know. Typically though, the nastier the job, the greater the need for a drink. I met a dozen security officers and drank a lake of beer before I met Paula. Lovely girl - saving up to go to college, working her way through the summer break. I liked her, she fell in love with me. It's a facility I have, getting young girls to fall in love with me. Problem is, I can't always get rid of them once they've fallen. They hang around, don't get the hint, won't go away. Unless I make them. And some people just won't be told. It's why I'm here. To make her go away, the one who won't leave, won't let me go either. You can tell them once, twice, three times even - but if they don't get the hint, then what? Short sharp shock. It's the only way according to Granny.

It's why I needed the Beretta. Why I needed to get the gun through airport security. Why I needed to get Paula to help me get the gun through airport security. She was very sweet about it, protested that she'd never done anything like that before. Of course she hadn't, poor lamb. Assured me she'd never even thought about breaking the rules. I don't suppose she ever had. But I don't suppose she'd ever been fucked in the back of a rental Alfa Romeo convertible either. I got the car for an evening. She thought it was mine. I told her it was, she believed me. I told her I loved her, she believed me. I told her to help me get the gun through customs and I'd be back within the month. She believed me. Young girls and gullibility - it's practically an anagram, isn't it? I didn't ask how she would do it but, three days later, I met her at the boarding gate. She took me aside for an extra security check, laid the gun carefully in my hand luggage as we'd agreed and then escorted me on to the plane. She sat me down in my first class seat - her lovely friend from the ground staff had sorted it. After I'd sorted him as well. Our little secret. Neither of us wanted to hurt Paula. (Except when she asked for it. For such a young one, she certainly knew what she wanted.)

I had arrivals organised as well. They don't always put your hand luggage through those x-ray machines after landing, but they do sometimes. Not usually when you've had a suspected heart attack though. Not usually when your pulse is racing and they need to get you off the plane as soon as possible. More than half a gram of coke up my nose in the first class toilets. When ground staff and security staff check you in with the personal touch it's almost obscenely simple to smuggle a little carefully hidden powder on board. Though I did have it packed in coffee, just in case. Finest Colombian. In every sense. And a screaming ambulance to the West Middlesex is a damn fine way to hurry through the Heathrow crowd. Lovely Australian nurse in A&amp;E as well. All in all a fantastic trip. Very pleased with myself I was when I finally left the hospital. Done and dusted and a good old-fashioned bed bath thrown in too. The nurse was, officially, obviously, too busy to wash me down. But I asked so nicely. And smiled so well. And she was a little lonely, a little more impressed by my first class passenger status. I'm not saying they're all so easily led, these young girls. But it's true there is an awful lot more attention available when people think you can afford the wide seats.

Then again the journeying. The buses and the trains and the coaches. Stopping and starting and taking another mode of transport. Not, this time, because it was how Granny travelled. While we travelled extensively, it was always by the fastest, cheapest method. This time I journey home by as many different routes as I can find. Doubling back on myself two three and four times. It takes almost a week. Staying in two different B&amp;B's on one occasion, booking into three different hotels on another. I am making extra tracks to cover the real ones. I'm on my way back. I need to cover my back. I need to uncover hers. To set myself free. She won't let me go. I should never have loved her this much in the first place and now she won't let me go. But I am leaving. And covering my tracks on the way there. I need to be free to find another, love another. Just as my Mum and Dad needed to leave me to love the next child. I need to leave her to love the next woman. It's normal. We were not made to love more than one at a time. Granny taught me that too. Not intentionally, but she taught it well.

Granny had another saying. My favourite of her many : "You could have gone sooner if you'd asked."

And I do need to move forward, and I do need to move on, and I have to leave her now, this woman who loves me. I have to dump her without dumping, to leave her with quitting, to get away without leaving her behind. So I don't have to see her crying eyes and her sadness when I go.

And I won't. I won't see her eyes because they will be closed. There won't be tears. Blood maybe, but no tears. Not hers anyway. I will not leave her behind me, hoping for my return. I will not leave her hope.

"You could have gone sooner if you'd asked."

I get home. Let myself in the back door. Am quiet, as quiet as ever I was when I sneaked out on Granny years ago, hid on the stairs until she was sleeping in her chair and whispered my way past her heavy-breathing body, out to the dark streets and my friends waiting on the corner.

I creep in now as I crept out then. I am ready to go. She is not ready to let me. I love another. I am moving on. It is time. The Beretta is smooth and cool and heavy in my hand. You could have gone sooner if you'd asked.

Bye bye Granny.
