KITCHEN 

He came down into me garden again this mornin, the fox, thee ahl fox with the one eye. Round about dawn, I mean the sky was still more night than day like, still a moon up there there was, an he came down off the mountain an through the hedge an into me garden, sniffed around the rabbit hutch for a bit then ate the cold bits of chip an fish batter I’d left out for him last night.Wolfed them as if he was starving, as if he hadn’t eaten in weeks, then cocked his leg an pissed on me cabbages an fucked off back through the hedge an back up again on to the mountain. 

I stood at the kitchen sink, staring out through the window, watchin him. He didn’t notice me, or if he did, he wasn’t arsed; it didn’t bother him, my shape at the window. Me rabbit, Charlie, was safe asleep in me bedroom, in a box lined with an ahl jumper underneath the bed, an me pulse raced an me skin crawled from the vile nightmare that’d woken me up so I came into the kitchen for some water an a fag an saw the tawny shape low in the mornin mist through the greasy glass. Them highsteppin paws, so delicate the way he lifts them an puts them down.Thin winter ribs under the russet fur an the white-tipped tail arched high over his back an his pointed muzzle probing through the dewy mist like the prow of a ship. An the one green eye glinting an then the fox-shaped hole in the mist as he turned an went away again so sudden, back through the hedge an up on to Pen Dinas, the head of the town, where I suppose he lives. 

This wild animal in me garden.This talented predator, here in my head. 

I gulped water an watched the mist tendril in to refill the hole made by his absence. Me skin dried, me heartbeat slowed back to normal. Me stump stopped itching or, rather, the void at the end of it did. The hole. Thee emptiness.The sick an warty shapes of me nightmare just dissolved like salt in water an I could feel me sanity, me hard-won fuckin sanity, me sanity gained at the cost of a fuckin limb, bein painlessly restored. That wild fox in me garden. Little red oneeyed wolf come down off the mountain into my living space to eat the scraps I’d left out for him an pee on me strugglin cabbages. Bein visited by that wild thing. 

How I fucking love this. 

Drank me water, smoked me fag, went back to me still-warm bed. Checked on Charlie, wee white fluffy slumberin bundle in the shadows beneath me mattress an I climbed on to that mattress an slept for another three hours. Nightmareless, whimperless sleep.Unusual an needed.Would’ve slept longer but Charlie woke me up by sniffin at me face. Little big-eared lettucebreathin hoppin bastard. 

Fox. 

Try an make yer breakfast with one fuckin arm; take the kettle over to the sink, put it down on the drainin board, turn the cold tap on, pick the kettle up again an fill it, put it down again, turn the tap off, pick the kettle up again, put it down again an work thee attachment into the socket an flick it on. Open the cupboard door, take the mug out an put it down on the worktop, close the cupboard door, take a tea bag out of the box an put it in the mug. Open the fridge door, take milk out, put milk down on the floor while you unscrew the top, pour a drop into the mug then put the bottle back on the floor again while you put the top back on then replace it in the fridge an close the door. Open another cupboard door, remove a bowl an put it on the worktop, close the cupboard door.Take the box of Ricicles an hold it between what’s left of yer left arm an yer ribs on that side while you unfurl the plastic inner wrapper with yer good hand, your only hand, tip the box an shake some cereal into the bowl, put it between yer stump an ribs again an rescrew up the inner wrapper with yer one hand an put the box back an then say ‘shite’ cos you’ve forgotten to leave the milk out, after nearly two fuckin long one-armed years you’ve still forgotten to leave the friggin milk out. So it’s back to the fridge, open it, milk out, floor, unscrew, stand, pour, bend, rescrew, replace in fridge, close door again. Take a spoon out of the cutlery drawer, close cutlery drawer. Back to kettle which has clicked off now, pour boiling water into mug, put spoon into bowl of popping cereal an take it into the front room,put it down on coffee table, turn telly on. Return to kitchen, agitate the tea bag in the mug with a spoon until the liquid turns brownish, then delve in the box of sugar cubes which you buy instead of loose sugar because cubes are easier to deal with one-handedly an take up two cubes an drop them in the mug. Scoop wilted bag out with spoon, drop it in bin, put spoon in sink then take up tea an go back into the front room, where news on the telly informs you of more countrywide train disruptions, delays an cancellations, not that yer plannin on travellin anywhere. Blow on to cool an then sip tea.When you eat the cereal, leave the bowl on the coffee table an lean over it an scoop it up into yer mouth. Put the spoon in the bowl whenever you need a sip of tea cos you’ve got no other hand to hold the mug with. 

Ridiculous empty sleeve floppin an a-flappin down yer body. Nowt fuckin in it, no, just a daft an empty fuckin sleeve. 

So try an make yer breakfast with one fuckin arm. It’ll be a frustrating, exasperating pain in the fuckin arse but you’ll do it. Now try washin up the breakfast dishes with that same one arm. Now try rolling a fuckin cigarette.Try gettin dressed, or undressed.Try gardening; try turnin the soil, sowin the seeds, harvestin yer fuckin vegetables. Try, fuck, makin a lasagne for yer tea; the pure mess it makes. Which you’ve got to clear up; an with just one hand, as well.You’ll manage to do all these things, they’ll all get done.Take twice as friggin long, like, an you’ll end up bootin dents in yer walls, but you’ll do them. Not easy, but you’ll get them done. Only easy thing to do with one hand is have a thrap, providin yeh do it without any pictorial assistance. Unless yeh lie on yer back with a box of tissues on yer chest an yer Razzle propped precariously up against that box, except then you have to interrupt the thrap every time yeh need to turn a page an sometimes the magazine slides down an off an then you have to rearrange the whole set-up an yer old feller goes limp an you end up throwin everythin to the floor an shouting. All yeh wanted was a quick wank for the relief in it, like, an now look – the pure fuckin frustration. It’s rubbish. 

I smoke two Lamberts with me tea then take the dishes into the kitchen an dump em in the sink.Wash em later.With the tepid dregs of the tea I neck two codeine then go into the bathroom an turn the shower on.Try brushin yer teeth with one arm; try just puttin toothpaste on the brush. Scouring an scrubbin all the bad night-mucus from yer gob an then suddenly you realise you’ve just been standin here for some time, holdin the brush still against yer front teeth, just staring down into the featureless porcelain of the sink. Must a been stood like this for five minutes or more; the bathroom’s filled up with steam an there’s drool an froth on me chin as if I’m rabid. Thinkin about nothing, standin here like a statue for all that time just starin down, absolutely fuck all in me head.Where do I go to when I’m like that? Do I stay here? Or what else comes into me? All me memories n hopes n stuff, all the shite that makes me me, where does it all go when I go off on one into them trances? 

Don’t know. Don’t know what fuckin happens. All I know is that I feel perfectly at peace. 

There’s a whole day ahead. So many things can happen in this one day. Me stomach lurches at the thought of it. As it always has, for as long as I can remember. Lurched, recoiled away from life an the days we have to spend. 

Step into the shower, ow, yeh bastard, too hot. I turn the cold tap an wait for the spray to cool. Me left arm, the truncated arm on me left side; the doctor says it’s healed incredibly well but I can’t stop seeing in it evidence of infection – a red discoloration, some sensation of heat. Sometimes even a smell, a bad whiff like milk gone sour. Seems okay today, tho. I can even admire the way the skin has been so smoothly stitched and has so seamlessly grown back into itself. It’s as if I was born this way; as if I’ve only ever been onearmed. Or one-and-a-half-armed. This little thing jerking at me left shoulder, I’ve never been any different, never looked any different; I’ve always had a limb made up of one part flesh, one part air. Thee entire atmosphere for a left forearm, that’s what I’ve always had. 

Our capacity to regenerate.The ways we can rebuild arselves, as Peter fuckin Salt might’ve said with one of his benign an pitying smiles on that grizzled fuckin face. 

Right, fuckin move, man, get the day done; get clean an dried an dressed. Put the new fleece on, the nice new Blackwatch tartan fleece, an pin thee arm up an gather together life’s, movement’s, paraphernalia; ciggies an lighter an wallet an keys, all that stuff. Pick the rabbit up out of his poo corner (clean up them little pellets later) an go out into the garden an put him back in his hutch, rip a radish up out of the soil an stick that in there with him. Tickle his head, tell him you’ll be back soon. Sniff, deeply, the fox’s left scent, the memory of him; his hot an thick, bladesharp musk. Think how ace the day will be; one of them clear an crisp spring days, cold but the sun shining, light so honed it will make every leaf, every blade of grass adopt a purely individual shade of green. It will turn the sea into a million mirrors. It will make the stump ache an throb, give me a fuckin migraine in thee elbow. But still. 

Back through the flat, telly off, front window open a tad for the fresh air. Charlie’s wee mings. Leave the house by the front door, turn left an start walking, down towards the harbour an the dump, past the Welsh-language primary school where the frost overnight has made grey flowers on the railings. No it hasn’t; what it’s done is stick itself to thee invisible flowers that bloom perennially on the metal. It’s stuck to them, given them form. 

Here comes another day. Another day I’m alive in. Me an me rabbit an me one-eyed fox. 

Step 1:We admitted that we were powerless over our addictions, that our lives had become unmanageable. And that we would willingly surrender up any last shred of selfautonomy we felt we may have possessed to a judgemental and sanctimonious gobshite in a small smoky yellow room in St Helens and the vast and frightening organisation behind him. And we admitted not only that we were completely worthless but also that if we should ever renege on this cession then we would become even less; not just shit, but the parasites on that shit. The parasites on the shit of the parasites on that shit. But here’s ar white flag, all the fuckin same. Look at us, we’re waving it. With just one fucking arm.
