Evelyn left Muriel with the nurse – aka Mrs Cowasjee, the manager's wife - and walked into the garden. It was already hot. The mali, holding a dribbling hosepipe, squatted in the flowerbed. Round his waist was tucked a chequered dhoti. She had once owned a summer frock made out of the same material - D H Evans, if she remembered correctly. Up in the tree, rooks cawed. A man stood at the gate. "Memsahib!" he called out, hoarse with his secret. His bicycle was laden with bundles. "Memsahib! You want t-shirts? Slacks? Good price, madam!"
Evelyn feebly raised her hand in a gesture of both greeting and dismissal. Maybe she should buy a t-shirt and look like Madge; she already felt sapped of energy, however, and it was only ten o'clock in the morning. The heat exhausted her. The need out there, the vastness of it, drained her. In a moment of rebellion, staggering in its boldness, she had decided to embark on a new life. Was it a sign of despair, a recognition of how little she was needed? Brick by brick she had created a family. Like the walls of this garden they should have shielded her from the terrors of the world outside. One by one, however, the bricks had been removed and she was left alone in a foreign country. 
Up in the nameless tree the rooks bounced from branch to branch. If only she could believe what Beverley had said: that those birds had once been people, that this was not the end. Deep in her heart she had never believed the Christian thing, she had realized this in recent years. Nobody calling himself God could let what happened happen. Maybe Indians, to whom tragedies happened on an incomprehensible scale, had the sense to hold nobody responsible. For lives so desperate, so pitifully short, there must be a comfort in knowing that theirs was just a journey through the animal kingdom. No wonder they looked so resigned - serene, even. Maybe the limbless beggar, to whom she had timidly given a rupee the day before, believed that next time round he would return as a rook, hopping across the lawn on strong, springy legs.
Evelyn stood on the path, trying to work this out. She should have listened to her daughter, who had had gone on about her holy man. The trouble was, Theresa was inclined to lecture and Evelyn had drifted off. She also had an uncomfortable feeling that Theresa was seeking some emotional nourishment she had been denied at home. Evelyn herself had never really spoken to an Indian. Until recently the only ones she had met had been behind the counter at the post office or punching her ticket on the train to London. They were in a position of servitude. Once, the British had ruled this place. The Raj, however, like her certainties, had long since crumbled. Now it was she herself who was the ethnic minority. In this sprawling city there were millions of Indians and she hadn't the faintest idea what went on in their heads. Maybe they possessed a spiritual belief that made sense of the senseless; that was the only way they managed to survive. It was all most confusing.
Hugh's laugh boomed in her head. Brace up, old girl! How she envied the Ainslies, striding off hand-in-hand to explore the unknown! Evelyn had to make her own journey, with no companions except these near-strangers who sat on the veranda reading paperback novels with a magnifying glass. Some of them were already dozing. Creepers snaked up the wooden pillars of the hotel and smothered the roof tiles. It was like a scene from the Sleeping Beauty. The old building was crumbling; soon nature would engulf it and in years to come there would just be a pile of rubble. No, even this would have been scavenged; nothing lay around for long. It would be as if she and her fellow residents had never existed at all.
Norman, too, was asleep. He had returned from his mission; the newspaper lay on his lap. Evelyn crossed the lawn. Outside in the street, cars hooted. From the servants' quarters came the sound of a radio - warbling Indian singing, eerily high.
Evelyn approached Norman. A fly, attracted by a ketchup stain on his jacket, buzzed around his chest. His tie, scattered with ash, was askew.
Evelyn stepped nearer. Norman's purple hands lay on the “Daily Telegraph”. It was open at the Deaths page. He seemed to have underlined some of the words. Evelyn put on her spectacles. “Peacefully”, she read, “after a long illness.”
Evelyn looked around; nobody was watching. With great care, she eased the paper out, from under the weight of his hands. He stirred; a phlegmy sound came from his throat. She waited. 
He flung his head back and started snoring - loud snores that made his body shudder. She knew the sound only too well from her nights next door. His mouth hung open, revealing the plastic gums of his dentures.
Evelyn's heart beat faster; this was the most lawless thing she had done for years. Grabbing the newspaper, she hurried away. It was not until she reached the lobby that she burst into giggles.
* * *
It wasn't what she had expected, the nurse's room. Muriel had imagined a clinical place smelling of Dettol. Hospitals, for obvious reasons, filled her with dread.
This wasn't like that at all. Mrs Cowasjee lived with her husband in the annex, a brick extension built onto the side of the hotel. She ushered Muriel into a room that smelt like church. A joss-stick smoked in a brass holder. The shelving unit was filled with ornaments - china animals, plastic flowers - and a booklet lay on the table: “Foresight Horoscopes: Only God Knows Better”. A fountain tinkled into a shell-shaped bowl, complete with cherub. In a funny way it reminded Muriel of her own front room. There was even a shrine, like her husband's to the Virgin Mary. This one, illuminated by fairy lights, held a figurine of a fat little man with an elephant's head. A candle flickered in front of it.
"What's that?" she asked.
"He is Ganesh, the god of prosperity and success," said Mrs Cowasjee.
"Why's he got an elephant's head?"
She shrugged. "He's the son of Shiva and Parvati."
That seemed to explain it. "Do you say prayers to him?"
Mrs Cowasjee nodded. Muriel stifled a giggle. Fancy worshipping an elephant! 
"We have many gods,” said Mrs Cowasjee. "Millions. In my country anything can be holy. You see, God is everywhere."
Mrs Coowasjee was a handsome, middle-aged woman wrapped in a mauve sari. No nurse's uniform, nothing like that. Muriel had thought that all Indians were the same colour but Mrs Cowasjee's skin was paler than her husband's, like milkier coffee. There was a smudge of crimson in the parting of her hair. It reminded Muriel of her own wounds and the chain of events that had brought her across the world to this exotic boudoir.
"I got a pain in my stomach," she said. "And diarrohea."
"Sit down, dear, and take off your shoes.”
Muriel, mildly surprised, sat down in an armchair. She peeled off her stockings and removed her shoes.
Mrs Cowasjee seated herself opposite. She stared at Muriel's feet. There was a silence.
"Hai Raba!” she said. "Your feet are in a terrible state."
Muriel nodded. “It's the bunions.”
Mrs Cowasjee drew her chair nearer. She lifted up Muriel's right foot and rested it on her lap.
"See the bones here, and here? They are quite deformed. And the corns here, where your shoes have rubbed. Really, Mrs Donnelly, you should have looked after yourself better. Have you never visited a chiropodist?"
Muriel shook her head.
"If you take care of your feet," said Mrs Cowasjee, "they will take care of you."
"Used to be a cleaner," said Muriel. "On my feet all day. That's when I got my varicose veins. My husband had beautiful feet. So did his brother Lenny. That's because they were so poor, see, they didn't have any shoes when they were little."
"Indians have beautiful feet for the same reason," said Mrs Cowasjee.
Her own peeped out from her hem - slim and brown, in bewelled flip-flops. Next to them Muriel's feet looked swollen and blotchy - deformed, even. Muriel had never compared herself to an Indian before. 
"I too come from a poor family," said Mrs Cowasjee. "When I met my husband, it was love at first sight." She sighed. In the corner, the fountain tinkled. "My family are Hindus, and not high caste. The law forbids the caste system but of course it still continues as strongly as ever.”
"Same where I come from," said Muriel, with feeling. “Same in this place. I'm a fish out of bloody water.”
"His family, it is very prosperous. They're Parsees. They are like your Jews, they do very well for themselves." Mrs Cowasjee sighed again. In the lava lamp, the orange blob rose to the top. "I was looking forward to a peaceful old age but it hasn't happened like that."
"Not with me either," said Muriel. She had had to organize this all by herself, with the help of her neighbour Winnie. Tickets, packing, the renting of her flat to Winnie's niece, who had promised to move out if Muriel decided to return to Peckham. Not a word from her son, her light-of-her-life, her Keith. But she had done it. After all, she had her own pressing need for coming here.
Muriel's foot, like a lump of uncooked meat, still lay in Mrs Cowasjee's lap. It looked as if it belonged to somebody else. They both gazed at it.
"Oh yes, it was a love match," said Mrs Cowasjee. "Then."
In the lamp, the blob slowly descended. Watching it made Muriel's stomach sink.
"You see, my husband is a weak man," said Mrs Cowasjee.
"So was mine. People took advantage of him. Then he lost his job and sat about all day watching telly." Muriel stopped. She shouldn't be saying all this to a foreigner. “About my tummy – “
"The main problem, in this country, is burning soles."
Souls? "What? In the bonfires?" Muriel knew that widows flung themselves on their husband's funeral pyres. She had seen it on the TV. It seemed a daft idea to her.
"No, dear, I'm talking about feet,” said Mrs Cowasjee. “In the temples you have to take off your shoes, as a mark of respect, and the floor can be very hot. It damages the skin."
Muriel gazed at the shelf of knick-knacks. Amongst them she spotted a Charles and Diana mug. It was the same one that she had, with the wedding photograph printed on it. In my country, anything can he holy. Prince Charles...an elephant...She thought of her cat, buried in her son's garden in Chigwell. Maybe she could put a candle in front of Lenny's photograph, like Mrs Cowasjee had done. For a moment, Muriel felt at home. Just now it was that woman at breakfast, Evelyn with her posh voice, who seemed the foreigner.
"Shall I scrape those corns now?" asked Mrs Cowasjee.
"What about my tummy?"
Mrs Cowasjee lowered Muriel's foot to the floor. "Drink plenty of plain tea," she said abruptly. "With cardamon and ginger. I'll tell the cook."
"That all?"
"If it continues I'll call for Doctor Rama."
Mrs Cowasjee had lost interest. She seemed to be a moody woman; during breakfast Muriel had heard her shouting at her husband.
Muriel pulled on her hold-ups, easing them over the barely-healed wound on her shin. Mrs Cowasjee seemed not to have noticed it. A funny sort of nurse, Muriel thought. And how could she do her job properly when she was swaddled in chiffon?
Muriel eased her feet into her shoes. They were beige courts, made of imitation leather that made her feet sweat. They were also too tight; her bunions throbbed.
From his niche, the elephant god watched her labours. He had a pot belly and a startled expression, as if somebody had goosed him. Maybe I should ask him to make my tummy better, thought Muriel. She felt a giggle rising, like a burp.
Mrs Cowasjee followed her gaze. "We pray to Ganesh before an important undertaking. We are needing his blessing, you see, to remove any obstacles in our path."
"You really believe all that?"
"If it happens, it happens." She shrugged. "It's our karma."
Well, if it makes you feel calmer good luck to you, thought Muriel. She got to her feet, steadying herself on the arm of the chair. Taking a last look at the elephant, she thought: I know what I would pray for. 
I would pray to find my son.

