Kenji Yamada stifled a yawn as the crowded train rattled into Tokyo station. Commuters gathered on the platform pushed forward expectantly. It was Monday, early morning rush hour on the Yamanote line. He had been unable to reach the doors of the last train, but now there was only one other person standing in front of him and he was determined not to let this one leave without him. By stepping on backwards, wriggling and squirming, he was able to force his way into the carriage where he watched – helplessly – as the doors snapped shut, trapping his box-like briefcase between their thick rubber lips. Even had he been able to move, tugging and pulling would have been pointless. The case would not budge. He simply had to wait until one of the three grey-suited platform attendants prised the lips apart and knocked it free, allowing the doors to close unimpeded. 

A shout echoed along the length of the platform. An attendant waved a white baton in the air, high above his head. The train lurched off, moving uncertainly at first and then with increasing speed, bowling fiercely along the tracks. As the next station approached, the train slowed and juddered to a stop, losing Kenji his grip on the clammy chrome bar overhead. With nothing else for support, he was forced to lean heavily first to the right and then to the left before returning to a near upright position. On one side an elderly gentleman smelling of stale whisky and fresh tobacco smoke acted as a buffer; on the other a young woman wearing a perfume with an overwhelming odour of roses that did little to mask the smell of perspiring bodies and unwashed hair permeating the carriage. Kenji's nose twitched and he sneezed, managing to keep his lips firmly pressed together. 

When the old man got off, Kenji was able to squeeze himself into the corner next to the door, where he extracted a copy of the Mainichi News from the pocket of his raincoat. Leiko Kobayashi's review of the best and worst television programmes from the preceding week was printed every Monday and he liked to be among the first in the office to read it. But today Kenji got no further than the front page. Nissan, he read with dismay, was shedding over a thousand workers from its manufacturing plant in Kanagawa. Or rather it had done so already. Several weeks ago, in fact, but it had managed to keep the news quiet until an employee – disgruntled by the provisions that had been made for him and his colleagues – went to the newspaper. There was a large black and white picture of the man standing outside the manufacturing plant: alone and waving his fist in the air. 

Kenji emitted a low whistle. He had always regarded the motor industry as untouchable – the one thing that would stand firm when everything else was falling down around it. He was not alone in this. Everybody thought so. If it wasn't the case, what hope was there for the rest of them? Things, he realised with a shudder, were starting to look very bad. 

"Shibuya, the next station is Shibuya,' an automated female voice trilled over the public address system. 

He pocketed the newspaper and left the carriage, stumbling slightly but quickly regaining his balance as he joined the long line of people who shuffled slowly towards the exit. From here it was a short walk through lightly drizzling rain to the office block in which he worked. There were too many people around to put up an umbrella, so he let the rain fall on to his head, where it rolled off his well-oiled hair and splattered his glasses. The building in which he worked came into view through the blurred lenses. It was a modest eleven storeys: three of which were occupied by NBC and included the programme research unit of the light entertainment division where Kenji worked. 

He took the lift to the seventh floor and walked out into a windowless passageway lit overhead by harsh fluorescent strip lights and covered underfoot by a coarse, rust-coloured carpet. Extensively labelled cardboard boxes awaiting collection by the mail room were stacked along the length of one wall, all the way to a double set of opaque glass doors. He keyed a four-digit security code into a pad on the door handle and there was a cheerful beep. The code was changed on the first Monday of every month. Today. And it had been clearly written on a small piece of paper sellotaped to the glass with a note that read, "Don't tell anyone, but here's the new code.' 

He pushed against the door, into the office. 

It was open-plan and divided into two halves by a wide aisle. Within each half, rows of desks arranged face-to-face ran at right angles to the main walkway. Kenji's desk – like those of his colleagues – was equipped with a telephone and a personal computer. A two-drawer filing cabinet was slotted into the space beneath the desk leaving just enough room for his legs alongside. Having long ago exhausted the capacity of these drawers, he had taken to piling paper files on his desk and the floor, building a low wall on either side of his chair with boxes of videotapes on which were recorded pilot episodes and the entire series of shows. The desks were arranged in order of rank and only the head of programme research, Shin Ishida, who sat at the far end of the row directly beneath the window, enjoyed an uncluttered working environment. With his position came additional storage space in a vault in the basement. Not to mention other privileges such as subsidised membership at the Maruhan Golf Club just outside Tokyo and use of the corporation's condominium in Hawaii. 

"Good morning,' Kenji greeted several of his colleagues who were sitting at their desks, already at work. They looked up, smiled, returned his greeting but nothing more. There was a time when one of them might have asked him about his weekend and he would have enquired after their son's baseball match or wife's birthday dinner. But there had been little of that lately. In fact, nobody said very much of anything to him anymore. Not even to remark upon the weather. 

Having dropped his briefcase on his desk, Kenji hung up his coat and went to the nearest drinks dispenser. He selected a cup of strong black coffee sweetened with sugar that never managed to dissolve but always sat in a clump of translucent granules at the bottom of the cup. Back at his desk, he turned on his computer and checked his watch. It was 8 a.m. A full hour before the Monday morning team meeting. He got down to work. 

High-pitched music began to wail from the extensive system of loudspeakers distributed throughout the office. Jumping up, Kenji joined the rest of his colleagues trooping towards meeting room one: a small, cramped, dusty space with no windows and an airconditioning unit that either whistled when it worked, or groaned and shuddered when it didn't. The walls were painted a shade somewhere between yellow and brown, which used to cause him to joke with his colleagues that an entire family of smokers was locked in the room overnight after they had all gone home. "Ah, the Watanabes must have been back again,' he would say at the start of a meeting. Or, "The Watanabes must have been busy last night.' 

Comments such as these had never failed to raise a laugh. Once. These days he just kept quiet. It seemed like the safest option. There was nothing definite that Kenji could put his finger on, but he felt certain that his colleagues' behaviour towards him had cooled considerably over the last few months. Certainly they were polite, but he was no longer invited out for drinks after work. Occasionally he caught a look in someone's eyes and it wasn't as friendly as it had once been. Several times colleagues had stopped talking if he suddenly happened upon them. There was only one possible explanation. They blamed him. 

Taking a hard plastic seat in the corner of the meeting room away from the others, he pretended to read the contents of his notebook as he waited for Shin Ishida to arrive. Which he did, minutes later, pushing confidently into the room, his assistant, Akira Eto, scurrying in his wake. 

"Good morning.' Ishida straightened his claret tie and smoothed down the front of his dark blue suit as he greeted the team. He had a small and unexpectedly stocky physique. Even Kenji's wife had commented when, last year, the team and their families had visited an onsen, and Ishida had stripped down to reveal large muscles in his calves and powerfully defined forearms. She had looked accusingly at her husband's puny body beside her, as if to say, "Why can't you be more like that?' But it wasn't just Ishida's impeccable dress sense, strong physical appearance or position within the corporation that commanded the team's respect. It was the straight way he held his back, the grace of his movements and the calm, dignified manner in which he spoke to everyone, no matter what their rank or the situation. He was in his late fifties. His otherwise jet black hair was showing signs of grey around the temples, and he required an enormous pair of black-framed prescription glasses. When not talking, he would methodically clean the thick lenses with a white cloth covered with polka dots. Kenji wondered if he repeatedly laundered the same one or kept a large supply at home. 

Ishida cleared his throat and began by making a number of announcements about work already in progress and on the horizon. "I am particularly excited,' he said softly so that everybody leant forward in their seats, "by a piece of work currently being undertaken by our Innovation Managers.' 

Kenji turned to where a group of three men was sitting in the opposite corner of the room. None of them wore ties. All had their shirts open at the neck and tended to favour smart casual trousers rather than suits. 

"This involves a group of extremely creative viewers who will be helping us to identify novel game show formats. We have recruited an author, a film maker, a graphic designer. And I am told that their ideas are different. Very, very different. But – ' He momentarily bowed his head. " – these are still tough times and the only way in which the corporation will get through them is if we all pull together and persevere.' 

Thinking about the Nissan factory in Kanagawa and that solitary, angry worker, Kenji nodded his head in agreement as a low murmur of consent passed around the room. 

"We must work hard,' Ishida concluded. "But we must also get a good night's sleep.' 

When he sat down, it was amidst appreciative laughter and polite but nonetheless heartfelt clapping. He immediately began to clean his glasses as Eto came forward. A gaunt, bird-like man with a small, egg-shaped head and thin hair, Eto took loud, deep intakes of air whenever he spoke such that clients often feared he was about to suffocate. In his hand was a well-thumbed book: its spine bent and the pages that had fallen out secured back in place with strips of sellotape that bore prints of his long, thin fingers. He opened it, having already selected a proverb that Ishida deemed suitable for the current climate, and began to read. "Today's proverb is – ' He inhaled deeply. " – one kind word can warm three winters. So act considerately towards your colleagues and support them in their work.' The book snapped shut and he moved back as if surprised by the sound. This was usually the cue that signalled they should all stand and go back to their desks, but only after they had shouted, in unison, Nippon Broadcasting Corporation's motto – "Working hard to fulfil our promise to every viewer everywhere.' 

Before the occupants of the room could leave, Ishida was on his feet again, coughing politely. "Excuse me, please. Before you go, I believe that we have a birthday to celebrate today. Something of a milestone if I understand correctly.' 

Kenji hung his head. 

"So if everybody could join me in wishing Yamada-san a very happy fortieth birthday.' 

He blushed. A hot crimson glow spread across his face as colleagues turned to pat him on the shoulder or reached across chairs to offer him their good wishes. As this was taking place, the door to meeting room one opened and Ishida's secretary rolled in a trolley laden with fresh pots of coffee, pristine white cups and a large selection of cream cakes. 

"Please help yourself.' Ishida waved an arm benevolently in the direction of the trolley and then left the room. 
