SURVIVED BY A SON

Papua New Guinea, Boxing Day 

—Keep the line straight, Marley, said the battle-hardened officer, warmly but firmly. Brian Marley stopped blubbering, helplessly obedient even now. He blinked hard several times, shivered convulsively throughout his soaked and emaciated body, then wiped a forearm and backhand over his face, smearing a mixture of blood, sweat, tears, snot, leeches, mosquitoes and various other small, repulsive, salt-licking, blood-sucking, flesh-eating arthropods (many of them uncatalogued and endangered) a little more thinly across his nose and mouth. —That's more like it. Right then. Trousers up and let's show the buggers how an Englishman dies. 

There were in fact no Englishmen apart from himself, present or correct, no officer in command of anything and no one to show. Marley was alone in the hellish forest, talking to himself, slumped in a sagging heap, trousers round his knees, forty-three and about to die. 

—Can't, he gasped. 

—Now see here, laddie, you still tried to get your trousers down and if a man can still be bothered trying to get his trousers down, even if he doesn't quite make it in time, then there's still some fight left in him. So no excuses. 

—But I won, I won the show, I've got two million pounds waiting in England, this is all so . . . bloody unfair, he whimpered again, as if he might yet appeal to something other than the uncaring jungle. The sheer injustice of it all made the helpless tears start again in his eyes. 

—Unfair, man? Who ever said it was fair? We're here because we're here. Does it mention fair in the Good Book or the King's Regulations? Does it buggery. Come on now, Marley, trousers back on, pick up that damn camera and we'll say no more about it. 

Marley pawed feebly at his trousers and looked blearily around to locate the bright yellow, waterproofed, shockresistant, digital satellite camera which had been his constant companion for the past six weeks and which now lay pathetically in the stinking undergrowth. A yard away. Too far to reach. Even if he could hold it steady. Too late for that now. 

He groaned softly and heard the dead, echoless sound of his own lonely voice, damped by the soggy, rampant greenery as effectively as if he were sitting in a soundproofed studio. His head rolled backwards of its own accord, smacking itself hard against the rock wall. He hardly noticed the blow. Yet another nameless insectoid horror, far too big and with far too many legs, wandered across his face, but he only even bothered to brush it idly away when one of its feelers actually began to probe his nostril. He scarcely cared. Death seemed a welcome friend, a mere cessation of horror, a quiet slide into a warm, dark river . . . 

—So you're going to die? What do you want, man, the ruddy VC? Every mincing little pox doctor's clerk and every arse-licking shopwalker is going to die. You're one of the lucky ones, for God's sake. How many of the poor sods on Hood got the chance to know they were sorting things out for their son and heir? And to leave him a message? Eh? 

—Yes, yes, yes, OK, mumbled Marley to his invincible other self. Anything to shut the mad bastard up. 

He waited for the next shivering lurch in his body and, when it came, allowed himself to slump sideways, using the small momentum he thus gained to fling out his right arm, so that he could hook two fingers into the grab handle of the camera. He caught hold, dragged it in and cradled it to his panting chest. Then he began the long, seemingly impossible process of hauling himself up on to his feet. 

—That's the stuff, Marley! 

Marley did not know why he had started talking like this to himself, since he had never been anywhere near the Army. But he remembered when the voice had begun. It had suddenly come to him, out of nowhere, at the end of the first week, after his seventh unbearable, sleepless vigil in the forest (the days were horrendous, but the nights beggared belief), when he had been on the verge of quickly giving up on the chance of winning Brit Pluck, Green Hell, Two Million. That morning, the helicopters had come down to offer the six contestants for the first time the (of course) dramatically televised and (naturally) well-strung-out choice: were they really going to stay for another week in the soaking, sauna-hot, pitch-black forest, amid the unbelievable racket of a trillion oversized insects flying, hunting, mating, killing and eating each other (many of them evidently also partial to large, hairless mammals)? Or would they choose instead to fly straight off home, to warmth, sanity, medical care and the consolation of many tabloid interviews? Marley had hesitated, pen in sweating hand, as he looked at the legal waiver which they all had to re-sign each week, before the helicopters left them here again. Live in front of the cameras, he had almost cracked. What chance did he have of winning? Why not give up now, before too much vileness had been endured for nothing? Why pile new, public shame and failure on to the old, private mess of his life? 

—Well? Watcha say, Bri'? You comin' home? Fancy a nice warm bath and a nice cold beer wiv me an' the girls, do ya? Decision time, Bri' . . . Home for Christmas or Hell in the jungle? 

Marley remembered the impossibly flawless white teeth in the wide-screen smile of the inane presenter as she had posed the question. He remembered her breasts shoving out against her ludicrous pink T-shirt (NFR it had said, in spangly letters distorted by the uplifted, surgically enhanced flesh beneath; he had wondered what the hell that meant). He had almost given in. But at that moment of decision, the insane, military voice had come into his head. 

—She's not so dumb, Marley. Trying to make you crack. Get those eyes off her tits. Think of your boy, man. What's another week? 

Before Marley had been able to decide, the choice had been made for him. One of the other competitors, a sporty little hairdresser from Edinburgh, had run out from the undergrowth towards the helicopters, screaming and weeping, almost beheading herself with the still-spinning rotor blades as she flung herself into the arms of the smiling TV presenters, still gagging convulsively and unstoppably from having awoken to find a cockroach the size of a mouse clambering about inside her mouth. Talk about a fab start to the series! And so, since only one of the six competitors could leave on each flight, the first to fight his or her way on board being given the place, Marley had been forced to stay on anyway. 

From that evening onwards, he had instinctively allowed this bizarre voice inside his head free rein. At first, he had merely used it when talking to himself, but soon he had found himself using it when speaking to the camera which was continually transmitting the horrors of his daily life here back to the 24/7 viewers of Brit Pluck, Green Hell, Two Million. He knew that he was clinically mad, talking to himself like this. He was perfectly well aware that it was nuts. But the Voice had kept him going that night, when he had almost wept for home, and it had continued to do so while all around him were gradually but utterly losing their minds and the contents of their bowels. By the time of the second chance to leave, a week later, he had fallen utterly under its spell. 

One by one, his rivals had given up, their greed for money and their lust for that modern sainthood, media fame, finally giving way under the unspeakable, crawling, winged nightmare of the rainforest. Each had at last taken the helicopter out in a state of total mental and physical collapse (great telly!). Brian Marley, however, obeying this ruthless yet avuncular parade-ground voice, had even kept up his shaving. It seemed that in pre-emptively embracing lunacy rather than trying to stay sane in a place utterly hostile to human life, let alone civilisation, he had adopted the right tactics. 

A fortnight in, failed contestant number two, a handsome young accountant from Bromley whose hobby was skydiving and who had appeared to lack any emotional existence whatever, was forcibly airlifted out because he had become so preoccupied with attempting to dig out with his fingernails the subcutaneous worms infesting his legs that he could not even remember his own name for the cameras, let alone re-sign the legal waiver. That had made good viewing, as had the psychic trauma displayed the following week, when the third would-be double millionaire, a big-boned Lexus saleswoman from Belfast who had been brought up in tinker caravans and had seemed unbreakable, was found eventually, by tracing her radio-location beacon, sitting up a tree doing a very convincing imitation of a bottle-blonde orang-utan. Only his radio-location beacon had saved the fourth member as well: a chatty DIY expert from Yorkshire, he was found almost lifeless in a swamp, one arm lost to crocodiles and incurably insane. 

The Great British Public was finding this theatre of dissolution and collapse as irresistible as Victorian clerks had found tales of Empire: Channel Seven's viewing figures were breaking records which had stood since the days when people had only had two stations to choose from. 

After five endless weeks on nothing but salt, bread, water and vitamin C tablets, Marley's body weight had come down to approximately eight stone and the fight for the two million pounds had come down to precisely himself and a bald, divorced, middle-aged schoolteacher from Swansea whom Marley had long realised was his chief danger because what on earth did a bald, divorced, middle-aged schoolteacher from Swansea have to lose? Any sane defence department would recruit entire battalions of bald, divorced, middle-aged schoolteachers as semi-suicidal shock-troops. Throughout the sixth week, Marley and this Welsh schoolteacher had sat or staggered about in the jungle, observing each other's decay warily from as far away as possible, each carrying out in private his by now almost hallucinatory chats with the spellbound audience back home. The stern Voice had kept on giving its military orders and at last, at last, it was the schoolteacher who had cracked. 

How clearly Marley could remember the moment, the glorious moment, when the choppers had come down once again and the schoolteacher had crawled towards the landing place, blubbering gratefully, already clearly doomed to lose his left leg to gangrene. Marley had stood and watched quite happily, assuming an At Ease position, saluting the two helicopters in a nonchalant manner. He knew the rules. He was now the sole remaining competitor, he would sign a final legal waiver, they would cart off the destroyed schoolteacher from Swansea and leave him, Brian Marley, there for one further week, a whole week utterly alone, just himself, his mad instructions to himself, the forest, his camera, water (no bread or vitamins for this last week) and many spare batteries. And the two million pounds to hold out for. They would also leave him an emergency beacon with which he could summon them at any time, a permanent temptation to forfeit the prize money. But Marley had known he would not use it. He had watched the helicopters hover slowly down towards him. He had shaken his head amusedly at the frantic waving of the teacher from Swansea, who, having yielded at last to pain and despair, now seemed possessed by the terrifying idea that his rescuers might now turn mockingly around, fly off and leave him here to die after all. 

—I want my pension, see, Marley, my pension, I've paid into it for so long, so bloody long, all those years with all those little bastards, oh yes, it's a very, very good scheme really, nothing in the private sector can compare, I'll even be able to eat out once a week or so, you know, so long as I keep saving the newspaper tokens. You go ahead and die here if you want, Marley, I'm getting that bloody pension, I am, and I'm going home for Christmas! 

—Absolutely, Marley had nodded, smartly. 
