The fact that most
of the major bones – legs, arms, pelvis, shoulder
blades, ribs – were intact argued against a fall from the
cliff, and DNA had been extracted from bone marrow
ready for matching against printouts in the national
data bank. In terms of age, on the evidence of bone
analysis the pathologist was suggesting a white male of
between thirty and forty. With a head on his body she
thought he'd measure an inch or so under six feet.
The probable elimination of a cliff fall had aroused
Faraday's interest. It was by no means unusual for
suicides to plunge naked to their deaths – he knew a
couple of instances when a pile of neatly folded clothes
had marked the deceased's final point of departure –
but four months was a long time for an individual to
go AWOL, and the fact that Webster's inquiries at the
national Missing Persons' Register had so far drawn a
blank simply deepened the mystery. No one had done
a runner from local psychiatric institutions. No one
had been reported overboard from either UK commercial
or naval shipping. And local media appeals
through TV, radio and the island press had failed to
attach a name to the headless corpse.
Darren Webster, naturally keen to break the case,
had begun to explore more exotic lines of inquiry, but
these too had so far come to nothing. The InternationalMaritime
Organisation had promised to circulate
details amongst commercial operators and fishermen
using the shipping lanes on the other side of the
English Channel but a precautionary call to an expert
in tidal currents at Southampton University's Oceanography
Centre suggested that this would be a very
long shot indeed. The designated shipping lanes were
way south of the Isle of Wight and any corpse floating
around in this area was liable, he said, to end up on a
French beach. Likewise, Webster's brief interest in
burials at sea had come to nothing. The area reserved
for these ceremonial farewells lay to the west of the
Needles, but the coastguard thought it highly unlikely
that a body would escape the weighted, tightly stitched
canvas shroud, somehow lose its head and finally wash
ashore at the foot of Tennyson Down. No, there had
to be another explanation.
Listening to Faraday's account of Webster's inquiries,
Willard had made the sensible point that these
were early days. Although the mystery corpse had
obviously been dead for a while, it might yet be weeks
before Webster's patient phone calls triggered a memory
or two. In the meantime Willard was more
interested in why Webster had made such an impression
on Faraday.
"Do you see yourself in him, Joe?' he'd enquired,
reaching for his jacket and his car keys, "Young island
boy, keen to make a name for himself?'
At the time Faraday had dismissed the comment as a
joke, the kind of parting shot Willard favoured on a
quiet Friday afternoon, but now – stretched full-length
on his sofa in the Bargemaster's House – he wasn't so
sure. It hadn't taken much to bridge the gap back to
his days in Freshwater Bay, and that afternoon,
standing in the fitful sunshine at the foot of the
Tennyson Memorial, he remembered only too well the
strange feeling of being banged up on an island he'd
only ever seen from the beach of his native Bournemouth.
At first, after eighteen months in the USA, the place
had felt impossibly small. With a pregnant American
wife and absolutely no money Faraday had managed
to find himself a driving job, delivering fancy goods
and other summer knick-knacks to a long list of cafe´s,
caravan camps, souvenir shops and amusement parks.
His father, tormented by the prospect of another
stroke and bewildered by the abruptness of his son's
marriage, had made his new daughter-in-law far from
welcome, but his mum – an ex-theatre nurse with a
hard, practical intelligence – had taken to Janna at
once.
With Faraday careering around West Wight at the
wheel of an ancient Bedford van, the two women had
spent a great deal of time together. Janna helped out
with the Freshwater B. and B., full to bursting in high
summer, and it was at Alice Faraday's insistence that
Janna had accepted payment for her labours. With two
incomes, plus a temporary loan, Faraday and Janna
had managed to scrape enough together for a deposit
plus three months' rent on a draughty bungalow half a
mile from the parental home. They'd moved in on a
blustery still-warm day in late September, Janna
splashing out on a supper of clam chowder and
Maryland crab cakes as a thank you for two months'
precious rent-free hospitality, and Faraday remembered
their first night together under the new roof, the
wind howling through the loose tiles, the itchy scrabble
of field mice behind the wainscoting, the warm
bulk of Janna beside him beneath the borrowed
blankets. At the time this new life of theirs had seemed
close to perfect but several days later, in a deeply
private conversation, Faraday's mother – ever observant
– warned him that all was not well. Your wife is
sick, she told him. You need to get her to a doctor.
Faraday lay back, his eyes closed, letting the music
flood over him. Gustav Mahler was a recent discovery,
a supplement to the Berlioz CDs that had underscored
the last couple of years, and the third symphony – with
its haunting brass motifs – was eerily apt for moments
like these. Older now, and wiser, he realised why
Janna had shielded him from the knowledge of her
previous tussle with breast cancer. She was in remission.
The drugs had worked. And if three gruelling
months of chemo owed her anything then it was surely
the chance to start again: a new relationship, a new
country even, absolutely nothing shadowed by the
possibility of another round or two with the Grim
Reaper. Her pregnancy had come as a surprise and it
was a testament to the strength of his feelings that
Faraday had begun at once to plan for the years ahead.
Hence his decision to take Janna home. And hence –
after a summer at the wheel – his abrupt appearance at
Freshwater's tiny police station. I'd like to be a cop,
he'd told the startled desk sergeant. How do I go about
applying?
In the event it had been harder than Faraday had
ever expected. Not because he hadn't got the brains or
aptitude for the job but because the selection interviews,
and everything that followed, had collided with
a catastrophe so enormous it had taken him years to
properly come to grips with.
The cancer had returned, more aggressive than ever.
Within months of J-J's birth Janna was dead. Faraday
had nursed her till the end, turning a deaf ear to offers
of a bed in the old hospital over in Newport. His
mother, bless her, had helped, first day by day, then
hour by hour, respecting every moment of their time
together. By the time Janna slipped away, a cold bright
morning in December with two electric fires on the go,
Faraday was helpless with grief. Only John-Junior kept
him going, with his gummy eyes and incessant hunger,
a debt Faraday spent the next twenty years trying to
repay.
Was this why he'd spent an hour or two listening to
an ambitious young island detective hungry for battle
honours? Was this why he'd passed the message back
to Willard, salted the facts with a thought or two of his
own, tried to pave the way for a possible referral to
Major Crimes? Had this been, in one of the ironies
that increasingly seemed to shape Faraday's life, the
real thrust of his little expedition over the water? To
knock one job on the head and then – thanks to
Webster – draw a steadier bead on another? He didn't
know, and just now he didn't much care. He plumped
the cushion behind his head and settled back. If the
sleeve notes were right and Mahler really was in the
business of challenge and resolution, then the next
couple of movements would be the test.
An hour later Faraday awoke. Apart from the
chuckle of a lone turnstone out on the harbour, he
could hear nothing. Then it came again, the beep-beep
from his laptop that signalled a priority incoming
message. He struggled to his feet and climbed the stairs
to his study. In the spill of light from the hall he could
see the email highlighted at the top of the day's
missives. He settled at the desk, reached for the
touchpad. Eadie, he thought.
She'd made it to Melbourne, taking the morning
seaplane shuttle from Vanuatu to Sydney and then a
domestic flight out of Kingston Smith to Tullamarine.
Her description of the take-off – the colours, the spray,
the sudden feeling of release as the little floatplane
hopped into the air – occupied two paragraphs. The
pilot's father, she wrote, had once been a pupil of her
dad's and so he'd spoiled her with a twirl or two
around the island before setting course for Oz. The
sight of her family house from the air had been weird –
so fucking small – and she'd found herself laughing at
how close the beach had once seemed to the gate in the
white picket fence that marked the front of the
property. As a kid the walk to the ocean had been a big
deal, a major expedition. Yet thirty years away had
shrunk it to a mere spit. Was this what growing up did
to a girl? Could a good lawyer make a case and get her
fantasies back?
Faraday smiled at the traffic jam of questions. Eadie
Sykes tore into life with a zest and an appetite that had
always left him slightly awed. Professionally, he was
sure that it had helped her no end when it came to
putting other people's stories onto film. She blew into
their lives with the force of a gale and her very
candour, her cheerful bluntness, always seemed to do
the trick. Even Faraday himself had opened up, and
here on the laptop was yet more proof that she could
still reach out and touch him.
At the same time, when he was honest with himself,
he knew that he didn't really miss her. They'd had
great moments together, probably still would, but
every conversation – even at this distance – was proof
that Eadie Sykes would always go her own way. She'd
flown thirteen thousand miles to explore the landscapes
of her youth. She'd be staying on the other side
of the world until her money ran out. That might be a
couple of months, might be longer. Whatever happened,
she'd keep him posted.
Faraday scanned the rest of the email, then sat back
in his chair, gazing out at the blackness of the harbour.
The more he thought about it, the more he realised
that twenty-six years in the job had changed him. For
better or worse he was in the evidence business and
deep down he'd finally admitted to himself that she
didn't need him. Not now. And very probably not
ever.
He reached for the touchpad a moment, thought
about tapping out a reply, then changed his mind and
swivelled the chair away. He could see the shape of his
upper body in the window, silhouetted against the
oblong of light through the open door. His fingers
found the thick growth of greying stubble on his chin
and he wondered again whether it was really such a
good idea to be growing a beard. Might this be some
kind of defiant proclamation about his age? Or was it
simply another way of curtaining himself off from a
world to which he increasingly appeared to have only
visiting rights?
He began to swivel the chair again, describing a
slow, lazy half circle before stilling the motion with his
foot. Something had been bothering him about Webster's
headless corpse, and he suddenly realised what it
was.

