 
This is a guy heading for
sainthood. The anti-litter people would love him.'
'Any other keyholders? Apart from Mallinder and the cleaner?'
'Only the agency. We're checking on keys.'
'OK.'
Barrie was scribbling himself a note. Faraday watched the bony,
yellowing fingers racing across the notepad. At length the Detective
Superintendent looked up. Less than an hour earlier, he'd chaired
the first Operation Billhook squad meet. The size of the investigative
team – twenty-three and counting – was testimony to the importance
he attached to an early result. People like Mallinder were Pompey's
guarantee of a decent future. The fact that somebody had killed him
did little for the city's reputation.
'So forensically, we're nowhere,' Barrie muttered. 'No bullet, no
shell case, no reports of a gunshot from neighbours. Scenes of Crime
have found entry damage around the front door but nothing we can
positively ID. We've got prints everywhere but I'm betting most of
them are Mallinder's or the cleaner's or this bloody girlfriend of his.
Is the pathologist sticking with three to four in the morning?'
'Yes. I think he'd like a bit of wriggle room either side but basically
. . . yes.'
'Terrific. So here's a guy turns up in the middle of the night. No one
sees him arrive, no one hears him at work, no one has a clue how or
when he goes. He wears gloves, he uses an automatic and presumably
a silencer, and he leaves sod all behind. He isn't pissed, he isn't forgetful,
in fact he's Mr Tidy. These people don't exist in Portsmouth . . .'
he shot Faraday a bleak smile '. . . do they?'
'Prima facie, sir, you'd say not.'
'Fine. So where next?'
'We need to take a good look at his laptop. It's over at Netley at
the moment but we ought to fast-track it. Do you want me to talk
to Wowser?'
Wowser Productions was a Southsea consultancy security-cleared
to analyse seized computer equipment. They normally turned jobs
round within a working week but charged the earth.
'I'll give them a ring.' Barrie was wincing. 'What else?'
The two men quickly ran through the tick-list of actions generated
by a major incident like this. Checks on CCTV footage were
already under way, with two D/Cs trawling through videotapes at the
Civic Centre control room. Suttle was pressing the force Telephone
Intelligence Department for billings on Mallinder's mobile and landlines,
and had drawn up an application for a Production Order to
access the dead man's bank accounts. The D/S in charge of Outside
Enquiries had detailed two D/Cs to locate and interview Mallinder's
lady friend, and Barrie seemed confident that further actions would
follow.
Within days Billhook should be a great deal wiser about the small
print of Mallinder's private life, but in the meantime Barrie could do
little but steadily extend the reach of the house-to-house teams in
the hope that someone in Port Solent might have noticed a tiny blip
in the steady pulse of marina life. A strange car. A new face. Maybe
even a visiting boat that no one had seen before. Anything, in short,
that might flag a pathway forward.
Faraday mentioned Benskin, Mallinder's partner. Barrie nodded.
'He's down tomorrow, first thing. According to Suttle, he's cleared
his diary. You need to talk to him, Joe, find out what the firm's been
into. These developer guys are canny, keep their cards well hidden,
but a class job like this might concentrate the man's mind. Unless . . .'
he frowned '. . . he knows more than we think.'
Faraday nodded. Barrie had a point. Business partnerships could be
as volatile as a marriage. According to Suttle, Mallinder and Benskin
had come from nowhere, piling deal on deal, taking established
developers
by surprise. The closer the relationship and the higher the
stakes, the greater the possibility of events running suddenly out of
control.
'You're suggesting Benskin might have something to do with this?'

'It's possible, Joe.' Barrie smiled thinly. 'Either that or Mallinder's
pissed a rival off. We have to start somewhere.'
He produced a packet of Rizlas from the desk drawer and got to
his feet. The pouch of Golden Virginia lay on the sill beside the open
window. He slipped off the elastic band and began to roll himself a
cigarette, gazing down at the near-empty car park. At length came
the scrape of a match and a long sigh as he expelled a thin plume of
smoke through the open window. Then he turned as Faraday asked
whether there was anything else he needed to know.
'Yes. Willard's been on a couple of times.' He nodded at the phone.
'It seems the Chief's taking a personal interest. I gather the emphasis
is on an early breakthrough. Quicker the better, Joe, eh . . . ?'
Returning to his own office, Faraday sorted quickly through his emails,
tapped a reply or two, and then put through a call to the
Bargemaster's House. As he'd half-expected, there was no response.
Gabrielle loathed answering the phone. Her years as an anthropologist
in various remote corners of the planet had taught her very different
ways to measure the world's pulse and he pictured her now,
out in the garden enjoying the last of the sunshine, content for the
caller to leave a message under this electronic stone.
'Me,' he announced. 'Sorry about the birds. Back soon. À bientôt.'
He put the phone down and eyed it for a moment. Accounting for
his every move was something new in his life and he wasn't quite sure
what to make of it. Gabrielle was on holiday from her apartment
in Chartres, a month at the very most, but even so he'd found it
odd to be fitting the rough contours of a copper's life into someone
else's routine. Not that Gabrielle had burdened him with demands.
Far from it. In fact he'd never met anyone who was so cheerfully
self-sufficient.
But in a relationship that was getting deeper by the
day, he felt he owed her an honest account of himself. This is who
I really am, he wanted to say. And this is the life that has made me
this way.
He found Suttle upstairs in the social club. The young D/C had
commandeered a couple of stools at the far end of the bar and was
locked in conversation with Gina Hamilton. The moment Faraday
appeared, he was on his feet.
'What are you having, boss? My shout.'
Faraday settled for a pint of Guinness and found himself a stool.
Gina made room for him at the bar. The spareness of her frame and
the steadiness in her eyes spoke of an appetite for regular exercise.
She'd barely touched the glass of lager beside her battered leather
bag.

'You're here for a while?'
'Couple of days. Max.'
'Drugs job?'
'Yeah.' She nodded. 'Big time. At least in our neck of the woods.'
Without going into details, she outlined an operation she'd obviously
been nurturing for a while. A distribution network centred in
Plymouth. Cocaine mostly, with special offers on crack and smack
when the Scouse dealers could be arsed to get out of bed. A supply
chain running into Devon and Cornwall from sources upcountry.
Dozens of outlets around the coast. Kick down a few doors, she said,
and you'd spoil the party for a couple of weeks. But nail a truly
major supplier and the damage might be a little more permanent.
'So why Pompey?' Faraday didn't bother to hide his interest.
Gina hesitated a moment. She looked on the young side to be an
experienced D/I, and she was plainly worried about sharing too much
intelligence. Faraday was about to put the question a different way
when Suttle helped him out.
'Terry Byrne.' He handed Faraday a brimming glass of Guinness.
'Who'd have believed it, eh?'
Terry Byrne was a young Scouser who dealt from a chaotic terraced
house barely a mile from Kingston Crescent and had won himself
a city-wide reputation for ultra-violence. Lately he'd been settling
heroin debts with a kettle full of boiling water tipped over the lower
body, a process known as jugging.
Suttle resumed his seat beside the West Country D/I. Faraday could
sense already that he was determined to make the most of his social
responsibilities.
'Cheers, boss.' Suttle turned to touch glasses with Gina. 'And here's
to some decent scalps, yeah?'
Faraday was still thinking about Byrne. The city's cocaine trade was
largely controlled by a prominent local criminal, Bazza Mackenzie.
Recently, he'd been setting up a series of arms-length franchise operations,
minimising his own risk while still enjoying huge profits, which
he washed through his ever-expanding business empire. Dealers
staked by Mackenzie were all Pompey boys, people he'd known most
of his life, and collectively they'd made it very plain indeed that they
intended to keep things local. A toerag Scouser like Terry Byrne could
flog as much smack as he liked. But the moment he moved into something
respectable like cocaine he'd be looking at a serious turf war.
'Byrne's really the target?' Faraday needed to be clear.
'Yes.' Gina nodded. 'He is.'
'And you're sure about the intel?'
'Yes. I gather our Force Intelligence blokes have been talking
to yours. I don't know whether you're in the loop or not but he's
expecting a delivery. Wholesale. Industrial quantities. Tomorrow, if
we're lucky.'
'Cocaine?'
'Yes.'
'With some of it heading your way?'
'That's the story.'
'How much?'
'Between one and two kilos.'
'Shit.' It was Suttle. He looked impressed.
Faraday was still watching Gina. That weight of cocaine in the
lock-up would be the making of a young D/I.
'You're serious? Two kilos?'
'Yes.'
'And you've got Byrne plotted up? Pennington Road? Surveillance?
The whole nine yards?'
'Absolutely. And tomorrow, if it all pans out, we'll be on the road
back west with him.'
'So who orders the strike?'
'Exeter makes the decision. Then I handle the tactical end. That
kind of weight, I imagine we'll settle for a traffic stop once we're
close to home. There's no way my bosses would let it run. We'd have
the media all over us if we fucked up.'
'Sure.' Faraday nodded. 'So you'll be relying on interview for
further arrests?'
'That's the plan. The bloke at the wheel will be looking at five to
six years. That's a big incentive to come up with a few names.'
'And this guy's known to you? The courier?'
'We've had dealings, yes. Bloke's an animal but he's just hooked
up with a Ukrainian lady, a real stunner, and she's another reason he
might come across. Who knows?' She reached for her drink, took a
tiny sip, then checked her watch. 'Shit. I'd no idea it was so late.'
Faraday ignored the hint. He still wanted to know how Byrne had
laid hands on a couple of kilos of cocaine. In Pompey.
'I've no idea. Force Intelligence are talking some kind of deal in
Manchester but that's something I can't vouch for. Me? I'll be happy
with that kind of seizure and a day or two in the interview suite.
Fingers crossed, we'll end up with both. Plus a handful of arrests
down the line. You want the rest of this?'
She handed Suttle her glass, still two thirds full. Suttle looked at it
a moment, then poured the contents into his own glass.
'You know who'd cream themselves over a conversation like this?'
He was looking at Faraday. 'Paul Winter. Two kilos of the laughing
powder? Plus someone to work over in the interview room? Shit. A
couple of days and you'd start running out of holding cells. Shame,
eh?'
'Shame, what?' Gina had slipped off the stool, slipping her jacket
over her shoulders.
'Shame Paul's not around any more. You're driving?'
'Yeah.'
'No wonder.' Suttle gestured at her empty glass. 'If only he'd been
as cluey as you.'
