Prologue
Moscow 1989
There was a do at Dom Literatov, the literary house. I remember that much. Some author, Limonov maybe, was launching his book and all the foreigners with pretensions to speaking Russian or knowing anything about anything were going. I wore a short, tight, black velvet dress with puffed sleeves that dropped off my shoulders. My landlady, Zinaida Petrovna, sewed me into it, pins sticking out of her puckered mouth, a greasy apron wrapped around her enormous middle.
"Real velvet,' she muttered into the pins. "Real velvet.' She stroked my back and looked as though she might actually cry. It was snowing from the heavy grey sky and the old men queuing up at the beer cellar in our courtyard wore the flaps of their shapkas down, raw red hands clutching their huge empty jars. There was one man with a swollen purple face, weeping red eyes and a running nose that dripped into his beard who always shuffled his way towards the front of the queue with a particular desolation – not chatting to the others, not even looking up.
"His mother loved him,' Dimitri used to say. I wasn't so sure. Zinaida Petrovna tutted every time one of the men came over to our wall to urinate. The snow was banked up high, nearly reaching the window. My nineteenth-century double glazing had a foot's width between the interior and exterior panes and I was keeping a chicken, frozen, in the gap. I worried that Zinaida Petrovna might steal it while I was out.
She was charging me three-quarters of my monthly salary as rent for my one room and I paid her because I was living there illegally and Dimitri, my Russian husband, my cover, the person who was officially renting the place, had gone back to Ryazan after our last big row and showed no signs of coming back any time soon, thank God. But my documents hadn't come through and I still had none of a Soviet citizen's rights (surprisingly many,mostly concerning the procurement of food and housing).
Tonight, free and possibly even single, I was meeting Scott Weisman at Dom Literatov. It was Scott, in fact, who was indirectly responsible for my new status. Dimitri and I had had a row about him in the Savoy hotel. Well, I say row. It was more of a prolonged silence really.
The Savoy had opened three months earlier, the only half civilised place in Moscow and with stricter entry procedures than the other hotels, so the prostitutes and seedy thugs who populated pretty much everywhere in those days couldn't get in.
Unfortunately, though, neither could Dimitri. Not without a certain amount of effort at any rate. It was not a good start to the evening as far as the impending row was concerned.
We had pulled up in Dimitri's maroon Lada Samara, which had no heating (me in a big black fur and him in a thin, cheap imitation of a presidential great coat), and we skidded to a stop in the deep snow, just brushing against the brass barriers with red ropes that surrounded the entrance. Inside the barrier, under the hotel's glittering canopy, the actual pavement was carpeted. Doors guarded by policemen and hotel staff in top hats and old-fashioned frock coats revealed the warm wealthy glow of the foyer within – a chandelier, gleaming marble floors and pretty girls in smart uniforms with their names on their badges, all just graduated from Moscow State University's English faculty.
I had been having dreams. My nights were haunted by plummeting lifts, plunging planes, gangs with guns, buildings ablaze. I had woken up that night gasping for breath, with alcoholic dehydration and a pounding heart. I ran barefoot across the freezing, unpolished parquet to the kitchen where I stirred a spoonful of crystal-shining orange KoolAid into a glass of tap water. Tap water they said one shouldn't drink, but I didn't see any Russians dying. Actually, I did, but not from drinking the tap water. Dimitri, my husband, who slept with one hand flat against the wall (his little finger scarred from when he fell over running for the loo at school when he was six), woke up, like he always did, lit a cigarette and tried to comfort me. Sometimes he went easy on himself and we just went out for a drive. I would tell him about girls who got cars for their seventeenth birthdays, the keys presented in a box by their beaming parents, friends clapping round the blazing candles on the cake, the surprise gift parked neatly outside, a ribbon round the aerial. Or I described people who winter in the Caribbean or restaurants where they serve lobster and make crêpes Suzette at the table. I don't think he really believed me.
That night of the separation he took one sympathetic, though exhausted, look at me and said, "You need to go to the Savoy.' And he was right. The dim greyness of Communist Moscow was too accurate a reflection of my mental state. He felt that only a Russian could really be expected to cope with this life. It amazes me now that he was then only twenty-seven. Judging by his eyes he could have been fifty.
I showed my passport to the policemen and the doormen and Dimitri walked manfully by my side, snowflakes melting on his shoulders, speaking to me in English. They usually fell for this at the Intourist but they weren't having any of it here. Dimitri lowered his voice to a whisper and one of the policemen leant down to hiss into his face. I lit a cigarette and waited, watched the fat snow fall. Dimitri stood on his tiptoes and whispered into the policeman's ear. That seemed to do it. One little threat and we were in.
The doors were opened and we went and sat down in the pink and gold bar. They served microwaved ready meals in here – that was how glamorous it was. Outside, where old ladies huddled in underpasses, their feet wrapped in rags, there were shortages so severe that even German food parcels were being accepted. People remembered the war and the Germans had not been forgiven. In the Leningrad blockade people ate rats.
"I wish you wouldn't threaten everyone,' I said, my hands clamped round a Campari and soda. I knew I shouldn't have said it. I knew he didn't want to be in the Savoy in any case. He did it for my sake. Taking me back to my world. A world in which he, of course, would always be uncomfortable.
Still, none of his generosity, in my view, justified an hour and a half's thin-lipped silence. Well, OK. Not total silence. He did say one thing. It was: "I don't know why you don't just go out with Scott Weisman.'
He had met Scott. He did not like Scott. The easy American superiority, white teeth, blue passport, pocket full of dollars. Good point, I thought as I rolled my eyes and sighed. When we got back to the dark, stinking doorway of our dingy flat, the symbol of our pathetic attempt at a relationship, he left me there, got into his car and drove away into the night. I put my big iron key in the door and went inside. There was a dead rat in the bath. I had brought poison from London and it made them die of thirst. I sat on the bed in my fur coat, my knees pulled into my chest, and cried until I was empty. Not for Dimitri really. For myself, for my dad, who was killed in Belfast when I was nine, for all the other desolate people crying alone in the night. A lot of them, I thought, were probably in Moscow.
Then in the morning after the row (maybe even separation?), shaking with hangover, I phoned Scott and he invited me to the Dom Literatov party. He was a Russophile Californian doing an internship at the New York Times, intrepidly trawling round meetings of mothers of dead Soviet conscripts (there were a lot of them), attending memorial rallies for the gulag-dead outside the Lubyanka at which nobody got arrested (unthinkable even six months earlier) and hitting on damsels in distress (me). He was sharp and funny and looked like a Martian in Moscow with his cute glasses, short back and sides and pressed khakis. Maybe the GIs looked like this in sepia wartime Britain. He mistook my depressive sarcasm for searing intelligence and he loved me. He brought me jars of bacon bits from the salad bar at the American Embassy and he sat on my dirty floor with me drinking sweet champagne, singing Billy Joel songs and saying he didn't know any other girls like me.
Tonight was the night of our date. Zinaida Petrovna came round to the front of me for a look. "Pryelyest!' she whimpered. I almost liked her. I put my stilettos in a carrier bag, pulled on black zip-up waterproof boots, my coat, hat and gloves, and trudged out into the gloom. I walked down the boulevard with my head bowed against the snow. There was an old woman sitting on a bench selling ice creams in squat cones out of a cardboard box for ten kopeks. An ancient orange and white tourist bus juddered outside the circus, choking everyone near it with thick black exhaust fumes.
At Dom Literatov people stood around in the slush smoking in groups and talking quietly.
"Hey, Zanetti,' Scott whispered into my ear, coming up behind me and putting his hands round my waist.
"Fuck off,' I said, and turned to kiss him on the cheek. "I've left Zinaida Petrovna alone with my chicken,' I told him.
"That's the last you'll see of that,' he nodded, pulling his woolly hat off and treading the snow off his Timberlands, the stamp of his nationality.
The foyer was dimly lit and stuffed full of middle-aged men in appalling suits standing in front of clouded mirrors and combing the remains of their hair. I sat down on a stool and changed my shoes and Scott took all our stuff to the cloakroom and handed me my greenish plastic tag. Limonov (which translates as "of the lemons'), or whoever it was, was already talking and most people were standing round the rostrum listening reverently. Scott took two shots of vodka off a trestle table and handed me one. I'd never drunk this stuff neat before. We clinked glasses and sank them in one. Hmmm. I could get a taste for this. We did it again and it is at this stage that my memory gets slightly blurry.
I remember throwing my arms round Limonov's neck and congratulating him. I remember throwing my arms round Scott's neck in a corridor we found behind a black padded door. I remember a KGB stooge telling us we were in an unauthorised area. I think I
remember falling soon after that down a stone flight of stairs, though that may be a retrospective memory, constructed from my injuries. Something flickering at the back of my mind shows me a girl in stilettos slipping down the boulevard on the ice dangerously late at night.
And then it was morning. I was lying on my front and my mouth tasted of vomit. Someone was banging on the door and thin grey light was coming through the windows. My hand was right in front of my eyes and there was blood on it. I sat up and put my feet on the parquet. There were shoes on them. My knees were badly grazed and I was still in my dress. I touched my face and felt what could be a dramatic wound on my forehead. My jaw hurt. I looked round the room and saw that I had thrown my outdoor clothes on the floor. I must have left my boots at Dom Literatov. I ran through the memories I could dredge up. No big deal, humiliation-wise. So far I could cope with the damage. I took my shoes off and went to the bathroom to wash my face. When I had rinsed the blood off it was only a scrape really. Amazing how much blood can be produced from a scalp wound. I went to the kitchen where the old lady, whose name I never did find out, was boiling some cornflakes in a saucepan of water. She was houseridden and smelt of decay. A boy called Lyosha brought her useless food aid – dried goods with instructions in English, all of which told the recipient to add eggs or milk or some other unattainable thing.
"Good morning,' I said.
"Good morning,' she said.
"There's someone at the door,' I said.
"Yes,' she said.
I couldn't answer the door because of my illegal status. Apparently, my Russian sounded like an Estonian's but that wasn't good enough. Estonians would be told to produce documents too. I took my KoolAid back to my room and it was only then that I saw Dimitri. He was asleep with one hand against the wall. Had he been there when I got home? Had he come in the night? My scream of surprise woke him up. He looked at me blearily.
"Your head,' he said.
"I know. There's someone at the door,' I told him.
He got up in his Y-fronts, lit a cigarette and heaved our enormous and ornate front door open. When I saw the policemen I ducked into the toilet. There is a Soviet joke which involves banging on friends' doors and shouting "Police!' It is a very bleak Russian-style joke with reference to the 1930s purges. Anyway, the sight of actual police at the door was very chilling indeed. I assumed they had come for me. Dimitri and I once ran through the crimes I had committed against the Soviet state and estimated that I was fixing to spend about thirty years in a camp. Trading hard currency, smoking illegal drugs, travelling outside Moscow without a visa, living without a propiska and so on.
They stood in the hall and made Dimitri produce his passport (although it was called a passport it did not entitle the holder to travel anywhere. For that he or she would need an "international passport' and there was pretty much no chance of getting one of these unless you were directly related to Gorbachev himself). Neither the policemen nor Dimitri reacted in the slightest way to the latter's near nudity. Dimitri smoked, the policemen checked his details.
"You're not registered here,' the more acned of the two stated.
"It's my mum's flat,' Dimitri said. I wondered if he had already told Zinaida Petrovna to confirm that or if he was planning to threaten her later.
Realising this wasn't about me, I came out of the bathroom, still in my velvet dress.
"This is my wife,' Dimitri said. "She's mute.'
Hello? I raised my eyebrows at him in disbelief and nodded at the policemen, lips sealed.
"You are covered in blood,' the chatty one said.
I nodded in silent admission and then went and lay back down to die quietly of alcohol poisoning. I hoped Dimitri would not be staying.

