CHAPTER ONE
Thursday 
The mud was everywhere at Pity Wood Farm. It lay in deep troughs under the walls of the house, it surged in wet tides where the cattle had poached the ground into a soup. And it was all over Jamie Ward's boots, sticky and red, like blobs of damson jam. His steel toe-caps were coated with the stuff, and smears of it had splashed halfway up his denims – long, fat splatters, as if he'd been wading in blood. 
Crouching in a corner of the yard, Jamie stared down at the mess and wondered when he'd get a chance to wipe it off. He couldn't remember if he had a clean pair of jeans back at his parents' house in Edendale, whether his mother had done his washing this week, or if he'd thrown his dirty clothes behind the bed again, where she wouldn't find them. She'd been complaining for the past month about the amount of dirt he brought into the house, the number of times she had to clean the filter on the washing machine. He wondered what she'd say about this latest disaster when he got in. 
And, as he heard the first police sirens wailing up the valley, it occurred to Jamie to wonder whether he'd actually be going home tonight at all. 
"Damn it, boy. Why didn't you just cover it up again? It would have been for the best all round.' 
Jamie shook his head. You couldn't just do that, could you? No matter what anyone else said, it wasn't right, and that was that. He'd done the only thing he possibly could, in the circumstances. He'd done the right thing, so there was nothing to regret. 
"Throw some dirt on it and forget it. There's no need for all this.' 
He felt bad about it, all the same. It was bad for Nikolai and the other blokes. This was a nightmare they didn't want, and some of them couldn't afford. Just before Christmas, too, when they needed the money more than ever, he supposed. He was going to be popular, all right. 
Jamie felt his muscles beginning to stiffen. The longer he stayed in one spot, the more he felt as though his boots were sinking into the ground. If he stayed here long enough, perhaps the blood-tinted earth would slowly close in and swallow him. His own weight would bury him. 
Of course, he knew the mud only looked red because the soil here was clay when you got a few inches down. It was so unusual for this part of Derbyshire that he'd noticed it as soon as he started digging. Clay and mud, tons of crushed brick and corroded iron. It had been a nightmare of a job, almost impossible for his spade to deal with. Jamie's rational mind told him that the colour was only because of the clay. And if the stuff on his boots looked too red, too dark, too wet … well, that was just his imagination, wasn't it? 
Jamie Ward thought he had plenty of common sense. He was educated, after all – not like most of the other lads on the crew. He would never be a victim of superstition and ignorance. He wasn't even particularly religious – he didn't cross himself when they passed a church, or hang a statue of the Virgin Mary over the dashboard of the van, the way Nikolai did. 
But this mud was so sticky, and so smelly. It stank as though it had been rotting for centuries. Now, when Jamie finally straightened up, he saw a thick gob slide from his boot on to the ground. It formed a sort of oozing coil, like the dropping of some slimy creature that had been living on the old farm, left to itself when the owners moved out and the cattle disappeared. He pictured something that only came out at night to feed on carrion, scavenging among the ruins of pigsties before slinking back into a dark, damp corner between those abandoned silage bags. 
"Damned fool. Kretyn.' 
He remembered the way Nikolai's fist had gripped his jacket, the feel of the older man's face pushed against his, rain glistening in his thick eyebrows and on his moustache. Jamie couldn't believe how angry Nikolai had been, not over something like this. The foreman had tolerated his bungling and his ignorance of the building trade with raucous good humour – until now. Yet suddenly this morning he'd been a different man, a wild thing, dangerously on the verge of violence. And all over a muddy hole. 
Jamie swallowed a spurt of bile that hit the back of his throat. He'd been trailing backwards and forwards over this same patch of earth for days now. Shifting stacks of breeze block for the brickies, unloading bags of sand from the lorry, stopping for a quick fag behind the wall. Damn it, his boot prints were all over the place. Anyone who cared to look would see the pattern of his rubber soles, pressed deep in the mud. His eyes followed the criss-crossing trails he'd left, curving in long arcs that stretched twenty yards or more. His tracks were so numerous and extensive that they were probably visible from space like the Great Wall of China, place-marked on Google Earth. They were so distinct that they might as well be the swirls of his fingerprints. Jamie Ward's signature on the job, perfectly clear and complete. 
Soon, people would be talking about him and pointing at him. Before much longer, he'd be answering questions, endless questions, re-living over and over the moment he was trying to forget. He'd seen the TV cop shows, and he knew they never let you alone once they had you in one of their little interview rooms. 
He could hear two sirens now, their yelp and wail teasing playfully against each other, fading and getting louder as the cars took one of the bends in Rakedale, dipping behind stone walls and clumps of trees until they reached the top of the hill and turned into the farm. 
Jamie thought back to the morning he'd got out of the van, stretched his legs and stepped on to Pity Wood Farm for the first time. It was strange to think there had been grass growing here when the crew arrived on site. Now the whole gateway was churned up, and the soil either side was bare and exposed. In one corner, a wheel rut from a reversing truck had sliced through his boot prints. 
He didn't remember noticing anything unusual that first time. Well, maybe there had been a slight difference in the level of the ground just here, a low bump that was only noticeable if you happened to be pushing a wheelbarrow load of sand over it. And perhaps the grass had been a bit greener, too – only a tiny bit, if you looked closely. Perhaps the blades had gleamed with faintly unnatural health in the winter sunlight. He wouldn't have looked twice at the time, and he'd never made anything of it. No one would have done. 
But then Nikolai had asked him to start digging a trench for the footings of a new wall. Jamie had dug barely more than a few inches into the ground before the soil changed colour. It had taken him a while to get even that far down, though. There were so many stones to be prised free with the spade and lifted out, not to mention lumps of concrete and long splinters of rusted metal. Without his gloves, his fingers would have been raw by now. 
After half an hour, he'd been starting to think that Nik had given him the job as a punishment for something, or just because he was the youngest on the crew and a student at that, the one they called "The Professor'. Or maybe it was on account of the fact that he didn't understand what they were going on about when the blokes started joking around on site, and they were taking advantage of him. Probably there wasn't going to be a wall here at all. Nobody had ever shown him the plans for the new development, so he couldn't be sure. But during the last few days Jamie had made his own plans. He reckoned that if he'd bought the farm himself, he'd have kept the old dry-stone wall and turned this bit of ground into a nice patio. All it needed was a few yards of paving, not a fancy brick boundary wall that needed some idiot to dig a trench for twelve-inch footings. 
Damn that trench. Just the thought of its moist, slippery sides made Jamie feel like throwing up. If it weren't for all the other blokes standing around gabbling to each other in Polish, he'd have lost his breakfast ages ago. 
Even in his distracted state, Jamie noticed that one or two of the labourers were looking a bit nervous as the police sirens got nearer. No papers, he supposed. Illegal workers. Well, it wasn't his business, and he bet the cops wouldn't care either, not today. 
Nevertheless, Jamie automatically counted up the men. Nine[AQ1], all present, but standing behind Nikolai for safety. 
And all of the crew were looking in the same direction now – at the cluster of objects Jamie had accidentally uncovered with his spade. There wasn't much to look at, not really. A strip of plastic sheeting and a scrap of rotted leather. A bulge of cloth, torn and faded, a surprising eggshell blue where patches showed through the dirt. And there had been a faint glint of metal, slick with the dampness of clay, reflecting a glimmer of light and the movement of his spade. 
But most of all, he knew they were staring at the only thing worth seeing – that unmistakable object laid out in the mud, like a bird trapped in cement, or an ancient fossil preserved in the clay. It was like a five-limbed sea creature, bony and white. 
It was the shape of a human hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Detective Sergeant Diane Fry stepped out of her car on to the muddy ground, drew her coat tighter round her shoulders and wiped the rain from her face. All the activity seemed to be taking place on the other side of the track. Uniformed officers setting up cordons, SOCOs climbing into scene suits, a bunch of bystanders gaping like idiots. She looked around with a weary sigh. A week before Christmas, and wouldn't you know it? A major enquiry in prospect, if she wasn't mistaken. 
Fry slammed the door of her Peugeot, her hands already wet and slipping on the handle. There was only one ray of hope. From the initial reports that had come in to Control, this air air of activity might be misleading[AQ2]. Something quite different was going on here. 
In fact, everyone was waiting with barely restrained anxiety for a verdict on the age of the body that had been unearthed. If it was recent, the entire division was in for a ruined holiday. If they were lucky, it could prove to be a historic burial, the remains of a medieval graveyard disturbed by the construction work. And then they could hand it over to the archaeologists and drive off home with a cheery wave and shouts of "Have a good Christmas.' 
All right, that was probably too much to hope for. But even a decade or two on the bones would be good news. At least they could take their time making enquiries. Victims who'd been missing for ten or twenty years would wait a little while longer for their identity to be established. 
Besides, what family wanted a knock on the door over Christmas and a police officer standing on the step to inform them that their missing loved one had been found in a shallow grave in some godforsaken spot at the back of beyond? That sort of thing could ruin Christmas for ever. 
She called to a uniformed officer in a yellow high-vis jacket. "Is DC Murfin here somewhere, do you know?' 
"Yes, Sergeant. Shall I fetch him?' 
"Please.' 
Yes, Christmas. In Fry's experience, there were already far too many families who were unable to regard it as a time for gladness and joy. This time of year had a nasty tendency to bring back memories for people. Recollections of happier times, of opportunities lost, of friends and relatives who had passed on to celebrate Christmas in a better place. 
No, the festive season wasn't all about peace and goodwill, not these days. Anyone in the emergency services could tell you that. Christmas didn't make much difference to the lives of all those poor, pathetic and dysfunctional people who cluttered up the police stations and courts from one month to the next. 
A few days ago, two men wearing Santa Claus outfits had raided a building society in Chesterfield. They'd been carrying baseball bats inside their fur-fringed sleeves, and a customer had ended up in hospital with a fractured skull when he got in their way. The suicide and domestic violence rates jumped at this time of year, the number of road accident victims multiplied, and the streets of Edendale were full of brawling drunks. The cells at West Street were never fuller, the hospitals were over-stretched, and hosing out the divisional vans was a full-time job. Lots of ho, ho, ho. 
But perhaps she was just a bit jaundiced in her view. Personally, she hadn't celebrated Christmas for over a decade. Not in a paper hat and cracker, turkey and mistletoe sort of way. There had never been a decorated spruce tree standing in the corner of her damp little flat in Grosvenor Avenue, no tinsel over the mantelpiece, no Nine Lessons and Carols on the radio on Christmas morning. She was lucky if she had a present to unwrap – at least, one that she hadn't sent to herself for appearance sake. What was there to celebrate? 
[AQ1]
[AQ2]
