 
So Rubio grabbed the knife loose and stabbed Carl in the same blunt
rush. The blade winked once in the low light as it came clear of the
bartop shadow, ripped low through Carl's jacket and slugged to a halt
in the weblar beneath. Gene tweaked spiderweb mail, expensive stuff.
But there was too much rage and hate behind the thrust to stop easily,
and it was likely a monofil edge. Carl felt the tip get through and slice
into him.
Because it wasn't really unexpected, he was already moving, and the
weblar gave him the luxury of not having to cover. He hit Rubio with
a tanindo move – palm-heel, twice, short, stabbing strikes, broke the
man's nose, crushed his temple, sent him sprawling away from the bar
to the floor. The knife tugged loose again – nasty, grainy intimacy of
metal in flesh – and he grunted as it came out. Rubio twitched and
rolled on the floor, possibly already on his way to dead. Carl kicked
him in the head to make sure.
Everything stopped.
People stared.
Beneath the weblar, he felt blood trickle down his belly from the
wound the knife had left.
Behind him, Gaby was gone through the kitchen doorway. Also
pretty much expected, his source had said she and Gray were close.
Carl scrambled over the bar – savage flash of pain from the newly
acquired wound – and went after her.
Through the kitchen – cramped, grimy space, gas ranges with blackened
pans left to sit, and a door to the outside still swinging wide with
Gaby's passage. Carl caught a couple of pan handles as he shimmied
the narrow clearance, left clatter and clang in his wake. He burst
through the door and out into an alley at the back of the building.
Sudden sunlight blasted his vision. He squinted left. Right, and caught
the waitress sprinting flat out up the hill. Looked like about a thirtymetre
lead.
Good enough.
He took off running.
With the combat, the mesh had kicked in for real. It flushed him
now, warm as the sun, and the pain in his side dropped to memory
and a detached knowledge that he was bleeding. His field of vision
sharpened on the woman running from him, peripherals smearing out
with the brightness in the air. When she broke left, out of line-ofsight,
he'd closed the gap by about a third. He reached the turn and
hooked round, into another back alley, this one barely the width of
his shoulders. Unpainted prefab walls with small, high-set windows,
stacked sheets of construction plastic and alloy frames leaning at
narrow angles, discarded drinks cans on the dirt floor. His feet tangled
momentarily in a loose wrap of polythene from one of the frames. Up
ahead, Gaby had already ducked right. He didn't think she'd looked
back.
He reached the new corner, and stopped dead, fighting down the
urge to poke his head out. The right turn Gaby had taken was a main
thoroughfare, paved in evercrete and loosely thronged with people.
He squatted, dug out his Cebe lenses and peeked round the corner at
knee height.With the relief of not having to squint in the harsh light,
he picked out Gaby's fleeing form amongst the crowd almost at once.
She was glancing back over her shoulder, but it was clear she hadn't
seen him. There was no panic-stricken bolt, only a deep-drawn breath
and then she started to jog rapidly along the street. Carl watched her
go for a few seconds, let the gap open up to a good fifty metres or
more, then slid out into the street and followed, bent-kneed to keep
his head low. It earned him a few strange looks, but no one spoke to
him and more importantly, no one made any comment out loud.
He had, he reckoned with meshed clarity, about ten minutes. That
was how long it would take news of the fight in the bar to reach
someone in authority, and that someone to put a chopper into the air
above the rectilinear streets of Garrod Horkan 9. If he hadn't found
Gray by then – game over.

Three blocks up, Gaby crossed the street abruptly and let herself
into a single storey prefab. Carl saw her dig the matt grey rectangle of
a keycard out of her jeans and swipe it in the lock. The door opened
and she disappeared inside. Too far off to make out a number or name
panel, but the place had hanging baskets of yellow-flowered cactus out
front. Carl loped up to the near end of the 'fab, slipped into the alley
between the building and its neighbour, and circled round to the back.
He found a toilet window left open, levered it up and heaved himself
over the sill. Vague pain from the stab wound, sliced muscle moving
against itself in a way it shouldn't. He narrowly missed stepping into
the toilet bowl, hopped sideways instead and crouched by the door,
grimacing.
Voices came through the finger-thin wall, bassy with resonance but
otherwise clear. Soundproofing on 'fab shells was pretty good these
days but if you wanted the same for interior partitioning, it cost. Not
the sort of thing GH were going to provide at base, you'd have to buy
the upgrade, and whoever lived here, Gaby or Gray, obviously hadn't.
Carl heard the woman's accented English again, and then another
voice he knew from filed audio playback.
"You stupid fucking bitch, why'd you come here?'
"I, you.' Her voice stumbled with hurt. "To warn you.'
"Yeah, and he'll be right fucking behind you!'
A flat crack, open hand across her face. Carl caught the sudden jump
of her breath through the wall, nothing more. She was tough, or used
to this, or both. He eased down the door handle, cracked the door and
peered through. A big form jerked across his sliver of vision. An
upthrown arm, gesturing, there and gone too fast to see if there was a
weapon in the hand or not. Carl reached under his jacket for the Haag
pistol. Something weighty went over with a thump in the next room.
"He's probably tracking you right now, probably let you go so he
could do it. You empty-headed cunt, you've–'
Now.
Carl threw the door open and found himself facing the two of them
across a tiny lounge laid with brightly coloured rugs. Gray was half
turned away, looming over a flinching Gaby, who had backed up and
knocked over a tall potted plant by the front door. The reddened
handprint was still visible on her face where he'd slapped her. More
plants around the room, cheap, painted ceramics and Pachamama icons
on shelves, a small statue of some saint or other on a shelf and a Spanish
prayer in a frame on one wall. They were in Gaby's house.
He pitched his voice hard and calm.
"That's it, Frank. Game over.'
Gray turned slowly, deliberately and, fuck, yes, he had a weapon, a
big black cannon of a handgun that seemed welded in the fist at the
end of his right hand. A tiny part of Carl, a subroutine immune to the
mesh and the betamyeline flooding the rest of his system, identified it
as the murder weapon, the '61 Smith caseless. Better than forty years
old, but they said you could lockvoid that gun in orbit, swing round
and pick it back up and it'd still kill things like it just came out of the
factory. For the first time in quite a while, he was grateful for the chilly
bulk of the Haag in his own hand.
It didn't help when Gray smiled at him.
"Hello there, UN man.'
Carl nodded. "Put the gun down, Frank. It's over.'
Gray frowned, as if seriously considering it. "Who sent you? Jesusland?'
"Brussels. Put the gun down, Frank.'
But the other man didn't move at all. He could have been a holoshot
on pause. Even the frown stayed on his face. Maybe deepened a little,
as if Gray was trying to work out how the hell it had all come to this.
"I know you, don't I,' he said suddenly. "Marceau, right? The lottery
guy?'
Keep him talking.
"Close. It's Marsalis. I like the new face.'
"Do you?' The Smith still hung loose in his grip, arm at his side.
Carl wondered if Gray was meshed yet. It'd make a difference to his
speed if he was, but that wasn't the real problem. The real problem
was the difference it'd make to Gray's attitude. "Try to fit in, you know.
Deru kui wa utareru.'
"I don't think so.'
"No?' And the slow, alarming smile Carl had hoped he wouldn't see.
"You were never going to get hammered down, Frank. None of us
do, that's our problem. And that's an appalling Japanese accent. Want
my advice, you'd be better delivering your folk wisdom in English.'
"I don't.' The smile became a grin. He was going, sliding into the
crack. "Want your advice, that is.'
"Why don't you put the gun down, Frank?'
"You want a fucking list?'
"Frank.' Carl stayed absolutely still. "Look at my hand. That's a Haag
pistol. Even if you get me, I don't have to do more than scratch you
on the way down. It is over. Why don't you try to salvage something?'
"Like you have, you mean?' Gray shook his head. "I'm nobody's
puppy, UN man.'
"Oh grow up, Frank.' The sudden snap of the anger in his own voice
was a suprise. "We're all somebody's puppy. You want to get dead, go
right fucking ahead and make me do it. They pay me just the same.'

Gray tautened visibly. "Yeah, I'll bet they fucking do.'
Carl got a grip on his own feelings. He made a slow, damping motion
with his free hand. "Look–'
"Look, nothing.' A mirthless grin. "I know my score. Three eurocops,
couple of Jesusland state troopers. You think I don't know what
that means?'
"It's Brussels, man. They got jurisdiction. You don't have to die.
They'll put you away, but–'
"Yeah, they'll put me away. You ever spend time in the tract?'
"No. But it can't be a lot worse than Mars, and you were going there
anyway.'
Gray shook his head. "Wrong. On Mars, I'll be free.'
"That's not what it's like, Frank.'
Gaby ran at him, screaming.
There wasn't a lot of space to cross, and she'd come more than
halfway, hands up, fingers splayed like talons, when he shot her. The
Haag gun made a deep cough and the slug caught her somewhere high
in the right shoulder. It spun her completely around and knocked her
into Gray, who was already raising the Smith. He got off a single shot,
a sprung-sounding boom in the tiny lounge, and the wall blew apart
at Carl's left ear. Deafened, stung in the face and side of the head with
impact fragments, Carl threw himself clumsily sideways and put four
slugs into the other man. Gray staggered backwards like a boxer taking
heavy blows, hit the far wall and thumped down into a sitting position
on the floor. The Smith was still in his hand. He stared up at Carl for
a moment, and Carl, moving cautiously closer, shot him twice again in
the chest. Then he watched carefully, gun still levelled, until the life
dimmed out of Gray's eyes.
Biotech account – closed.
On the floor, Gaby tried to prop herself up and slipped on some of
her own blood. The wound in her shoulder was leaking copiously
down her arm and onto the gaily coloured rug under her. Haag shells
were designed to stay in the body – the wall behind Gray was pristine –
but they made a lot of mess going in. She looked up at him, making a
tiny panicked grunting in the back of her throat over and over.
He shook his head.
"I'll go and get some help,' he said, in Quechua.
He stepped past her to the front door and opened it.
Then, in the flood of light from outside, he swivelled quietly and
shot her once more, through the back of the head.

