.
"Ah, Ser Dagger, you mean."
He nodded. "Corlek Ondene, as I live and breathe."
Tashil shrugged. "Who?"
"Ten years ago, he was the youngest soldier ever to rise to a captaincy in the Iron Guard, the Emperor's personal bodyguard. But while he was an outstanding warrior, he was callow and careless in other matters -- he became entranced by the Emperor's daughter and bedded her -- "
"With her agreement, I assume," she said archly.
"No doubt. When Magramon found out he swore he would cut off Ondene's head himself, after doing the same to his manhood."
Tashil was both appalled and amused. "How did he escape?"
"Someone in the palace warned him and helped him climb down from one of the guard towers, and someone else spirited him out of Sejeend. That was the last that anyone saw of him, but the repercussions went on for months, years. Ever heard of a play by Momas Gobryn called 'The Trial Of Aetheon'?"
"I know the title but I've never seen a copy, nor seen it enacted."
Calabos' smile was brittle. "Nor would you while Magramon was alive -- Gobryn wrote it as an allegory of Ondene's folly..."
Suddenly Calabos paused, bowed his head and let the cowl fall forward across his face. Before Tashil could say anything, Corlek Ondene brushed past their table on his way to the door. He was now wearing a battered, wide-brimmed hat and while he did not look directly at either of them, Tashil saw a look of bleak despair in his features as he passed by. And there was something else, something that impinged on her awareness below the level of her undersenses, a minatory feeling that chilled her as if a beast made of ice had breathed on her. Glancing up, she saw that Calabos too had felt it, his bearded face seeming almost haunted while a fierceness shone in his eyes. 
"What was that?" she said low and quiet as Ondene reached the door and stepped outside.
For long moments Calabos said nothing, then drew a deep breath.
"A forebodeance," he said. "Ondene is going to his doom. Come!"
Standing quickly, he snatched up his walking stick and made for the door, and Tashil had to hastily down the last of her ale before hurrying after him.
Outside, cold dense fog from the river drifted through the narrow streets, strengthening the trickle of dread within her. It was rare for her to experience a forebodeance so strong that it forced its way into conscious thought, the last time being two years ago when an elderly customer left her shop and promptly walked under the hooves and wheels of an oncoming wagon, dying instantly. Her old mentor, Tregaylis, had been visiting Calabos at the time and tried to assuage the guilt that she felt. "A forebodeance is not a message directed at us, commanding us to prevent what is about to happen," he had told her. "It is only a quality of the Lesser Power as it weaves in and out of the Void, a natural event like a scattering of raindrops or a cold breeze from the mountains. Doubtless, there were other times when some tragedy occurred but you felt little or nothing -- should you seek to shoulder those burdens as well?"
Tashil had been grateful for such counsel, but as she followed Calabos along from the Four Winds she started to wonder why he was so concerned about Ondene. Then her attention was diverted by voices as she crossed before the alleyway that ran up the side of the tavern -- a wedge of brightness spilled into the darkness half way along as two figures stumbled out and began trudging off to the other end, followed by a third who closed the door on the light and the chattering din. Listening a moment, she recognised the voices of the three scholars from earlier, then hastened to keep with Calabos.
The next building was the Earl of Westerbow dramahouse past which they walked until Calabos halted suddenly at the next corner to survey their surroundings. The light from a few porch lamps and street lanterns were smothered to weak, isolated glows by the fog. The grey roads ahead and to the left ran level while a rightward turn led up a hill. Of Ondene there was neither sight nor sound yet Calabos pointed to the right and said, "This way."
Matching her companion's gait, Tashil strove to focus on her undersenses and after a moment thought she could see signs on the cobbled road, faint outlines of footprints left on the fog-dampened stones, the spoor by which Calabos tracked their quarry. Once more, her curiosity came to the fore.
"So, how did you come to know Captain Ondene, master?" she said, recalling how Calabos had covered his face back at the tavern.
There was a dry chuckle. "I knew his father, Arnos, Baron Ondene, thus I knew the family -- 'twas I who helped the boy escape the city back then, but I could not save Arnos or his wife and older son." The humour in his voice had turned to bitterness.
Then his whole demeanour became more alert as he regarded the cobbles with unwavering intensity, pointing with his walking stick. Tashil could just see where other footprints had converged on the single set of tracks and formed a smeared muddle from which lines of scuffed marks led diagonally across the road towards a small, wooded park. Shadowy trees were were bordered by a low stone wall broken by an arched entrance through which the tracks progressed.
"They've taken him, and it was only moments ago!" Calabos said, breaking into a run. Dashing after him, Tashil could make out at the edge of her undersenses faint sounds of struggle, twigs breaking underfoot, foliage brushing against clothing....
As they hurried into the park and up a wide path amid the tangled gloom, Calabos gave his stick a twist with his hands, separating it into two pieces which he stowed away in his robe.
"I'll use Engulf to smother their lanterns," he muttered. "Then you'll move in and retrieve the unfortunate Captain. Agreed?"
"Yes, master," Tashil said as she sifted through her memory for an appropriate spell.
The wooded park was a shapeless, dark mass in the night, except for the fitful lamplight that glimmered through the trees and bushes from a point off the main path along which they now crept. Cruel laughter and grunts of pain reached Tashil's ears as she called up the thought-canto Leech and set it spinning in her thoughts, a loop of whispers, reverie-shapes and dream-tastes. Calabos was now standing a few feet away with both hands held before him, gripping each other. With her attuned eyes she could see the intense purpose in his features as he stared at his clenched hands.
"Ready?" he murmured without shifting his gaze.
Tashil breathed out her unlocking word, and the thought-canto flowed down into her hands which now flickered with an icy-blue web of power.
"I am now," she said.
Calabos nodded once, eyes fixed on the flickering lamp glows. Then his hands sprang apart as the Engulf spell burgeoned forth and an utter, pit-deep darkness rushed in, swallowing every detail and every gleam of radiance. Tashil was already slipping swiftly through the trees when blackness fell, but her sight was now firmly aligned to her undersenses, allowing her to see the surroundings as ghostly, webby forms and spidery outlines.
Moments later she reached a clearing where four wraith-like figures of men were either sprawled on ground, or struggling blindly against entangling roots and thorny vines, while giving out angry, baffled shouts and curses. But with her glowing hands she silenced them one by one, sending them into insensibility with a light and precise touch. All succumbed instantly except for one who was wearing a crescent-shaped amulet that hung down from his indistinct, dishevelled garments. The amulet resisted her thought-canto, brightening for a second or two before lapsing into dullness while its owner slumped into immobility.
Tashil did not realise how tense she was until she felt the relief that followed. She quickly turned to the figure of Corlek Ondene who, bound to a tree, had already suffered a beating. Untying him, she realised that he was scarcely able to stand so she was forced to half-carry him with one of his arms braced across her shoulders. She was struggling with him through the bushes when she felt Calabos' strong hands relieving her of the burden. By the time they stumbled out of the blackness and down towards the road, Ondene was completely unconscious and Calabos had to carry him over one shoulder.
"How long before those roughs start to awake?" he asked, breathing heavily.
"Not quite half an hour," Tashil said.
"Good." At the park's arched entrance he halted and lowered the unresponsive Ondene down to a seated position against the stonework.
"I have my horse and carriage lodged at a hostelry just a street away," he said. "If you watch over our friend, I shall return very shortly."
So saying, he departed at a run, leaving an apprehensive Tashil to shiver in the cold and stand over her charge while eyeing the dark wood behind her. Yet all seemed tranquil, the deserted park and street ruled by a chill, deadening silence. Then something disturbed the edges of her undersenses, a tenuous, uneasy feeling that she was being watched from shadows along the downward street they had climbed from the tavern. She turned her head enough to glance that way and began attuning her sight, reaching through the intervening distance with perceptions that made the grey veil of shadow and fog melt....
Then the clatter of hooves and wheels broke her concentration and a moment later a two-seater drew up, and Calabos clambered out. The moment of unease passed and Tashil bent to the task of helping to lift Ondene into the carriage, then climbed up and squeezed in beside him. Back in the driver seat, Calabos took up the reins and flicked the horse into motion. Great clouds of vapour fumed from the animal's mouth and nostrils as it hauled on the traces.
"Where are we taking him?" Tashil said. "The Watch-house?"
Calabos shook his head. "I think it would be better if we made for the townlodge -- we should be safe there."
Tashi knew that was certainly the case -- Calabos' lodge was build like a fortress. So she sat back in the hard seat as Calabos steered the carriage round to head down the other side of the park, towards the eastern districts of Sejeend.

From a shadowed doorway, a tall, gaunt figure stared at the horse-drawn vehicle as it rattled away from him. The timely intervention of the two mages had saved him the trouble of having to retrieve Ondene from his predicament, yet they struck him as suspicious, especially that powerful older man who at all times had a secretive air about him. The young woman may have been weaker in power but she was still able to perceive his presence, even this far back along the street.
He sniffed the cold fogginess of the air and was so reminded of sea mist that he smiled. He longed for a return to the Stormclaw's deck, but he and his companions had been entrusted with the guardianship of Ondene's mystery by the exalted Prince Agasklin himself, who hinted at mysterious lines from the Book of the Vortex. Thus duty commanded that he follow Ondene's rescuers and discover their destination, which would not be difficult given their nature.
Stretching, he rocked his head around to loosen the stiffness in his neck, then set off in trudging pursuit.

