Wolf's Revenge By Mark E. Cooper

                               Stakeout       
   Chris eased the car around the corner, switched off the headlights, and coasted the last few hundred yards before slowing to a halt behind Baxter's car. She could just see Jimmy's silhouette in the front passenger seat as evening gave way to night. 
   “My turn,” she said, opening her door. 
   “Be my guest,” Ken mumbled around a ham roll. “Ask them if Flint is still giving them shit.” 
   “Save some for later. I'm not going to keep making them if you eat them all before midnight.” 
   “Have a heart, Chris. If you hadn't joined the Department you could have opened your own restaurant.” 
   “Butt kisser,” she said with a grin and slammed the door. 
   She ambled along the rapidly emptying street; it had long since become familiar to her. A week of staking out Kirkwood's store had garnered her precisely nothing except for Ken's appreciation for her culinary skills; present him with food, and he was anybody's. 
   She knocked on the passenger window of Baxter's car, and Jimmy rolled it down. “Fancy meeting you here.” 
   “Hiya, Chris.” 
   She waved a hand in front of her face. “How many times do I have to say it, Jimmy? Bring some breath mints on these things.” 
   “I don't like mints.” 
   She climbed into the back of the car. “Anything?” 
   Baxter grunted. “Squat. I know this is your show now—” 
   “That's right, it is.” 
   “—but I think Flint is onto something. Ryder—that arsehole—isn't coming. He would have to be a complete idiot to try for Kirkwood in front of us.” 
   “Or so confident he doesn't care if we see him,” Jimmy added. 
   Or something they haven't thought of, Chris mused. “Flint hasn't done any better with her approach. I still think this is our best shot. Has she made an appearance round here?” 
   Baxter nodded. “She came to see Kirkwood again. She didn't look pleased when she left.” 
   “Say anything?” 
   “Nah, she wouldn't talk about it. She was seriously pissed, I can tell you that.” 
   She smirked. “Good.” 
   Jimmy laughed. “You really don't like her do you? What is it with the two of you? Someone said…” 
   “Said what?” 
   “Nothing.” 
   “Don't make me hurt you, Jimmy,” she warned. “Give.” 
   “It's nothing, just something making the rounds back at Central. If you must know, people are saying Flint made a play for Ken and you busted her chops for it. They reckon you're jealous.” 
   Her jaw dropped and she felt her face grow hot. “Oh that's just great. Perfect!” 
   Jimmy chuckled and even Baxter grinned. 
   “No truth to it is there? Ow!” Baxter glared and rubbed his shoulder. “What was that for?” 
   “Something to make me feel better,” she said grumpily. “I don't need this on top of everything else. I thought the guys had some respect, if not for me, at least for a fellow officer. Ken is my partner. It would be like incest or something, and besides, I'm getting married in a couple of months.” 
   “Don't take everything so serious,” Jimmy said with a pained sigh. “They're only funning. They joke about me and Baxter all the time, and you don't hear us complaining.” 
   “What?” Baxter said with a start. “What have those bastards been saying? I'll—” 
   Jimmy waved his partner silent. “They do respect you, Chris. They know you'd kick their butts if they didn't!” 
   “You bet I would.” 
   “And anyway, you're not Ken's type.” 
   “What the hell do you mean by that?” She said, wanting to suck in her gut. This week's extra sessions in the gym had so far failed to show up on the scales. 
   Jimmy just chuckled and shook his head. 
   Her glare gave way under the assault of his laughter and she smiled. She was being ridiculous. She didn't want to be Ken's type. 
   “I want to know what they're saying about me,” Baxter growled, and that set off another round of laughter. 
   She climbed out of the car still grinning and watched it pull away. Baxter was questioning Jimmy and threatening dire consequences for the rumour-mongers. 
   Chris watched the hurrying pedestrians heading home, and wondered what it was like being them living among monsters. The locals called the Waterfront District Monster Central, and with good reason. Compared with other cities Monster Central had the highest concentration of non-human residents and businesses bar none. The people living here cheek by jowl with the monsters had a unique perspective on the problem of non-human integration. She wondered what they thought about the proposed amendments to the Constitution. 
   She climbed back into her car to find Ken munching on a bag of chips reading his horoscope. He offered her the bag, and she took a generous handful. She ignored his indignant squawk, and pulled half of the newspaper out of his lap. She draped it over the steering wheel where she could read and keep an eye on the street at the same time. 
   “You really buy into that don't you?” 
   Ken smiled without looking up. “You know I do.” 
   “But even the gifted say it's bullshit.” 
   “There are many kinds of magic,” he said piously. 
   “Yeah, and that kind is bullshit,” she said with a grin. It was an old bone of contention between them, and always a good way to pass the time on a stakeout. “Ask a mage about the stars, and he'll tell you all they're good for is summer nights and poetry.” 
   “Ask a witch and she'll tell you everything is connected. If you know how to look, the stars can tell you a lot.” 
   She shook her head and began reading her half of the paper. Ed Davis must surely have a contact in the Department. His latest story about the Shifter Slayings had pride of place on the front page and his information was spot on. She sighed and turned the paper over, determined not to read anything Davis had written. 
   The top story this time was about the Amendment Lobby and their efforts to push their agenda through congress. All kinds of interesting people had signed on and were using their influence to help things along. That so many non-humans had an interest in the proposed amendments wasn't a surprise, but some of the names on the list were. NSPCL was high on the list of influential backers of course, and that meant Techtron—and its money—was too, but what was ex-president Irvine doing there? There was also a strong contingent of mages listed, though the Council itself had remained neutral. Perhaps the most surprising name on the list was Winterwing. Why did a dragon care whether non-humans got the vote or not? His place as presidential advisor was secure no matter the outcome. 
   “Do you ever wonder what the world would be like without magic?” she asked, turning the page. 
   “Sometimes.” 
   “I think it would be better.” 
   “Different anyway.” 
   “Different and better.” 
   Ken folded his half of the paper and tossed it on the back seat. “I don't know about better. Easier on us though.” 
   She nodded. “No worrying about getting hexed.” 
   “You always bring that up, Chris. It only happened that one time.” 
   “Once was enough for me.” She shivered, feeling again that sense of desperation she had felt when the hex paralysed her. Unable to move or even breathe, she would have died if not for Ken. “What about this amendment business?” 
   “What about it?” 
   “No magic, no monsters.” 
   “Doesn't follow. Didn't your Dad teach you anything?” 
   Chris looked at him sharply, but he was grinning. “That's something I've been meaning to talk to you about.” 
   “Hand me the binoculars would you? I think I saw something up ahead.” 
   “You're not getting out of it that easy, Ken. How did Flint find out about my Dad?” 
   “I didn't tell her… I didn't, I swear!” 
   “How did she know to ask about him then?” 
   “She already knew everything. I wouldn't tell anyone about stuff like that behind your back. She already knew about your Dad being a witch when she brought it up with me. She must have read your file and did some digging. She did ask me how you felt about it, but I told her to ask you, which she did that day at Collard.” 
   Chris pursed her lips as if trying to decide whether to believe him, but she could tell he was sincere. What worried her was Flint's interest in her background. If Flint was only after Ryder, why was she digging into her past? What possible difference could it make that her Dad was a witch? 
   “Okay, I believe you,” she said and Ken relaxed. “I still say no magic means no monsters.” 
   Ken shook his head. “You'll never change.” 
   She glared. “That had better be a compliment.” 
   Ken grinned. He reached onto the back seat for another roll, and ate it in silence. 
   Less than an hour later it was too dark to read. They didn't want to betray their presence by using a light, so they sat in darkness watching the empty street. Even this late, one or two people wandered into Kirkwood's store. None of them matched Ryder's description. 
   She snaked a hand onto the back seat and came up with an empty bag. “Tell me you didn't eat everything I brought.” 
   “Of course not,” Ken said, exuding injured dignity. 
   She wasn't sure she believed him, but she nodded acceptance when he reached over the seat and found the other bag she had packed. He stole another roll before she could get to it, but she let it go. While she was eating, Ken poured them both a coffee from the thermos and then took up the binoculars again. 
   The binoculars were fitted with a gizmo called a low light amplification module and were brand new tech. She and a few others were supposed to test them in the field and report back. They were clunky looking things—entirely non-magical in construction—and provided a fuzzy picture with a faintly greenish cast to it. Magical or not, the old ones in the trunk were a damn sight better, but she wasn't in charge of the Department's budget. Those who managed such things were always looking for ways to make cuts, and magic was expensive. 
   Chris ate a couple of rolls and drank her coffee. Remembering her advice to Jimmy, she popped a mint into her mouth. She didn't want coffee breath. Ken passed her the binoculars and she studied the street. She watched Kirkwood's customers coming and going and wondered what the hell they found to buy at this time of night. Why didn't they— 
   She tensed. “Heads up.” 
   “Is it Ryder?” Ken said eagerly. 
   She shook her head. It wasn't Ryder, but it was something. There were shadows running back and forth behind the windows of Kirkwood's shop. She was about to suggest they take a look, when someone staggered out the door and collapsed onto the sidewalk. 
   Chris pulled her weapon and climbed out of the car. She scurried across the road to kneel next to the prone figure. Pressing her fingers to the man's neck, she felt for a pulse and found one. It was faint but there. There was blood running down his face, but scalp wounds always bled a lot. The wound looked superficial. A shopping bag lay discarded on the sidewalk nearby, its contents strewn all over. 
   “He alive?” Ken asked, peering around the doorjamb into the store. 
   “Yeah, unconscious.” 
   “Great.” 
   It was great, less paperwork. 
   “You see anything?” she asked, looking down the central aisle past bottles of shampoo and bars of soap. 
   “Nothing.” 
   “Me neither. I go first, you back me.” 
   “Okay.” 
   She crept through the door and met frightened eyes. Another customer, this time lying facedown to one side of the door. The woman looked up when she heard help coming. 
   “How many?” Chris whispered. 
   The woman didn't answer with words, instead she held up a single finger. 

