
THE INTRUDERS
by
Michael Marshall

How can we be sure we are not impostors?
Jacques Lacan
The Four Fundamental Concepts
of Psycho-Analysis

Prologue
Thump, thump, thump. You could hear it half the way up
the street. It was bizarre the neighbours didn't
complain. Or do so more often, and more stridently. Gina
sure as hell would — especially if the music sucked this
bad. She knew she ought to go upstairs as soon as she got
indoors, yell at Josh to turn it down. She also knew he'd
look at her in that way teenagers have, like they're
wondering who you are and what gives you the right to
bother them and what the hell happened in your life to
make you so boring and old. He was a good son at heart
though, and so he'd roll his eyes and nudge the stereo
down a notch, and then over the next half hour the volume
would creep up until it was even louder than before.
Usually Bill was around to get into it with him — if
he wasn't hidden in his basement, tinkering — but tonight
he was out with a couple of faculty colleagues. That was
good, partly so he could get the bowling out of his system without involving Gina, who couldn't stand the
dumb sport, also just because he went out very seldom.
They usually managed to grab a meal somewhere once every
couple weeks, just the two of them, but most evenings
this year had seen him disappearing downstairs after
dinner, screwdriver in hand and a pleasurably preoccupied
look on his face. For a while he'd generated his own
strange noises down there, low booming sounds that you
felt in the pit of your stomach, but thankfully that had
stopped. It was healthy for a guy to get out the house
once in a while, hang with other guys — even if Pete Chen
and Gerry Johnson were two of the geekiest dudes Gina had
met in her entire life, and she found it impossible to
imagine them cutting loose at bowling or drinking or
indeed anything at all that didn't involve UNIX and/or a
soldering iron. It also gave Gina a little time to
herself, which — no matter how much you love your husband
— is a nice thing once in a while. Her plan was a couple
hours in front of the tube with her choice of show —
screw the documentary channels. In preparation she'd gone
to the big deli on Broadway, picked up groceries for the
week and a handful of deluxe nibbles for right now.
As she opened the door to the house and stepped into
a zone of even higher volume, she wondered if Josh ever
considered that his vanilla mom might have rocked out on
her own account, back in the day. That before she'd
fallen in love with a young physics lecturer called Bill
Anderson and settled down to a life of happy domesticity,
she'd done plenty time in the grungier venues of Seattle-
Tacoma and its environs, had been no stranger to volume,
cheap beer and waking up with a head that felt like
someone had set about it with hammers. That she'd bounced
sweatily to Pearl Jam and Ideal Mausoleum and even
Nirvana themselves, back when they were local unknowns
and sharp and hungry instead of hollow-faced and dying,
and most memorably on a summer night when she'd puked
while crowd-surfing, been dropped on her head and still
got lucky in the soaking and dope-reeking restrooms with
some guy she'd never met before, and never saw again.
Probably not. She smiled to herself.
Just went to show kids didn't know everything, huh.
An hour later, she'd had enough. The thumping was okay
while she was just watching with half an eye — and the
volume had actually dropped for a while, which maybe
suggested he was doing some homework, which was a relief
— but it had started racking up again and in ten minutes
there was a re-run of a West Wing episode she'd never
seen before. You needed a clear head and peace and quiet
to follow what the hell was going on with those guys, they talked so fast. Plus, Jesus, it was half past nine
and getting beyond a joke.
She tried hollering up at the ceiling (Josh's bedroom
was directly overhead) but received no indication she'd
been heard. So she sighed, put her depleted plate of
goodies on the coffee table, and hoisted herself off the
couch. Tramped upstairs, feeling as if she was pushing
against a wall of noise, and banged on his door.
After a fairly short time it was opened by some
skinny guy with extraordinary hair. For a split second
Gina didn't even recognize him. She wasn't looking at a
boy any more, nothing like, and Gina realized suddenly
that she and Bill were sharing their house with a young
man.
"Honey,' she said, "I don't want to cramp your style,
but do you have anything that's more like actual music,
if you're going to play it that loud?'
"Huh?'
"Turn it down.'
He grinned lopsidedly, and turned back into the room
to jack the volume back. He actually cut it in half,
which emboldened Gina to take a step into his room. It
struck her it had been a while since she'd been there
when he was also present. In years past she and Bill had
spent hours sitting on the floor here together, watching
their tot careering around on wobbly legs and bringing
them random objects with a triumphant "Gah!', thinking
how magical it all was; and later tucking him in and
reading a story, or two, or three; then perched on the
bed in the early years of homework and puzzling out sums.
At some point in the last year the rules had changed.
It was a solo mission now when she came in to fix the bed
or sweep up piles of t-shirts. She was in and out
quickly, too, remembering her own youth well enough to
respect her child's space.
She saw that, amongst the chaos of clothing and CD
sleeves and pieces of at least one dismembered computer,
there was evidence of homework being tackled.
"How's it going?'
He shrugged. Shrugging was the lingua franca. She
remembered that too. "Okay,' he added.
"Good. Who's that you're listening to, anyway?'
Josh blushed faintly, as if his mom had asked who
this Connie Lingus was, that everyone was talking about.
"Stu Rezni,' he said, diffidently. "He...'
"Used to hit sticks for Fallow. I know. I saw him at
the Astoria. Before they knocked it down. He was so
wasted he fell off his stool.'
She was gratified to see her son's eyebrows shoot up.
She tried not to smile. "Can you keep the volume sane for a while, honey?
There's a show I want to watch. Plus people are
staggering up the street with bleeding ears, and you know
how that lowers the tone.'
"Sure,' he said, with a genuine smile. "Sorry.'
"No problem,' she said, thinking I hope he's going to
be okay. He was a nice boy, polite, a slacker who yet got
(most of) his chores done eventually. She hoped without a
trace of egotism that he'd taken on enough of her, too,
along with the big old helping of Bill he'd absorbed.
This young man already spent a lot of time alone, and
seldom seemed more content than when taking something
apart or putting it back together. That was cool, of
course, but she hoped it wouldn't be too long before she
saw evidence of his first hangover. Man cannot live by
coding skills alone, not even in these strange days.
"Later,' she said, hoping it didn't sound too lame.
The doorbell rang.
As she hurried downstairs she heard the volume drop a
little farther, and smiled. She still had this expression
on her face when she opened the front door.
It was dark outside, the streetlamps at the corner
spreading orange light over the fallen leaves on the lawn
and sidewalk. A strong breeze rustled those still left on
the trees, sending a few to spiral down and around the
crossroads where the two residential streets met.
A figure was standing a couple of yards back from the
door. It was tall, wearing a long dark coat.
"Yes?' Gina said.
She flipped the porch light on. It showed a man in
his mid-fifties, with short, dark hair, sallow skin in
flat planes around his face. His eyes seemed dark too,
almost black. They gave no impression of depth, as if
they had been painted on his head from the outside.
"I'm looking for William Anderson,' he said.
"He's not here right now. Who are you?'
"Agent Shepherd,' the man said, and then paused, for
a deep cough. "Mind if I come inside?'
Gina did, but he just stepped up onto the porch and
walked right past her and into the house.
"Hold on a second there, buster,' she said, leaving
the door open and following him. "Can I see some ID?'
The man pulled out a wallet and flipped it open at
her without bothering to look in her direction. Instead
he panned his gaze methodically around the room, then up
at the ceiling.
"What's this about?' Gina asked. She'd seen the three
big letters clearly enough, but the idea of having a real
live Fed in the house didn't even slightly compute.
"I need to talk to your husband,' the man said. His
matter-of-factness made the situation seem even more
absurd.
Gina put her hands on her hips. This was her house,
after all. "Well, he's out, like I said.'
The man turned toward her. His eyes, which had seemed
flat and dead before, slowly seemed to be coming alive.
"You did, and I heard you. I want to know where he
is. And I need to take a look around your house.'
"The hell you do,' Gina said. "I don't know what you
think you're doing here, but...'
His hand came up so fast she didn't even see it. The
first she knew was when it was clamped around the bottom
of her face, holding her jaw like a claw.
She was too shocked to make a sound as he began to
pull her slowly towards him. But then she started to
shout, substituting volume for the articulation denied
her by being unable to move the lower half of her mouth.
"Where is it?' he said. Matter-of-fact had become
almost bored.
Gina had no clue what he was talking about. She tried
to pull away, hitting at him with her fists, kicking out,
jerking her head back and forth. He put up with this for
about one second and then whipped his other hand around
to smack her across the side of her head. Her ears rang
like a dropped hubcap and she nearly fell, but he held
her up, pulling her jaw to the side in the process,
making it feel like it was going to pop out.
"I'm going to find it anyway,' he said, and now she
knew she could feel something tearing at the side of her
head. "But you can save us both some time and trouble.
Where is it? Where does he work?'
"I... don't...'
"Mom?'
Gina and the man turned together, to see Josh at the
bottom of the stairs. Her son blinked, a deep frown
spreading across his face.
"Let go of my mom.'
Gina tried to tell him to get back upstairs, to just
run, but it came out as desperate, breathless grunts. The
man stuck his other hand in the pocket of his coat,
started pulling something out.
Josh hit the ground running and launched himself
across the sitting room. "Let go of my...'
Gina just had time to realize she'd got it wrong
before, that her son wasn't a man after all but just a
little boy, stretched taller and thinner but still so
young, when the man shot him in the face.

She screamed then, or tried to, and the tall man
swore quietly and dragged her with him as he walked over
to the front door and pushed it shut.
Then he pulled her back into the room where her son
lay on the ground, one arm and one leg moving in
twitches. Her head felt like it was full of bright light,
stuttering with shock. Then he punched her precisely on
the jaw and she didn't know where she was.
A second or several minutes passed.
Then she was aware again, sprawled on the floor,
half-propped against the couch she'd been curled up in
ten minutes before. The plate of food lay upside down
within arms' reach. Her jaw was hanging loose, she
couldn't seem to move it. It felt like someone had pushed
long, thick nails into both of her ears.
The man in the coat was squatted down next to Josh,
whose right arm was still moving, lazily smearing through
the pool of blood seeping from his head.
The smell of petrol reached Gina's face. The man
finished squirting something from a small metal tin over
her son, then dropped it on him and stood up.
He looked down at Gina.
"Last chance,' he said. His forehead was beaded with
sweat, though the house was not warm. In one hand he held
a cigarette lighter. In the other he held his gun. "Where
is it?'
As he sparked the lighter up, holding it over Josh
and looking her in the eyes, Gina knew that — whatever
this was — it wasn't a last chance to live.

