CHAPTER ONE
Beneath Ingleborough Fell, Yorkshire Dales,
window at the sandstone library and great lawned courts of
Bede's College, with their five hundred years of tending and all
the legends that went with them. She had learned those, too. "I
thought the skull killed all those who ever held it?'
He had laughed and slid his part-dressed body over the top of
her and said, Only if they fell into the sins of lust and avarice. We
won't do that.
They were close then, eye to eye, nose to nose, heartbeat to
heartbeat sharing each breath. He had let go with his elbows. She
had held the weight of him balanced on the palms of her hands
and looked up into the measure of his face and, quite truthfully,
said, "I could fall into lust for the first descent of an undiscovered
cave. You can't begin to imagine what kind of gift that would be.'
But I can. You're a caver: it means to you what finding Owen's
heart-stone would mean to me. It's why we can do it, you and me,
bravely and together. Then we can tell the world what we have
found.
She was the caver; hers the responsibility to bring the dream to
reality. Which was why she had persisted after she found the rock
fall that blocked the route, and why, when she had discovered an
opening that might lead to where they wanted to go, she had gone
first along the long, claustrophobic tunnel, where she had to
become a snake and then an eel and then a worm in order to bend
round the corners and slide under the overhangs and creep, inch
by pulling inch, up fifty metres of a one in ten incline that brought
her at last to the exit and the cavern beyond.
The rope went tight in her hands and then slack again as Kit
rounded the final bend. She switched on her head-torch, to give
him something to aim for.
Like a flickering cinema, her beam picked out random lengths
of stalactites and stalagmites, closing like shark's teeth from floor
to roof and back again. She eased the camera from the lid of her
pack and turned a full half-circle, taking serial shots from floor to
roof and roof to floor.
The flash reached out and splashed colour across the rising,
falling calcite, drew rainbows from the constant sheen of water,
sprinkled brilliant, living diamonds across the roof at each crack
and angle of the rock.
She took pictures for the sheer joy of it, revelling in the beauty.
Only as Kit was easing out of the tunnel to stand beside her, did
she follow at last the thunderous noise and turn west, to shed
light on the cascading torrent of the waterfall.
"My God . . .'
"The cathedral of the earth. You clever, clever girl. I thought the
rock fall had finished us.'
She was no longer alone. Kit's voice warmed her ear. Kit's arm
wrapped her waist, immersing her in bittersweet joy; it was
always hard to relinquish the purity of solitude, and yet, out of all
the world, this one man understood her need for black aloneness
and did not fear it.
She leaned in to him, dry-suit to dry-suit, and turned her light
up to his face. Encircled by black neoprene, he was filthy and
euphoric at once; a man on the brink of a promise.
She said, "I can't think Cedric Owen knew about this route;
you'd never get a Tudor physician in doublet and tights along that
tunnel.'
"Nor any sane man, without his lady love to guide him.' He
twirled a knightly bow and blew her a kiss. "Mrs O'Connor, I
adore you and everything there is of you, but I can't kiss you with
a head-torch on.'
Laughing, she snatched the flying blessing from the air with her
teeth. "That's Dr Cody, until it becomes Professor Cody, and don't
you ever forget it.' They had been wed for a little over forty-eight
hours. Already the argument was old and private between them;
in public there was never a chance he would steal her name.
She said, "Have you a flare? It'd be good to see it all properly.'
"I have.' He was already rummaging in his pack. "And then we
have to find out where Owen came in when he walked the easy
route. I'm rather hoping there's an obvious way out. I really don't
want to have to do that second hairpin in reverse. Going down
and then up and trying to turn at the same time wouldn't be any
fun at all.'

"But not impossible. It matters to remember that.' She had been
caught once in a cave where the way in was not a possible way
out. She dreamed of it still, on the bad nights, when life pressed
too close. "Light the flare and let's see all that we haven't seen yet.'
"Ask and it shall be given.' Kit locked the flare in a cleft high up
where he could reach and she could not; six inches' extra height
was good for some things and bad for others. "Stand back.'
He lit it with his hand covering his face, as she had taught him,
and stepped back before the magnesium fully lit.
White! Blistering incandescence spilled from the cavern wall.
Under its light, the stalagmites were virgin snow, the waterfall
was a cascade of living ice, and beyond all the jagged shark's teeth
the cave's roof was finally visible, a greying white limestone arch
halfway to the heavens.
"How high is it, do you think?' Kit asked. His voice was lost in
the rush and thunder of the waterfall.
"A hundred metres? Maybe a bit more. We could climb one of
the walls and find out if you're feeling keen.'
"Am I ever keen to lift my feet off the ground if I don't have to?'
He grinned a little sickly. "I'd rather find the skull.'
He leaned back on the wall, bit his glove off one hand, delved
into the hidden pockets of his backpack, and came out with the
precious folded paper, the print of Cedric Owen's cipher, the
pinnacle of three years' work.
That which you seek lies hidden in white water. The waterfall
is white.'
"And the water is full of limescale, which is another form of
white. Read me again the bit that comes after having the courage
to go forward?'
He was a poet at heart, for all that he buried his head in hexadecimal
code and computer languages. He turned so that the flare
cast his shadow behind him and read aloud:
"Enter with courage. Go forward as far as the dark
allows. Step through night's arch and come at last to the
cathedral of the earth. Face the rising of the sun, and its
setting, pierce the curtain to the well of living water and
discover at last the pearl there entombed.'
He lowered the paper. Softly, he said, "We have come at last to
the cathedral of the earth.'
"We have. So next we have to face the rising and setting sun.
But we didn't step through night's arch to get here, we crawled
through a tunnel that wasn't there before half a ton of rock fell
into the route Cedric Owen took. We need to find out where he
came in before we can work out where he went next.'
Stella stood at the margins of the magnesium white and turned
in a slow circle. Her head-lamp cut a horizontal line along the
wall, cutting through stalactites, snagging on outcrops, falling
into a tall slice of darkness.
"There.'
She ran to it, soft-footed on wet rock. The arch was more of a
cleft, jaggedly asymmetric, higher than her upstretched hands,
broader than her arm-span. She followed the dark space cautiously,
rounding a bend, moving into a narrower passageway.
"Stell?' Kit was at the entrance, peering in.
She shouted back to him, cupping her hands against the echo.
"This is it. The rock fall's up ahead. It must be at least twenty
metres thick. Our crawl-tunnel looped out and round to come out
further along the cavern's wall.' She reversed back towards him,
playing her torch over the passage walls. Here and there were
smudges of colour that barely held her torchlight.
"I think there are cave paintings on the wall.' She could hear the
awe in her own voice. "We're going to have to tell people about
this.'
She backed out, into the cavern, to the place where there was
light enough to see, to look around, to search the high walls for
other signs of ancient life.
"God, Kit . . . I take it all back. There are better things than
finding a cave no one has ever been in.' She grinned at him,
stupidly, her blood fizzing in her veins.
"Stell?'

The flare was fading fast. Gobbets of molten magnesium fell
hissing to the ground. In the yellowing light, she saw him pull off
his head-torch and strip back the black neoprene hood. His hair
glowed like gold in the poor light. There was a line of clean skin
where the cap had been. He had half a day's stubble, which had
caught the mud. She saw what he was going to do and yanked off
her own gloves, and touched her face and was glad that it was not
clean.
He leaned forward, and lifted her torch clear of her head and
stripped her cap back as he had his own. Coppery lights bounced
off her hair and lit the water. He was near and warm and he
smelled of sweat and fear and excitement and she loved him.
They closed the kiss in darkness, with no head-torches and no
flare, and Stella was afraid, suddenly, for both of them, that from
these heights there was only a long slope down.
He caught the swoop of her feeling. Hoarsely, he said, "Are you
ready to face the rising of the sun and its setting?'
She checked the compass on her wrist. "I think that means we
need to go east of the entrance and then west. There's a river over
by the north side of the cavern. Can you set the second flare somewhere
up there, so that it shines on the wall and the water
together?'
They had three flares. She very rarely used more than one on
any caving trip. He wedged their second between two stalagmites
at the side of the water-cut channel in the chalk, where she
showed him. The magnesium spat and flared and the black
ribbon of the river became a thread of silver in snow.
Stella said, "We don't know how deep it is and it's too wide to
jump We're looking for a bridge, or a stepping stone, or a pinch
point where we can cross.'
Kit was ahead of her, searching. He was back in neoprene with
his lamp set at his brow. The smears on his cheeks made him more
gaunt than he should have been. He said, "Why are we trying to
cross the river?'
"Because it's the only good reason to go east before we go west.
There must be a crossing point to the east so we can walk back
west along the north wall. The waterfall is a curtain and there's a
pool at its foot that's as close to a well of living water as we're
likely to get. It's also as far from night's arch as you can go in this
cave. Owen was hiding his heart-stone to keep it safe for
posterity. He didn't want it to be easy to find, but equally not
impossible. Therefore, across the river, which you wouldn't do by
chance, or even by choice, unless you had to.'
"Then we'll cross here, will we?' said Kit uncertainly. "On the
stepping stones that look like marbles?'
The stepping stones also rolled like marbles underfoot, so that,
after a trial step on the first one, Stella made Kit wait while she
set another bolt and strung out two lines at right angles to give
maximum security before she tried again. She was glad of them
when the third stone rolled under her feet and she felt the strength
of the black current.
"You're cold,' Kit said, when he joined her.
She might have tried to deny it, but his hand was on her arm,
bouncing in time with her shuddering. She shrugged and made
her teeth keep still from chattering. "Caves are always cold. I'll be
fine when we get moving again. And it's not a bad thing to be wet
if we're going to have to dive for the skull.'
"You don't have the gear to dive.' He sounded anxious, which
was not at all like him; the water had unnerved him more than
either of them had expected.
"I have you. What more Kit do I need?' It was cheap, but she
was in need of easy warmth. "And we're not coming back, are we?
It's too far and no cave in the world is as much fun a second time.
I've got a mask and an underwater light. They'll do.'
"We might need the third flare.'
"No. We don't know what's ahead. We might need it to get out.
Come on, let's have a look at the waterfall.' Already, she was
regretting the profligate waste of the earlier light.
"Face the rising of the sun and its setting. Pierce the curtain to
the well of living water and discover at last . . . et cetera, et
cetera.'

Her world was limited to the circle of her head-torch, and Kit's
beside her. In all the looming blackness, the noise told her more
than she had seen of the waterfall, of its size, and its volume and
the plunging depth of the pool at its feet.
She tilted her head back to look up at the cataract, to guess its
height. Her beam did not reach a point where there was no water,
although right at the limit of its reach was turbulence, and a spray
that reached far out into the cavern and danced like fairy lights so
that she could believe the river's head might be there.
When she looked down, she followed boiling ice-cold water
that plunged deep into blackness for an immeasurable depth. For
the hell of it, she found a stone the size of her fist and threw it in.
It spun like a leaf in the violent water and vanished.
"Pierce the curtain,' Kit said. "Christ. How?'
"I don't know, but Cedric Owen did it four hundred and
nineteen years ago without magnesium flares or a neoprene drysuit
and he came out alive, so we have to assume that it's not as
terrifying as it looks. I think if we—'
"Stell?'
"Take a look at the northern end of the rock face where the
waterfall ends, then we—'
"Stella . . .'
"—might find that there's a hollow in the space behind the
water that will let us— What?'
"I don't think he did.' Kit's voice was flat, leached of all
inflection.
"You don't think who did what?'
"I don't think Cedric Owen made it out alive. There's a skeleton
here, with not a bit of flesh on it, and a huge amount of lime scale
deposit, which suggests to my untrained eyes that it's been here
for a very long time.'

