"Harry!' Hermione's voice was becoming more urgent now. "What are you doing?' 
"Oi! Mate, what are looking at?' Ron was yelling. 
As Harry approached the building, he was unable to speak, unable to answer their calls. Pulling up 
before the large iron gates, he placed a gloved hand on one of the bars as if by touching it, it would 
become undeniably real. 
He could hear Ron and Hermione's footsteps quickening as they came up behind him, but he could 
not yet draw his gaze from the deadened building. The minute his eyes had fallen upon it, he knew 
he had seen it before. In fact, he had not only seen it before, he had been there. 
Ron and Hermione were panting as they came to a halt at the gates, trying to understand what it 
was that had held Harry's attention so completely. 
"What?' Ron breathed as he bent over and placed his hands on his knees, the cold air making it all 
the more difficult to draw in breath. 
"This is it' Harry said, almost not daring to speak it aloud, both his gloved hands now clutching at 
the cold metal bars on the gate. 
"This is what?' Hermione said, breathing heavily as her eyes roamed over the impossibly dull 
building. 
Harry let go of the gate and took a step back, taking it all in. "This is where Tom Riddle grew up.' He 
still spoke as if he said it too loud, it would disappear. 
"What?' Ron said unbelievably as he straightened to get a better look. 
"Are you sure?' Hermione too, had taken to almost whispering, whether following Harry's lead, or 
more likely, was awed at the realization that this was the place where the darkest wizard of all time 
had spent his childhood. 
"This is the orphanage Dumbledore came to when he offered Riddle a place at Hogwarts.' Harry still 
couldn't quite believe he was suddenly faced with it. "This is where he brought me in the pensieve.' 
All three of them stood silently watching the building for a time, and then Harry took a step forward 
to the gates and lifted the latch. It creaked open ominously as he passed through it. 
"What are you doing?' Hermione half whispered. 
"It looks like someone still lives here' Harry said as he craned his neck back, staring up at a small 
light on in one of the third floor windows. 
"So what if they do?' Ron was also whispering, obviously affected by the disturbing history of the 
place. "How's that going to help us find…' he cut himself off before blurting out aloud the reason 
they had come. 
Harry ignored them and made his way up the few stairs to the door, and lifting his hand, hesitating
- 163 - 
for the tiniest moment, he knocked lightly, looking back at Ron and Hermione standing outside the 
gate. He waited with great anticipation, but no answer came. 
He knocked again, more forcefully this time, and waited. It was becoming obvious that no one was 
in, and just as he started to descend the stairs, he heard the rough clanging of a massive bolt being 
slid open on the other side of the door. Abruptly it swung inwards, revealing a rather skinny, frail 
old woman. 
She had grizzled grey hair that stuck out in all directions from a poorly twisted bun, and a number 
of spiky looking grey whiskers protruding from her chin. Her rather wrinkled features seemed to 
bare the weight of a hard life, and her clothing was drab to the extreme, yet was overlaid in stark 
contrast by a bright floral apron that seemed glaringly inappropriate. 
"Yes?' she demanded in a crackly old voice, somewhat out of breath. 
"Oh, er … I don't mean to bother you-' 
"Of course you do! Why else would you come knocking on my door?' As she spoke, she showed her 
crooked, yellowed teeth that looked like they were barely hanging from her receding gums, and in 
between those crooked, yellowed teeth, were black gaps where it seemed that some of her teeth 
had finally lost the battle to cling on. 
Harry tried to avoid looking at it. 
"Er … um, I-I was just wondering if you know anything about the orphanage that used to be here?' 
The woman paused for the longest time, just staring at him, and then a small smile crept across her 
crooked mouth. 
"What's your name boy?' 
Harry didn't know if this woman was muggle or witch, but with his beanie on his scar was hidden 
out of sight. "Harry' He said "Harry Potter.' 
"Of course you are!' she said. She glanced around him at the two teenagers hovering at the gate. 
"Friends of yours?' she said accusingly. 
"Er … yeah,' 
"Well, its all the same to me if they want to wait out here in the cold.' She held the door open just 
enough to allow Harry to pass through, and as he stepped over the threshold, he looked back 
nervously at Ron and Hermione. They exchanged glances and walked slowly to the open door as 
Harry disappeared behind it. The iron-gate clanged shut behind them, making them both jump as 
they half glanced over their shoulders. 
"Well, come on then!' the old woman crackled impatiently. "You get to my age, you don't have time 
to be waitin' on people as slow as you two!' 
Ron turned to Hermione, all thoughts of their previous pettiness forgotten. "I'm not sure this is such 
a good idea.' He said under his breath as they continued to approach slowly. "There's something 
about her-' 
"You don't trust?' Hermione finished, looking just as apprehensive. But with Harry already inside, 
what choice did they have? They mounted the stairs, and Ron, taking Hermione by the arm, all the 
while placing himself between her and the grizzled old woman, entered to hallway. The door was 
slammed shut and bolted behind them. 
~*~*~*~*~ 
Harry stood in the familiar black and white tiled entry hall, staring up the stone stairs, pulling off his
- 164 - 
gloves, half expecting the younger looking Dumbledore and the eleven year old Tom Riddle to come 
strolling down towards them. But it appeared the place was empty now, though it had an 
unpleasant smell that reminded Harry of Mrs. Figgs, the squib that lived down the street from the 
Dursleys. The frazzled old woman was watching Harry silently as he shoved his gloves idly in his 
cloak pocket and pulled off his beanie. Tom's old room was up there somewhere, just meters from 
where he now stood. 
Without realizing it, Harry's hand had gripped the balustrade, and he had one foot already on the 
lower step as if he were about to climb the stairs. Then, as his face turned to the second landing, an 
unnaturally cold draft seemed to pass right through him. His hair ruffled almost unnoticeably 
causing a shudder to ripple down his spine as he felt the breath leave him momentarily. 
"Harry?' Hermione came up beside him, but even her familiar voice was unable to drag his eyes 
from the floor above. "What is it?' 
"Didn't you feel it?' he breathed. 
"What?' she frowned as she followed his gaze. Ron joined them at the foot of the stairs. 
"What are you looking at?' He asked, watching their expressions. 
"Look if you will, that's why you're here isn't it?' The woman's gravely voice drew all of them to turn 
their heads and look at her. Her lips curled into a dry smile as she looked directly at Harry. "I wish I 
could be of more help dear, but you wont find anything. This place has been empty for more than 
sixteen years. There's nothing here now but some useless old furniture, plenty of cobwebs and…' 
she trailed off. 
"And what?' Harry dropped to the foot of the stairs again as he turned to face her. "There is 
something else here too, I know. What is it?' 
"What makes you think so?' she said, smiling as she raised an eyebrow. Harry's eyes narrowed. 
"Because I can feel it.' 
The old woman cackled at Harry's words. "It is not my place to understand what may lurk here.' Her 
laughter died as quickly as it had been born. "As Dumbledore knew well.' 
"Dumbledore?' Harry asked "He put you here?' 
"He did.' Harry had the impression she did not like Dumbledore. 
"What do you know about this place?' He pushed. 
"It was an orphanage once.' 
"And the Chapel down the road?' Harry asked intently. The woman's mild expression changed at the 
mention of the chapel. Her face dropped. 
"I know nothing about the Chapel.' She said flatly. 
"But it would have been the local chapel for the orphanage, wouldn't it?' Hermione asked innocently. 
"That was before my time. For all I know, they never visited the chapel.' The woman eyed Hermione 
out of the corner of her eye. 
"Why are you here?' Harry asked her "What did Dumbledore ask of you?' 
"He told me to mind the place. Watch over it. He knew that you would come.' She said slyly. 
"How is that possible?' Harry interjected abruptly. "I didn't know myself until just now when I 
stumbled onto the place by accident.'
- 165 - 
The old woman seemed to grow nervously impatient at Harry's continued questioning. She waved 
her hand at the stairway. 
"The room you seek is on the first floor, third door to the right.' 
Harry watched the woman for a moment, eyeing her curiously as she avoided his gaze, before 
turning back to the stone steps. 
"Don't take too long, dear!' she said in a falsely honeyed voice as Hermione and Ron fell in behind 
Harry. 
They climbed the stone stairs as if it were the last thing they wanted to do. When they reached the 
first landing, Harry glanced over his shoulder to see if the woman had followed them, but she was 
nowhere in sight. 
"She lied.' Harry said as he looked down the hallway. 
"What are you talking about?' Hermione asked in a hoarse whisper. 
"She lied about where Tom Riddle's room was.' Harry was speaking softly so that the three of them 
had to crowd their heads together. 
"How do you know?' asked Ron. 
"I went to Riddle's room with Dumbledore when he brought me here in the pensieve. It's off the 
second landing, not the first, and it was the first door.' 
"But Dumbledore put her here. Why would she lie?' Hermione asked sceptically. 
"I don't know.' 
"Maybe she wasn't lying.' They both turned to look at Ron "I mean, yeah, she's a bit weird, I know,' 
Weird was putting it mildly as far as Harry was concerned. "But maybe she doesn't know you're here 
to see Riddle's room.' 
"If Dumbledore put her here, she would know why I came.' Harry stated darkly. 
"Maybe the room you should be looking at is that one down there.' Ron continued as he motioned 
his head to the doorway. "Not Riddle's old room at all.' 
Harry went quiet as he thought about what Ron had said. But it didn't seem right. Something told 
him it was Riddles room that would be the only important place here to both Harry and Voldemort. 
"What do we do?' Hermione's whispers were getting quieter, but more urgent. Harry looked about 
him for a moment. 
"Ron, you wait outside the door down there,' Harry pointed to the chipped and flaky wooden third 
door down the hallway. "And whatever you do, do not go into that room! Hermione, you come with 
me.' Harry started to move off towards the stairs again. 
"Hang on, what am I supposed to do if she comes up looking for you?' Ron asked. 
"Hold her off with chit-chat… and if that doesn't work …' Harry winced as he shrugged "Hex her.' He 
continued up the stairs with Hermione in tow. 
"Great!' They could hear Ron mumbling as he headed down the passageway. "Hex an old woman 
that Dumbledore put here to guard the place!' he scoffed "Brilliantly cunning plan.' His voice trailed 
off as Harry and Hermione stopped in front of the first door after quietly making their way to the 
second landing. 
Harry put his hand on the door handle.
- 166 - 
"WAIT!' Hermione reached out and placed her hand over his to stop him from turning the handle. "If 
this is Tom Riddle's old room, and that old woman didn't want us to get in here, then maybe its 
protected.' Harry looked into her worried eyes and pulled his hand away. 
"Hermione, I have to get in there.' He knew there was a link, a reason the Hufflepuff chapel had led 
him straight to the orphanage where Riddle grew up. As they stood there, the temperature dropped 
dramatically, and Harry shuddered, grabbing Hermione's arm. 
"Can you feel that?' 
"What?' she was studying his face, trying to work out what it was he was talking about. 
"Cold.' He said. Hermione looked down and saw the Goosebumps on his wrist above the hand that 
gripped her. 
'Are you all right?' 
"I have been waiting for you, Harry Potter.' 
A chilling voice that seemed to come from no direction in particular, swept around Harry and echoed 
through him. 
"Who are you?' he asked, his heartbeat racing as his head turned, urgently seeking the source of the 
ghostly being. His eyes fell on Hermione, who by the way she was looking at him, had heard 
nothing. 
"I am the one who will help you into his room, and I ask for only one thing in return.' The voice 
rasped as the cold seeped through Harry's thick clothing. His breath was coming out frosted as he 
started to shiver. 
"What?' 
"Harry, are you okay?' Hermione was watching him as he clasped his arms about him, shrinking in 
the cold. 
"You must avenge my trust in him. You must swear ... no matter what the cost to you ... you will 
destroy him!' 
The voice hissed in what sounded like a hundred whispering voices. Harry lowered his head as 
images of the people Harry cared about flashed before him, lingering on Ginny. 
"I can't.' He whispered. 
"Harry!' Hermione had his face in her hands, trying to get him to look at her. 

