iVerts 

FMCG 

"What's your name?' 

Kristin barely turned round before choosing her answer. 

"Piss off,' she said, and swivelled on her stool. 

The guy stood in front of her, confident, drunk, his eyes wide and glassy. But it was Esh he was staring at, a meeklooking friend behind him, the two of them gazing at Esh as she sat at the bar with her back turned. 

"Where are you from?' the drunk guy asked. 

Esh stayed where she was, fingers resting on her nearfinished drink on the counter, legs stretching to the ground. In the dim light of the bar her face looked almost angelic, pale skin striking beneath her crop of dark hair. 

"I thought I told you to piss off,' Kristin reminded him. 

"Your friend not speak for herself?' 

"She doesn't need an asshole like you bugging her.' 

"I'm not talking to you.' 

"Yeah?' said Kristin. "Well, I'm talking to you.' 

As sedate as he was, the guy was finding it hard to ignore Kristin's interruptions. He turned his languid eyes towards her and looked her up and down. 

"The fuck are you?' he snorted. "The night shift?' 

Kristin took a calm look over herself. 

"Let me see,' she said. 

This guy didn't scare her. She knew how underdressed she looked. She was in her house jeans and sweatshirt, and Esh was in a T-shirt and Khakis. Neither of them was wearing makeup. Neither of them had their hair fixed. They'd just walked the five hundred yards from Kristin's parents' house, a couple of streets off Oxford Street, to have a quiet Saturday night drink at Dusk Junkie's. Now the bar was filling up with excruciatingly trendy people, but the people who ran Dusk Junkie's had known Esh and Kristin for a long time, and always let them in no matter how they were dressed. 

How anyone would come up and start hitting on them now was beyond her. That was the thing, though. Esh could have dressed in fish-stinking sackcloth and every guy in the bar would still have wanted to talk to her. But Kristin didn't mind. That was just the way it had always been. 

"That's right,' Kristin replied. "We're the cleaners. We're just getting hammered before we start our shift.' 

The guy chuckled. 

"What do you really do?' 

"We're investment bankers.' 

He sniggered. 

"Really?' 

"Yes.' 

"What area?' 

"Structured corporate finance.' 

The guy grinned, not knowing whether to laugh or believe it. He gazed thoughtfully into Esh's back. Whatever was going on in his head, his eyes weren't giving much away. Even he wasn't sure which way his mood was going to go. 

Slowly, he turned his eyes back to Kristin. 

"Don't piss me off, all right?' 

"Leave us alone,' she said. 

Eyes swimming, his lip started to curl. He raised his finger at Kristin, and suddenly, unexpectedly, jabbed it between her eyes. 

"Dave!' she cried. 

Dave the head barman looked up from the end of the room and motioned to the bouncers. Undeterred, the guy pressed his finger against her forehead. 

"Twat.' 

Esh turned round. 

She curled her fingers around his hand, gave it a little twist, and instantly he skewered to the floor. 

The suddenness of her movement startled his friend into alertness. He gaped at his drunk friend on the floor, one arm raised absurdly in the air as Esh kept him down. 

"If I let go of your friend,' she told him, "he'll probably get up and start acting even more of an asshole than before. So I'm just going to let him cool off. Okay?' 

The silent guy nodded, looking at Esh in admiration. She was taller than him, looking back at him with beautiful dark eyes. 

"Everything all right?' Dave called anxiously, running over with the bouncers. 

They stopped and looked at the guy on the floor. 

"Yep,' said Kristin. "Looks like we're fine.' 

Dave didn't take any chances, and had the bigger two of the bouncers pick the guy up and pin his arms behind him. 

With sudden surprising strength, the drunk guy struggled, loosening the bouncers' grip, and managed to take a quick swing at one of them before the third bouncer stepped in and punched him in the gut. All three of them pinned him down, and with the guy tussling between them, they led him through the bar as the crowd in Dusk Junkie's looked on. The bar was buzzing, music and voices mixing with the ads and video clips on the iBoards, suffusing everything with shafts of vibrant colours and glowing light. But the commotion was enough to attract everyone's attention. 

The drunk guy's friend trailed behind him, still silent, and turned to take one last look at Esh before he too was chucked out unceremoniously onto Oxford Street. 

"You okay?' Dave asked. 

Esh shrugged, and gave him a nod. 

"Fine.' 

"Do you do martial arts?' 

"No.' 

"Are you sure?' 

She'd floored a guy it had taken three of his bouncers to escort from the bar. 

"Yes,' she said curiously. "Why?' 

Dave shook his head. 

"I'll get you girls some drinks,' he said. 

He walked off, and Esh resumed her place on her stool. 

"Thanks, Esh,' Kristin told her. 

She leaned over and kissed Esh's head. The two of them turned to each other, belated nerves now making them grin. 

"How do you do it, Esh?' 

Esh shrugged again. She didn't know. She'd never used physical strength on anyone before, really. She'd just got off her stool the moment she saw the guy attacking Kristin and, without processing the situation, floored him. 

"On the house,' Dave said. 

He slid two freshly-made Mohitos across the counter. 

"With apologies from the management.' 

He left them, and returned to his paying customers. 

Taking a breath, Esh and Kristin turned to each other and raised their glasses. 

"The future,' said Kristin. 

Esh smiled and clinked glasses. 

"The future.' 

She and Kristin had been at school together since they were four. Fifteen years later, it was a Saturday night in August, on the main drag of Oxford Street, and they were still each other's only friends. 

From their very first day at Ford, they'd never been the gregarious, mixing-with-the-gang types. Withdrawn and uninterested in anyone, the two of them had gravitated towards each other and had never ventured any further. 

Throughout their time at school the teachers had showed them off to the rest of their year as prodigies, driving Esh and Kristin further into their exclusive and private world. They might have been classroom freaks, but when it came to tests and exams Kristin and Esh outclassed everyone. 

They'd started so differently. 

Kristin's family had always had money, living in a fourstorey house in Portman Square where Kristin had been born. Her dad was a lawyer. Her mum was a financier. Kristin's siblings went on to become City professionals, but Kristin still stood out, the more so because no one had really expected the young afterthought of the family to echo the success of her brothers and sisters. She could have gone to Ford whatever had happened, but she attended the school on as much merit as Esh. 

The difference was that Esh had never been destined to go to Ford. 

She took a sip of her Mohito and looked around. Dusk Junkie's was filling up slowly, the crowd gradually moving around her and Kristin as they sat on their own at the end of the bar. On the far side of the long room, the floor-to-ceiling iBoards glowed on the bar's walls, blaring with videos and ads. On one of the screens, Esh saw the boys from FMCG prancing around in the video for their new single, "PollyGonnaRocka', a tie-in for the latest Sneaker Store campaign. She watched, stunned as ever by how mystifyingly crap the video was and how successfully FMCG sold their product. They'd been so perfectly styled to bring out the Sneaker Store endorsement, the entire video synched to enhance the "Sneakers' motif. 

"Jesus,' she sighed. 

"FMCG?' Kristin asked without turning. 

She knew that sigh. 

Esh leaned forward to glance outside, idly surveying the busy crowd on Oxford Street. Shoppers, tourists, teenagers out for the night, all thronging through the street, weaving in and out of shops. Every now and then a couple of trams thundered by, street-guards momentarily stalling the steady stream of people to let them pass safely. The SkyBoards above shone so brightly it seemed as if they were only metres away. Orbiting in space, each SkyBoard stretched a hundred miles long and transmitted huge advertisements across the world, leaving narrow strips of night between one slab of brightness and the next. The giant mosaic of ads for Interface, Bank, Sneaker, Juice, and the rest of the endless roster of products and services that beckoned to the crowd below, moved above in a luminescent canopy, adding to the intensity of the iBoards and the building-size video-walls across the Sneaker Store and Khaki Company. 

Esh turned her head slightly to take in the queue outside Dusk Junkie's, steadily trickling into the bar from behind the transparent iBoard that fronted the premises. The iBoard played a Japanese cartoon to the outside queue, casting red, green and yellow pools of light over everyone already inside. 

"I'm hungry. Let's get some fries,' Kristin suggested. 

She called over a barman, asked him to bring them a couple of bowls. 

Esh sipped her Mohito. 

Dad was a professor at Imperial, Mum taught physics at UCL. Education meant more to them than anything, but neither of them had ever made enough money to consider sending Esh to somewhere as exclusive as Ford. 

She realised that, beneath their close bond, she'd always felt a bit sorry for them. She'd often found herself pitying them when she looked at the simplicity of their lives, and her own, compared to the other girls at Ford. 

Only recently had she come to understand what Mum and Dad's financial humility really was. Deep down, they'd have loved to have money. They'd have loved to have sent her to Ford on their own earnings and given her everything she'd wanted. But in the end money just wasn't as important to them as their personal happiness, their careers. They lived for what they did. Even at the weekends they were always working in their studies, in the tiny terraced house in East Stratford they'd shared since their marriage. 

So little seemed to have happened in their lives. They'd never gone anywhere. Every holiday Esh had ever been on, bar a stay in Normandy with Mum and Dad when she was two, had been with Kristin's family. They included Esh on their yearly trips without even thinking of asking Mum and Dad for a contribution. Or maybe they'd never had the heart to ask for money that probably wasn't there. 

Esh remembered her parents and Kristin's parents meeting once and the guilty embarrassment she'd felt at her parents exuding their pious bookishness beside the glamour of Kristin's mum and dad. 

From early on, Esh had always been treated as one of Kristin's family. Kristin's parents could see as well as Esh's that Kristin and Esh were an odd couple, but that was okay. Esh and Kristin made each other happy. They didn't squabble and lose their tempers like a lot of children did. They had a silent understanding through which they never infringed on each other's space, and Esh had quickly become a member of Kristin's family. 

But inside herself, through her whole adolescence, Esh had never lost the feeling that she was different, not just in terms of intelligence and physical ability, but in terms of money. However much she hid behind Kristin's self-assurance, she felt constantly aware that she was the scholarship girl from East Stratford who'd come to join the ranks of Ford. 

Mum and Dad both did jobs they loved, and had reached the top of their professions. But they'd never made wild financial successes of themselves, they'd never left their roots. They were modest, tidy people who praised Esh for doing so well at school. But Esh couldn't deny that their small lives depressed her, and sometimes made her feel as alienated at home as she did at school. 

Kristin was the only one who didn't make her feel odd. Kristin was her bridge. Together, they kept each other safe inside a world that seemed to find no place in the world around them. 

"Fries. Times two.' 

The barman landed the bowls in front of them. Without giving Esh the chance to open her mouth, Kristin told the barman she'd pay, and transferred her Account details via the bar's Interface. Immediately, the price of the fries showed up in her EyeScreen and she confirmed the sale, triggering the debit to her Account. 

"Thanks,' Esh whispered as Kristin slid one of the bowls over. 

"Don't mention it.' 

They sat eating their fries at the end of the bar, while the glowing space of Dusk Junkie's thrummed around them. 

Esh had been scouted by Ford's special bursary scheme at the age of four. When they found her at her local primary, they immediately gave her a scholarship. There was nothing she couldn't do. Gymnastics, running, swimming, volleyball, tennis, fencing. She did everything better, faster and with more poise than anyone else at Ford. She mastered everything she touched, there was no intellectual challenge she couldn't overcome, no sporting discipline she couldn't perfect. She was tall, strong, fit, lithe, and entirely in a class of her own. 


