King Khalid International Airport 
Tuesday 6 May 2009 

The black Cadillac stretch limousine moved swiftly around the public drop-off point to a wide double gate, already opened by the two armed guards. On each wing of the big American automobile fluttered two pennants, the green and blue ensigns of the Royal Saudi Naval Forces. 

Both guards saluted as the instantly recognisable limo swept past and out towards the wide runway of Terminal Three, the exclusive enclave of Saudia, the national airline. 

Inside the limousine was a solitary passenger in Arab dress: Crown Prince Nasir Ibn Mohammed, Deputy Minister of the Armed Forces. Both sentries saluted as Prince Nasir went by, heading straight for the runway where one of the King's newest Boeing 747s was awaiting him, engines idling preparatory to take off. Every other flight was on hold until the meticulously punctual Prince Nasir was in the air. 

The prince was escorted to the steps of the aircraft by both the chief steward and a senior naval officer. Prince Nasir's own son, the twenty-six-year-old Commodore Fahad Ibn Nasir, served in a Red Sea frigate, and his father was always treated like an admiral wherever he travelled in the Kingdom. 

He was also the only passenger on board, and the moment he was seated in the upstairs first-class section the door was tightly secured and the pilot opened the throttles. The royal passenger jet, revelling in its light load, roared off down the runway and screamed into the clear blue skies, directly into the hot south wind off the desert, before banking left towards the Gulf, and then north-west across Iraq, towards Syria. 

It was almost unheard of for a senior member of the royal family to travel alone, without even a bodyguard, but this was different. The 747 was not going even halfway to Prince Nasir's final destination. He used it only to get out of Saudi Arabia, to another Arab country. His real destination was entirely another matter. 

A suitcase at the rear of the upstairs area contained his Western clothes and, as soon as the flight was airborne, Prince Nasir changed into a dark grey suit, blue shirt and a maroon-patterned silk Hermès tie, completed with a solid gold clip in the shape of a desert scimitar. He wore plain black loafers, hand-made in London, with dark grey socks. 

The suitcase also contained a briefcase, containing several documents, which the Prince removed, and he then packed away his white Arabian thobe, red and white ghutra headdress with its double cord, the aghal. He had left King Khalid International Airport, named for his late great-uncle, as an Arab. He would arrive in Damascus every inch the international businessman. 

When they touched down two hours later, a limousine from the Saudi Embassy met him and drove him directly to the regular midday Air France flight to Paris. The aircraft sat with its passengers in their seats; although none of them knew it, they were awaiting the arrival of the Arabian prince. 

The aircraft had in fact pulled back from the jetway and a special flight of stairs had been placed against the forward entrance. Prince Nasir's car halted precisely at those stairs, where an Air France official waited to escort him to his seat. Four rows, eight seats that is, had been booked in the name of the Saudi Embassy on Al-Jala's Avenue. Prince Nasir sat in seat 1A.The rest of the seats in the row would remain empty all the way to Roissy-Charles de Gaulle Airport, 19 miles north of Paris. 

The cabin crew served a special luncheon, prepared by the cooks at the embassy, of curried chicken with rice, cooked Indian-style, followed by fruit juice and sweet pastries. Prince Nasir, the most devout of Muslims, had never touched alcohol in his life and disapproved fiercely of those of his countrymen who did.The late Prince Khalid of Monte Carlo had had many failings.The great man knew, beyond any doubt, of the antics of that particular deceased member of his family. 

They flew on across Turkey and the Balkan States, finally crossing the Alps and dropping down above the lush French farmland lying south of the forest of Ardenne, over the Seine, and into north-west Paris. 

Once more, Prince Nasir endured no formalities or checks. He disembarked before anyone else, down a private flight of stairs, where a jet-black, unmarked French government car waited to drive him directly to the heavily guarded Elysée Palace on rue St-Honoré, the official residence of the Presidents of France since 1873. 

It was a little after 4 p.m. in Paris, the flight from Damascus having taken five hours, with a two-hour time gain. Two officials were waiting at the President's private entrance and Prince Nasir was escorted immediately to the President's private apartment on the first floor overlooking rue de l'Elysée. 

The President was awaiting him in a large modern drawing room, hung with a selection of six breathtaking Impressionist paintings - two by Renoir, two by Claude Monet and one each by Degas and Pissarro. One hundred million dollars would not have bought them. 

The President greeted Prince Nasir in impeccable English, the language agreed for the forthcoming conversation. By previous arrangement, no one would listen in. No ministers. No private secretaries. No translators. The following two hours before dinner would bring a meaning to the word 'privacy' rarely, if ever, attained in international politics. 

'Good afternoon,Your Highness,' said the President in greeting. 'I trust my country's travel arrangements have been satisfactory?' 

'Quite perfect,' replied the prince, smiling. 'No one could have asked for more.' The two men knew each other vaguely, but could not be called friends, let alone blood brothers. Yet. 

The door to the drawing room was closed and two uniformed military guards, summoned from the exterior security force, stood sentry in the outside corridor.The President of France himself poured coffee for his guest from a silver service laid out on a magnificent Napoleonic sideboard. Prince Nasir complimented the President on the beauty of the piece and was amused when the President replied, 'It probably belonged to Bonaparte himself - the Palais de l'Elysée was occupied by Napoleon's sister Caroline for much of the nineteenth century.' 

Prince Nasir loved the traditions of France. A highly educated man, he not only had a Bachelor of Arts degree in English Literature from Harvard, but also a maîtrise (Master's degree) in European History from the University of Paris.The knowledge that Bonaparte himself might have been served from this very sideboard somehow made the coffee taste all the richer. 

'Now,Your Highness,' said the President, 'you must tell me your story, and why you wished to have a talk with me in this most private manner, at such very short notice.' He was keenly aware of the way most high-born Arabs operated: talk about almost anything else for half an hour before tackling the main subject. 

Prince Nasir knew time was precious at this level. The balding, burly politician who stood before him had, after all, an entire country to run. He decided to speak carefully, weighing his words appropriately. 

'Sir,' he said. 'My country is in terminal decline. In the past 20 years the ruling family - my own - has managed to spend over $100 billion of our cash reserves.We are probably down to our last $15 billion. And soon that will be $10 billion and then $5 billion. Twenty years ago my people received a generous share of the oil wealth that Allah has bestowed upon us.Around $30,000 per capita. Today that figure is close to $7,000. Because we can afford no more.' 

'But, of course,' replied the President of France, 'you do own 25 per cent of all the world's oil . . .' 

Prince Nasir smiled. 'Our problem, sir, is not the creation of wealth,' he said. 'I suppose we could close down modern Saudi Arabia and all go back to the desert and sit there allowing our vast oil revenues to accrue, and make us once more one of the richest nations on earth. However, that would plainly be impracticable. 

'Our problem is the reckless spending of money by a ruling family which is now irredeemably corrupt. And a huge percentage of that expenditure goes on the family itself. Thousands and thousands of royal princes are being kept in a style probably not seen on this planet since . . . well, since the Bourbon royal family's domination of your own country. I have stated it often enough. Saudi Arabia is like France before the Revolution. Monsieur Le President, I intend to emulate your brave class warriors of the late eighteenth century. In my own country, I intend to re-enact that renunciation of the rights of the nobility.' 

The President's early left-wing leanings were well documented. Indeed, he had risen to power from a base as the communist mayor of a small town in Brittany. In a previous incarnation, this particular French President would have stormed the gates of Paris in the vanguard of Revolution. Prince Nasir was aware that use of the word 'Bourbon' would elicit instant sympathy. 

The President shrugged, a deep Gallic heave. Then he held out both hands, palms upwards. 'I knew of course some of the difficulties in Saudi Arabia . . . but I put it down mostly to your closeness to the Americans.' 

'That too is a grave problem, sir,' replied Prince Nasir.'My people long for freedom from the Great Satan. But this King is a vigorous globally ambitious man, aged only forty-eight, and under him it would be impossible. We are bound up with the the infidels so tightly . . . even though the majority of Saudis wish devoutly that they could be once more a God-fearing nation of pure Muslims. Not terrorists, just a religious people in tune with the words of the Prophet, rather than the grasping material creeds of the United States. 

'I tell you this, sir. If Osama bin Laden suddenly materialised in Riyadh and ran for President, or even King, he would win in a landslide.' 

The President of France smiled uneasily. 'I imagine there are many Saudi princes who would not agree exactement with your views,' he said. 'I don't imagine that young man who almost sunk the Queen Mary last week would have been . . . er . . . too sympathétique.' 

'He most certainly would not,' said Prince Nasir, frowning. 'He was a prime example of the endless corruption in my country. His type are wastrels, bleeding the country dry with their excesses. If they continue in this way, we will be in danger of becoming a godless Third World country.To stand in one of our royal palaces today is to watch something close to the fall of the Roman Empire!' 

'Or the British,' countered the President, smiling more comfortably.' May I offer you more coffee from Napoleon Bonaparte's sideboard?' 

Although he barely knew him, Prince Nasir had always liked the French President, and he was extremely glad to have the opportunity to get to know him better. 

'Thank you,' he said. And the two men walked across the room towards the silver coffee pot. They were already in step. 

'Well,Your Highness, you are outlining to me a very regrettable state of affairs. And I agree; if I were the Crown Prince of such a nation I too would be extremely exercised by the situation. But, to the outside world, Saudi Arabia looks very much like the one constant in a turbulent Middle East.' 

'That may have been the case 20 years ago, but it is most certainly not so today. It is my belief that this corrupt ruling family must be overthrown, its excesses removed, the lifestyles of the princes terminated. And the colossal spending on military hardware from the United States ceased forthwith. Everything has to change, if we are to survive as the prosperous nation we once were.' 

The prince rose to his feet and paced the room. 'Remember, sir, as a nation we are not yet 80 years old. The active members of this family are just a generation, maybe two, from men who grew up in goat-hair tents and followed the rhythms of the desert, from oasis to oasis, subsisting on dates and camel's milk . . .' 

'You are surely not advocating a return to those days?' asked the President. 

'No, sir, I am not. But I know we must return part of the way to our Bedouin roots in the desert, to the written creeds of the Prophet Mohammed. I do not wish to see our sons spending millions of dollars on Western luxuries. 'Wallahi!' he exclaimed - By God - 'What could that boy Khalid possibly have been doing with those cheap women on a yacht fit for a President, out of his mind on drugs and alcohol?' 


