A LETTER FROM Norfolk 

Tom Marlowe flexed his fingers one by one and then squeezed the sword hilt tightly, chewing nervously on the inside of his bottom lip. A handcart clattered by in the alley beyond the courtyard wall and Tom took half a pace forward. 

Dr Harker lunged, the tip of his sword jabbing straight at Tom's heart. Tom parried the thrust clumsily, only just sidestepping the attack, before stumbling on a loose cobble and almost falling over. 

Before Tom could ready himself, Dr Harker swung his sword and Tom heard the whistle of the blade as it sliced the air between them. Again Dr Harker's sword whistled by, but this time Tom raised his own to meet it and the blades crashed together. 

Dr Harker pushed into Tom so that the blades were crossed in front of their faces, their swords locked hilt to hilt. Tom saw a half smile flicker across Dr Harker's face and then the doctor gave one great shove and Tom sailed backwards, landing on his backside on a heap of sacks. 

Tom struggled to get to his feet, but no sooner had he begun to raise himself up than he saw Dr Harker standing over him, the tip of his sword at Tom's throat. Tom refused to concede defeat and tried to stand. Dr Harker cocked his head on one side and raised an eyebrow. Tom sighed and dropped his sword onto the cobbles. 

'Come on, Tom,' said Dr Harker, holding out a hand. 'Do not be so hard on yourself. You are coming along remarkably well.' 

Tom muttered under his breath. 'I can't see that I will ever get the hang of this,' he said. 

'Nonsense, Tom,' said the doctor, helping his assistant to his feet. 'I do have rather a head start on you. And at least these swords are only wooden ones.' 

Tom smiled despite himself. He straightened himself up, touched swords with Dr Harker and readied himself for another bout, determined to give his all this time. 

Doctor Harker traced a small circle in the air with the tip of his sword. Tom decided to attack while he still had the element of surprise and lunged forward, but as quickly as he attacked, Dr Harker dodged the thrust, stepping inside it, parrying Tom's sword arm with his free hand and grabbing his sleeve. The tip of the doctor's sword was now once again at Tom's throat. Tom was forced to simply smile and shake his head in admiration. 

'You nearly had me there, Tom,' said Dr Harker. 'You are improving.' 

'Not quickly enough, sir,' Tom replied. 

'Come now, Tom,' said the doctor. 'Let me show you what I did there.' And the doctor took Tom through the previous movement. 'These dreadful Italian fencing masters wave their free hand about as if they are waving to their tailor across the street. They have clearly never fought for their lives.' Tom lunged and Dr Harker parried, showing him how to throw his opponent off balance. 'You must be wary of making rash attacks, Tom. Do not allow yourself to become frustrated. Defend yourself without giving ground and bide your time.' 

'Yes, sir,' said Tom. 

'But do not bide too much time, of course. You must be bold. Timidity never won a swordfight, Tom. No - it is all about creating the right opportunity. You must gain control of the fight, but by your wits.' 

'Yes, sir,' said Tom again. 'But I fear I should be dead before I have a chance to gain control of any swordfight.' 

Dr Harker laughed as a light drizzle began to fall from the dark clouds above them. 'Dear me,' he said. 'This will not do, Tom. I shall have to cheer you up. Give me a moment to fetch my wig and we shall away to The Quill where I shall buy you a large bowl of chocolate. How does that sound?' 

'It sounds very generous of you, sir.' 

'I shall see you at the front door, then. I won't be a moment.' 

As the doctor went upstairs, Tom put his coat on and stood in front of the hall mirror. He mimed some fencing moves. He lunged and parried, then stood looking at himself, trying to see the dignified young man he might one day be. Then he noticed Mary the maid standing with one eyebrow raised. 

'Mary,' said Tom, coming to a sudden halt and readjusting his coat. 

'Master Tom,' she said, walking through to the kitchen with a giggle. 

It was the end of September 1716. The summer had been so dry in London that it had been possible - if a little hazardous - to walk across the river beneath the arches of London Bridge, the water level being so low. 

The smell from the Thames and from the Fleet Ditch had been a nauseating mix of dung heap and fish stall. It had taken a perfumed handkerchief and strong stomach simply to walk about the town. 

Now the skies were leaden. It had rained on and off for days, the gutters turning into miniature torrents, their cargo of dead rats and dung, newspapers and rotten vegetables, sailing away on the rapids. 

Ladies busied themselves with preventing their expensive silk dresses from trailing in puddles or being splashed by passing carriages and horses, hitching their hemlines up as high above their ankles as they dared and picking their way across the slippery rain-soaked cobbles. 

It was at times like this, when the grey clouds of autumn closed like a lid over the city, plunging it into a permanent twilight, that Tom felt most strongly the urge to escape and go adventuring. 

A pigeon took off from the sign outside The Quill coffee house as Tom and the doctor approached. Arriving early enough to find that their usual seats by the fire were still vacant, they ordered their coffee and chocolate and Tom tried to go over the swordfighting lesson in his mind while Dr Harker looked at the newspaper. He was vowing to himself to do better next time when Dr Harker suddenly stopped what he was doing and started patting his pockets, searching for something. 

'Ah! I almost forgot,' he said finally, pulling a folded piece of paper from his waistcoat pocket. 'I have had a letter from the son of an old friend of mine who died some two years ago now. Walter Gibbs was my friend's name . . . a fine man, Tom. We met at university. His father was a wealthy merchant and before Walter inherited the business, we travelled the world together aboard his father's ships. He was good company, Tom. You would have liked him, I think.' 

'I'm sure I would, sir,' said Tom. 'Did he live in London?' 

'No, no,' said Dr Harker. 'He was a Norfolk man. He came to London when he had to, but always reluctantly. He was immensely proud of Norfolk and I am ashamed to say that I never did get to his house there, despite frequent invitations.' 

'And do you know his son, sir?' 

'Yes,' the doctor said. 'His name is Abraham and his father was very proud of him, I know. I promised Walter that I would keep in contact with his son, and generally take an interest in his affairs, and I have done so. Abraham lived in Bristol until his father died, then he moved to the family home in Norfolk. We try to meet whenever business brings him to London and I am happy to say that a relationship that was born out of a sense of debt to Abraham's father has flowered into a firm friendship. We share many interests and he is passionate about the history of England, and of his beloved Norfolk in particular. Which brings me to this letter, Tom.' 

'Yes, sir?' 

'What say you to an expedition into the county of East Anglia? I know it is not quite the adventure you hope for . . .' 

'I would like to, sir,' said Tom. 'Very much.' East Anglia may not have been the East Indies, but since Tom had barely stepped out of the shadow of St Paul's, any travel seemed alive with possibilities for adventure. 

'Splendid!' exclaimed Dr Harker. 'Abraham has invited me to come and visit and to meet his wife - he is recently married - and I intend to accept. I would greatly appreciate your company.' 

'Thank you, sir,' said Tom. 'You have not met his wife before?' 

'No, Tom. They were married only last year. Abraham tells me she is very beautiful and very intelligent. There speaks a man in love, eh, Tom?' Tom smiled and blushed a little. 'But there is another reason to tempt us to make the long journey, Tom. Abraham says that he has some artefacts that may interest me . . .' Dr Harker searched through the letter. 'Ah . . . yes . . . here we are: "I have recently excavated a nearby burial mound dating from the time of the ancient warrior kings of East Anglia. I think you will find the artefacts and the legend attached to them most diverting . . ." It sounds intriguing, does it not?' 

Tom nodded. 'It certainly does, sir.' 

'Then I shall reply at once,' said Dr Harker. 'It will be good to get the soot of London from our lungs for a while.'
