Friday, not the 13th but it felt like it. Hunched in the back of the car, Hilde covered her ears as the jets took off in V formation. Ugly mottled creatures with sweptback wings, farting filth and flames, their engines screaming as they scored the sky with thick black lines. 

"Those F-15s heading for the Gulf, Dad?' Tom was in the front being matey with Frank. Dad! Tom's dark hair – like their mum's – flopped forward as he nodded towards the vanishing aircraft. Don't think of Mum. 

"Yeah.' Frank nodded. "Putting pressure on Saddam the Insane.'

Hilde eyed the back of Frank's head. Why was she ginger like him?

Angrily she read the board at the roadside as the stink of kerosene seeped into the car. 

UNITED STATES AIR FORCE
WHISTON RAF BASE.
PRIVATE PROPERTY.
STRICTLY NO ENTRANCE WITHOUT PRIOR CONSENT.

SHOW IDENTITY AND WAIT FOR CLEARANCE

That's what they'd been doing for ten minutes, waiting to get permission to enter a foreign airbase on British land!
"Sorry, kids.' Frank Browne's fingers drummed the dashboard as the barrier ahead rose and fell once more. "Used to drive straight through – before 9/11.' 

Silence. Tom bowed his head reverentially. Frank looked tense as well he might. If he thought she was going to act lovey-dovey just because he'd started playing daddy, he was very wrong. She noted the razor wire on the perimeter fence, the watchtowers disap-pearing into the distance, spiking the dreary, flat as a pancake landscape. Home sweet home. More jets took off, blackening the sky, which had been half decent, blue and white as if it were a summer day, not a freezing cold one in January. Now she noticed a cluster of white spheres near the horizon.
"Radomes,' said Frank, who must be spying on her in the rear view mirror. "Golf balls, the locals call them. They detect incoming aircraft.'

"In case of invasion.' Tom nodded sagely.

"No no!' Frank was quick to correct. "Invaders would be spotted way before they got this far. Those things help guide our own aircraft.'

"Haven't we been invaded already?'

Tom glared at her. "You're sounding like Mum, Hild.'

"So?'

But she wished he hadn't mentioned their mother. How could she, how could she, a pacifist for heaven's sake, have sent them to live here? With an American father they hardly knew, while she...But best not to think about what she was doing. Dangerously near tears, Hilde focused on a weed thrusting its head through the wire, half expecting a soldier to yell at it to get back inside, but the military were busy up the road checking vehicles. She ought to try and see exactly what they were doing. 

"Increased alert. Sorry, kids, since...' But more jets drowned Frank's words. 

Hilde guessed what they were. Frank put on a CD and closed his eyes as a soprano screeched – till Tom nudged him a few minutes later. "Moving, Dad.' 

There was only a white van between them and the barrier now, and two soldiers were moving in on it. 

"Are those M16 carbines?' Tom was showing off. 

"Think so. Oh no. This is gonna take longer.' 

Most drivers had been allowed to stay in their cars, but White Van Man was getting out. A heavily armed soldier was taking him to the guardhouse, just outside the barrier, and another was opening the van's tailgates. A black labrador jumped inside.

"Why choose him for a going-over?' Tom wondered aloud. 

"Why not?' said Frank. "Anyone of them could be a terrorist.'

"Looks like a painter and decorator.'

"Could have Semtex in his paint cans.'

"And you expect us to live here?' Hilde snapped at Frank's reflection, saw him open his mouth, and think better of it. Good. Then he got out of the car to talk to someone in the truck behind and Tom attacked. 

"Why are you so negative? Mum's gone and that's that – without you. Accept it. And she asked Frank to have us – remember? While she went to Scotland to stop the war. Ha ha ha.'

If only she were in Scotland. 

"At least she's trying to stop a bloody war! And he left, for your information, though you're too young to remember.'
"At least Frank's got a house and a decent car.' 

Maeve – their mum preferred Maeve to Mum – had a caravan and a beaten-up Volvo.

"You care about these things?'

"So do you, hypocrite. You've been longing for a mobile and I didn't hear you turn down Frank's offer to get you one.

Living on base is gonna be great. You'd know if you hadn't refused all his invites.'

Tom had come back from weekends with Frank full of it. He said living on base was like going to America once you got groundside – as opposed to airside where munitions were kept. He'd come back with all the jargon too. Shops, no stores, movies – everything was American, even the currency. His mates had been dead impressed with the gear he'd brought back – jeans half the price of British ones and better quality. He'd supplied half the school.

"Frank's OK,' he insisted. "Pity about his job – but you ought to like that – and his music, but think positive,' he laughed. "We'll get him a headset!'

She didn't answer and he switched to his favourite topic, the brilliant sports facilities on base. And how he'd played American football when he was here, and proved to be good. Was he really as unworried as he seemed? What would he say if he knew where their mum had really gone? 

As White Van Man moved onto the base Frank got back into the car and drove up to the barrier. No one had opened the paint cans, she noticed. So much for high security. But she wished she hadn't rowed with Tom. Wished she were more like him in some ways. Wished she didn't care or know so much. It was stressing her out. Now a black soldier in camouflage gear was peering in at Tom, who straightened up. Was he going to salute? On the other side Frank was showing his ID to a white girl soldier who stared into the back at Hilde.

"My two kids,' Frank said. "They're coming to live on base.'

"They got ID?'

"Not yet.'

Frank pulled into the side, and they all piled out and into the guardhouse, where Frank told everyone their business again. Guardhouse. She expected bars, but it was just a reception area with a counter. One wall was covered with cutesie posters with uplifting messages. Another had a huge TV showing American football. 

"Look this way,' said a pasty-faced boy soldier and flash – their photos were taken, by a tiny camera on the end of what looked like an angle poise lamp. Maeve would have gone mad about invasion of privacy. He hadn't even asked. Seconds later, Pasty Face was handing them ID cards with shots of their faces. 

"Excuse me,' she managed to say. "You didn't...' But then Tom nudged her, and nodded towards a poster of an eagle flying high. DARE TO SOAR it urged. YOUR ATTITUDE DETERMINES YOUR ALTITUDE IN LIFE. 

"So?'

But Tom didn't answer. An officer in airforce blue had just walked in and was talking to Frank. Tom joined them and Frank made introductions. 

"Lieutenant-Colonel Karl van Jennions, my son Tom and...' He nodded in her direction. "My daughter, Hilde.' 

"Hi, Tom. Hi, Hilde. And it's just Karl, OK?' He took off his cap and folded it up. "I'm off duty. Tom, didn't you play American football with my boy Friedman when you were here last? And weren't you pretty good? He'll be real glad to see you. He's trying to get a team together, doing a bit of coaching in fact, but a lotta American kids are more into soccer now. I'll give him a buzz. What's your address now, Frank? I guess you've changed billet.'

Hilde listened as Frank said yes, he'd moved from single to family quarters, but Tom seemed tongue-tied. Hilde guessed why. Hero worship. The officer was everything he admired, tall, dark and good-looking in an obvious sort of way – and he probably dropped bombs on people. And – it was clear from the conversation – he knew Frank as the base librarian. So Tom's little secret was out. He wouldn't be able to pretend his dad was a fighter pilot as he had back at Crosby Upper. He didn't know that she knew that. 

Tom recovered when they were on their own again, driving into the residential area. Just like America? Well it wasn't exactly Hollywood, or New York. It looked more like an English council estate in fact, with an out-of-town shopping centre attached. The sight of a McDonalds next to a KFC next to a Pizzahut revived Tom's spirits, but he went into shock again, when they stopped for traffic lights by a motor pool where residents were filling their gas-guzzling cars. But it was the building site next to it which upset him. 

"What are they doing? That's where the football field was!'

"Yeah, but don't worry.' Frank was reassuring. "There's another field near the Junior High. And that's not a building site, by the way, not yet, though it's gonna be another accommodation block. But right now it's a dig.' He looked to see if Tom had understood. "Those guys in hard hats, they're archaeologists, hoping to find an Anglo-Saxon cemetery. See how they've stripped and levelled the surface. Might even have started digging. Excuse me?' He leaned across Tom. "Yeah. See that trench near the sidewalk? Might be an old grave!' 

Hilde watched Tom trying to look interested. Frank sounded like those hairy men in jumpers who got excited about bits of old pot. An old grave – so what? There'd be tons of new ones if the war with Iraq went ahead. If? More planes screamed overhead and she couldn't help thinking about Maeve. The date for war was obviously in someone's diary. Maeve was kidding herself if she thought she and her Quaker friends were going to stop it. Those F-15s carried bombs. She'd sat outside enough airfields herself to know that. 

Deep in thought, she didn't notice the lights change. Didn't notice Frank driving on, or that he'd pulled up in front of a house – till she saw his pale face peering into the car through the rear door. 

"Hilde honey, we're here.' He sounded as if he was in a crummy sit com. "You were miles away. Here, pass me your bag.'

"Thanks. I'll carry it myself.'

Tom was already halfway up the concrete path of 281B Washington Street, the middle house in a block of three. It was the last in a long line of identical blocks, on the corner with another street, which looked just the same. Frank said they'd soon get the hang of the layout. It was a grid system and all the roads were named after American presidents. 

Hilde followed Tom to the grey front door. Even when it was closed you could hear the whine of aircraft. Outside smelled of kerosene. Inside smelled of fresh paint.

Frank showed them the ground floor – entrance hall, kitchen-diner and lounge, not much bigger than Maeve's caravan, and all very beige. "Just one thing, kids,' Frank hesitated at the foot of the stairs. "It's probably best to keep quiet here, about what your mom's doing.' 

And he thought she was sitting outside a submarine base in Scotland, making her usual protest against war and nuclear weapons. 

Hilde carried her bag upstairs. One bag. She hadn't brought much stuff because she didn't intend to stay long. As soon as her best friend Ruthie got back from the school skiing trip, she was going to go and stay with her.
"My own room? Great!' Tom flung open the door with his name and a picture of an American footballer on it. Hers had a nameplate but no picture, because Frank Browne hadn't seen her since she was five, so he'd had no idea what she was like. But, she smiled as she lugged her bag into the bedroom, he was beginning to find out.
