A Coffin and its Contents

"Why couldn't Dad come?' Ben demanded. "Is something wrong?'

"No, nothing is wrong.' 

Zarina's voice was silky and hypnotic. It reminded Claire of one of the big cats at the zoo, purring contentedly over a hunk of raw meat.

"Your father – he was needed at the camp. Me – I had to come to Mexico City anyway, to make the fixing up for permits and other things. My job is to help the expedition.'

The air hostess interrupted. 

"I'm afraid I can't release these children into your care, madam, without proper documents. We have very strict rules about unaccompanied minors.'

Zarina fished in a woven shoulder bag. Strange devilish little faces were intermingled in its intricate pattern with pyramids and lines and squares.

"I have what you need, I think. Ah...here.'

She handed over a small dark red passport. The stewardess opened it and read out.

"Michael Swift. Veterinary Surgeon.'

She showed the photograph to the children.

"Is this your dad?'

Claire looked at the bug-eyed lavatory-brush bearded fellow in the picture. She felt relieved.

"Yes, that's Dad's passport.'

"Also...' Zarina was fishing deeper in the bag. As her hand moved about inside it, the devils on the outside seemed to bulge and wink at Ben.

"...here we are.'

Zarina held out a handwritten note. The stewardess took it and read it aloud.

"Please allow Ben and Claire Swift to accompany the bearer of this note, Miss Zarina Aguila. It's signed Mike Swift.'
She waved the note under the children's noses. 

"Is this your father's writing?'

Claire glanced at the paper, which looked as if a spider had crawled across it with a biro strapped to one leg.

"Yes,' she said, nodding.

"Well, that seems to be all right then,' said the stewardess, looking at Claire with rather dull eyes. Claire realised for the first time how tired the stewardess was. Now she seemed anxious to wash her hands of responsibility for the children. Claire looked at Zarina, who smiled, putting the passport back into her bag.

"Okay,' she said. "We'll come with you.'

The stewardess held out a form to Zarina. 

"Just sign this, will you? And I'll keep the letter... thanks. 'Bye 'bye! Have a lovely time in Mexico, you two!'

And she was off. Although she hadn't even bothered to learn their names, Ben felt sorry to see her go. He had felt protected by her, and wasn't sure he'd feel the same way with Zarina. She was looking at him now, quite intently, as if examining some zoological specimen.

"So – you are Mike's boy! Yes, I can see you are looking the same. Your ears, for example.'

Ben put a hand up to one ear. No one else had ever said he'd got his dad's ears. Zarina turned to Claire.

"And you are having his nose, I think.' 

Claire tried to picture her father's nose and couldn't.

Zarina smiled again, showing teeth that were beautifully white, but a little pointed. Her dark eyebrows lay like graceful reclining cats on the smooth couch of her forehead, curtained by long, black, shining hair. Half concealed among its strands, tiny silver claws clutching beads of amber dangled from her ears.

"Come this way. I have a car who is waiting for us.'

They embarked from the calm island of the airline office back into the sea of people charging this way and that around the terminal building. Claire and Ben clung tightly to each other's hands – something they wouldn't have dreamed of doing at home. 

When they went out through the door of the terminal building, Ben felt a sudden rush of sensations. Warmth flooded over him, and he realised that the inside must have been air-conditioned. Dazzling light made him screw up his eyes. A thousand suns were glinting from car windscreens and the windows of buildings. His ears were assaulted by a great background roar of motor engines and honking car horns while the foreground was a tangle of foreign voices and tinny pulsing music from a nearby flower stall. There was a tang of acid on his tongue, of flowers and petrol in his nose. He felt bewildered, yet excited, as if he were waking from a long grey sleep into a new vivid reality.

"Wow! Look at all these cars!'

A great landscape of gleaming multi-coloured metal lay ahead – the airport car park. They followed Zarina as she picked her way through the lines of cars until they reached a big black four-wheel-drive vehicle.

"Here we are! This is the expedition's vehicle of the Mochaca Zoological Team. Her name is called La Caja.'

"What does that mean in English?' Ben asked.

"Well – that word might mean “the box”. But in this case it means “the coffin”!' 

Zarina tapped on the darkly-tinted driver's window with a bare knuckle. Most of the others were adorned with silver rings. 

"We Mexicans, we like – what you call it? – the black jokes!' She looked sideways at them.

The window slid downwards, and the children were startled to see an incredibly wrinkled old man grinning toothlessly out at them. Claire felt Ben's clutch on her hand tighten in alarm. Was this a living man or a corpse?

"Hola! Qué tal?' croaked a voice made of sandpaper and old sticks rubbing together. The old man's misty brown eyes moved, and searched their faces.

"Me llamo Ramon!' he added, then put a thin claw out of the window for shaking.

Claire and Ben shook his hand. Ben felt it was like touching a bundle of dry twigs that had come to life.
Zarina looked amused by the children's consternation. 

"This is Ramon. He is our driver. For you it is riding on the back seat with another companion!' Zarina swished her long mane back over her shoulders and opened the back door. Who was going to be lurking in there? Ben wondered.
His eyes, dazzled by the sunlight outside, could just make out a flash of red and green in the gloom. It moved towards him along the back seat in a curious sidelong way. He was panic stricken – it looked like some sort of living puppet. Then a voice even more dry and croaking than the driver's said: 

"Buenos días, amigos!'

It was Claire who first laughed with relief and understanding. It was a parrot! A great big friendly green parrot with a red face and tail feathers, and a huge curving grey beak. He nodded his head up and down at them, and repeated his greeting.

"Buenos días, amigos!'

"He's saying “hello”,' Zarina explained, reaching into the vehicle and tickling the parrot under his beak. "Don't be afraid of him, he's very gentle, and he likes children.'

Ben had instinctively backed away a little from the car door, but Claire detached her hand from his and went forward. She was used to the parrots at the zoo at home, and this one didn't look too frightening.

"He's a military macaw. What's his name?' she asked, putting her head into the car.

"Uva Seca,' Zarina replied. "It means “dried grape” – I think you call it “raisin”. We gave to him that name because he loves to eat raisins.'

"Uva seca! Uva seca!' the bird said excitedly, and Zarina gave the children a few raisins each from a little paper bag in the glove compartment. 

"Feed him these, and he is becoming friend for life!' she said.

It took a long time to get out of the city. The streets were choked with wild flocks of cars, all honking like geese. The vehicles moved in a series of mad dashes, and their own little old driver kept pace, peering ferociously at the road under the rim of his steering wheel.

By the time they came out into open country, the sun was sinking in the west, and the fields and distant mountains took on a rich smouldering hue, as if an inferno burned just beneath the surface of the landscape.

"How far is it to the camp, Zarina?' Claire asked, leaning forward. Uva Seca, who had been perching half asleep on her lap, made a little protesting caw.

Zarina looked back over her shoulder.

"We will come there tomorrow, in the afternoon.'

"Tomorrow!'

"Yes. It is a far way. We must drive many hundred miles. Many miles also through jungle. There has been raining, and so a lot of mud and water. Slow to travel.'

"Where are we staying tonight?'

"Tonight we are coming to my mother in the village who is named Tepestloatan. He is my home village. That place is famous in Mexico for its brujos and brujas. Do you know what that is meaning?' 

Zarina had turned slightly more in her seat, and was fixing Claire with her dark eyes. Claire shook her head.

Zarina smiled broadly. All her pointed teeth glinted. 

"Wizards and witches, you would call them in English. People who know magic.'

Zarina was staring at her. Claire felt that she was being willed to ask a question, a particular question. Zarina's eyebrows arched upwards, waiting. Claire couldn't help speaking.

"Er...are you...do you...know magic?'

Zarina laughed, and turned back to face the front again, breaking the spell.

"Perhaps. A little.'

Claire sat back. She wished Mum or Dad was with her. She wasn't comfortable travelling in a coffin with a witch, a talking corpse and a parrot. With a sense of watching an approaching nightmare, she observed the darkness gathering over the strange landscape as they sped along the highway to Mochaca.
