
'Oh, he knows,' she replied acidly. 'He doesn't speak - won't even answer direct questions. Never looks you in the eye. Never smiles. Never frowns. No expression at all. He does it on purpose just to infuriate us.' 

Nadia Petrovna doubted that even a stubborn teenager could keep that up, day after day, merely for the satisfaction of annoying his teachers. But she kept her own counsel and tactfully pointed to a different student. 

'That boy there, with the black hair, has the most beautifully polished feet. You've done a marvellous job with him.' 

'Yes, he's a very dedicated worker,' Madame said with relief. 'Only fifteen. Henri thinks he might go into the Upper School a year early.' 

A few minutes later she rose from her seat and led her aged guest out of the studio to continue their tour of the classes. At the door Nadia Petrovna stopped and looked back along the row of boys as they swept their feet over the floor in rapid unison, all in identical green dance-uniform. At the far end of the barre, the willowy boy with the blond curly hair and invisible eyes was marking the exercise listlessly, his arms and feet moving mechanically in time to the thumping of the pianist's hands, his technique floundering on every step. Nadia Petrovna's heart went out to him. 

In the afternoon, after lunching with Madeleine de Sancerre and Henri Renoir, Nadia Petrovna escaped from her companions and stole a pleasant half-hour to wander alone through the school where she had taught for so many years. In the pillared foyer she lifted her face, still radiant despite its great age, to look at the Rococo paintings on the curved ceiling of the huge dome. She had always loved that dome. Such grandeur. Like classical dance at its best - untouched by the pettiness and the humdrum of the lives that passed beneath it. 

She walked slowly through the corridors of the school, leaning on her walking stick, thinking of all those children she had taught so long ago in these echoing studios. She still remembered every face, every pair of feet, every heartbreaking injury that had destroyed a promising career. Silently, in one of the empty studios on the top floor, she ran her hand lovingly over the barre remembering a time even before her teaching days. Her hands were misshapen and white now, crippled with arthritis, fragile skin stretched over them like parchment. Once they had been described as the most beautiful hands in Europe. 

She stopped outside one of the small studios, resting both hands on top of her stick, and looked through the little window in the door. The tall, fair-haired boy was standing alone in the studio, his back propped indolently against the barre with his arms folded and his feet, in long white ballet socks and ballet shoes, crossed at the ankles. Through an open window at his side the sound of piano music drifted in from across the courtyard. He was gazing through the window, listening, lost in abstraction. 

Nadia Petrovna opened the door quietly and went in. 

When the boy saw who had entered he unfolded his arms and shifted his weight away from the barre in an unconscious gesture of respect. Nadia Petrovna permitted herself a small smile. Hostile and undisciplined he might be, but he was still a pupil of the Académie Française. 

'Excuse me,' she said. 'Am I interrupting you?' 

He looked at her warily and glanced at the door behind her to see who might be about to follow her into the room. 'No, Madame.' 

'A little bird in the staff-room whispered to me that I would find you up here. Under strict instructions, as I understand the situation, to spend an hour working on your pirouettes.' 

He made a small explanatory gesture towards the window, indicating the music. 

'Chopin,' he said. 'Les Sylphides. I was listening, Madame.' 

Nadia Petrovna smiled at that. 

'I see. And can you not listen and dance at the same time?' 

'I can't even dance and dance at the same time.' He looked away. 'As you saw in class this morning.' 

The old woman walked slowly across the wooden studio floor to stand beside him at the barre. She peered up at his face with shrewd interest. 

'How tall you are. I think I should be rather frightened to be so tall. Do you get vertigo all the way up there?' 

He looked down into her sympathetic eyes, not fully comprehending her meaning. His own grey eyes were a little perturbed. It wasn't every day that a pupil of the Académie found himself face to face with a genuine danseuse étoile of the old Russian school. 

He cleared his throat. 'Shall I get you a chair, Madame?' Despite his height and his sixteen years his voice was not yet quite settled in its precarious baritone. 

She shook her head, amused. 'No, thank you, child. I know I look dreadfully feeble but I'm not quite so decrepit that I can't stand for a few minutes.' She saw that she had embarrassed him and immediately regretted her flippancy. What, after all, could a boy of sixteen be expected to know about such great age as hers? 'Tell me,' she said, 'what's your name?' 

He answered her reluctantly: 'Jean-Baptiste St Michel.' 

Nadia Petrovna managed to hide her surprise. She looked him over slowly, recognising now the extraordinary familiarity of those fair curls and those guarded grey eyes. St Michel - yes. Oh yes, that explained a great deal. Indeed, she thought, that name must be quite a burden for a boy to bear in the world of dance. With a profound tact born of almost half a century's experience with teenage students she pretended not to recognise his family name. 

'Jean-Baptiste,' she said. 'What a charming name.' 

'I'm always called Michel.' 

'May I ask why? Or is it a secret?' 

'It's not a secret, but I can't tell you why. I don't know.' 

'Then it's a mystery. I love mysteries; there should be more of them in life. They keep us young.' Her gleeful smile vanished and she looked him firmly in the eye. 'Your teachers tell me you're lazy, Michel. That you're unfocused and make no effort to take corrections. That you're rude and undisciplined. Why is this?' 

He grappled with her question in discomfort but he couldn't find a reply. Watching him closely, Nadia Petrovna saw in his troubled grey eyes something she couldn't define; something that had no place in the eyes of any sixteen-year-old boy. 

'Let me ask you a different question,' she said. 'Do you love dancing?' 

'I've lost the facility, Madame. I can't do things that came easily to me at twelve or thirteen. I can't even turn any more.' 

'That was not my question. I asked if you love dancing.' 

Again he struggled to find an answer. His withdrawn gaze turned involuntarily for a moment towards the window, towards the piano music that was still drifting up across the courtyard. 

'I don't know,' he said. 

Nadia Petrovna's old eyes sparkled softly. He couldn't know how eloquent that simple glance had been. 

'Sixteen is a good age,' she said, with a plucky cheerfulness that defied her physical frailty. 'A splendid age. It's the age of choice, Michel. Choice! Do you realise what a wonderful word that is? It's an age when you can be who you want to be. Even when being sixteen is ghastly it's still absolutely wonderful. And the best news is it gets better as you go along. Dancers always whine terribly about getting older - take no notice of them. I'll tell you a secret: being old and white-haired is tremendous fun. The only thing that's not fun about it, apart from arthritis, is the unfulfilled dreams you've left behind you.' 

She paused to let Michel speak if he wanted to, but he said nothing. He just watched her with quiet, interested eyes. 

'You're not a great talker, I see. You prefer to listen.' 

'I can't learn anything when I'm talking.' 

Nadia Petrovna nodded slowly. 

'I think you are rather a bright young man.' 

He looked at her in surprise. No one had ever called him a young man before. And certainly no one had ever suggested that he was anything other than patently dull-witted. 

'I don't read or write very well,' he said doubtfully. 

'There are different kinds of intelligence and different things you can do with it.' She raised her chin with a proud smile. 'Did you know I have my own little company in London?' 

'Yes, Madame. Charles Crown is your choreographer.' 

'Good! You have heard of him! Excellent! What have you heard? Be frank.' 

'That his style's very modern. And his ballets are controversial.' She saw the flicker of a dormant personality steal into his eyes for the first time. 'And that he's dangerous, Madame.' 

'Dangerous?' She clenched her fragile fist and shook it in excitement. Her ancient eyes blazed with enthusiasm. 'Is that how he is known in France? Hurrah!' 

'The other boys say he's clever,' Michel said. 'Some of them went to the summer school he gave on choreography last year.' 

'And why didn't you go?' she demanded. 

'I wasn't allowed to. I had to attend the classical summer school here at the Académie to work on my technique.' 

'Well, you missed a great opportunity. Did you know that he is also a very fine dance teacher? Between you and me, I think he's the best.' 

He was puzzled: 'But you don't have a school, Madame.' 

'No, but we have students within the company. A few boys and girls around your age who come to finish their training and learn to perform on stage.' She smiled mischievously. 'It allows us to have our little stake in the future of dance. And, to be truthful, I'm afraid it helps keep our company solvent. Now what do you think of our scheme?' 

Michel shook his head quickly. 

'I could never afford it. Apprenticeships like that are very expensive.' 

Nadia Petrovna stopped herself from replying that a course of study at the Académie was hardly cheap. The faint flush that had stolen over his face warned her against it. And yet, she thought, someone must be paying for his education. 

'I am sure we can find a solution if we try,' she said, and then, seeing his uncertainty: 'Think about it, Michel. I will be in Paris for three more days. The office downstairs can give you the address of my hotel.' 

As Nadia Petrovna made her way slowly to the door Michel gazed after her. 

'Excuse me, Madame . . . ?' 

She stopped to look back at him. 'Yes, child?' 

'Is it true that you danced in the first production of Les Sylphides?' 

Nadia Petrovna laughed. 'I am very old, Michel, but I am not that old. It was first performed in 1907 in St Petersburg. The first time I danced in it was here in Paris in 1911, with Pavlova and Nijinsky. I had only just turned fourteen.' Her eyes softened for a moment, gazing into the past, and then she smiled at him. 'You can work out my present age for yourself.' 

The front hall and corridors of the Islington Ballet's headquarters in London were alive with bustling dancers on their way to and from the studios, and up to the wardrobe room for fittings. In the large ground-floor studio Charles Crown was auditioning young women for the corps. 

Nadia Petrovna walked very slowly along the short corridor, leaning on her stick as always, to peer through the reinforced glass in the studio doors. Eyeing the rows of hopeful girls at the barres she shook her head. She knew the artistic director's taste. 

'No,' she told herself. 'Not one.' 

She went back to her office and filled the electric kettle, exhuming the files of unpaid invoices from her desk drawer with a sigh. They couldn't stay buried for ever.
