Afterwards, the universe will explode for your pleasure.
- Douglas Adams

"OK, Bee with Greta and Valia and Lena,' Carmen ordered, shepherding a wandering grandmother with her hand. Bee and Lena intertwined their legs, trying to tip each other over, as Carmen clicked her digital camera. 

"OK, um. Effie and .. um, Perry. And Katherine and Nicky. With Tibby and Lena and Bee.' 

Lena cast her a look. Lena hated pictures. "Are you getting paid or something?' she asked grumpily. 

Carmen pushed her hair off her sweaty neck. The shiny black gown permitted no flow of air. She shook off the mortarboard (who ever thought of that name?) and pressed it under her arm. "Squeeze together, would you? I'm losing Perry.' Tibby's three-year-old sister, Katherine, bleated angrily as her older brother, Nicky, stomped on her foot. 

It wasn't Carmen's fault her friends had large families. But it was graduation, for God's sake. This was a big day. She wasn't going to miss anybody. She didn't have any official brothers or sisters. She had to make the most of her unofficial ones. 

"There is no shade,' Valia, Lena's grandmother, noted bitterly. 

It was a football field. Carmen briefly imagined the trouble with an elm or oak planted at the fifty-yard line. The thought of this made her turn towards the raucous bunch of graduating football players, their families and admirers. It was one of the many clumps and cliques spread out over the hot field – a last stand for social order. 

Carmen's grandma, Carmen senior (Seniora, as Tibby called her), cast searing looks at Albert, Carmen's father, as though blaming him for the merciless heat. Carmen could practically read her grandmother's mind: if Albert could leave Christina, Carmen's mother, what couldn't that man be capable of? 

"Now's the big one, OK, everybody?' It had been a long morning. Carmen knew she was wearing everyone thin. She was irritating herself at this point. But who else looked out for posterity? Huh? "Last one, I swear.' 

She arranged the dads and full-grown boys in the back. Even Lena's dad – not because he was tall (Bee had a good three inches on him) but because Carmen was a generally thoughtful person, if she did think so herself. 

Grandmothers and mothers took the next row. Valia, Carmen senior, Tibby's ancient great-grandma Felicia, who didn't know where she was, Greta nervously patting her perm. Then there was Ari in her handsome beige suit, Christina constantly looking over her shoulder at her new husband, David, Tibby's mom with the lipstick on her teeth. And there was Albert's wife, Lydia, looking eager but also anxious that she might be taking up an extra square inch of space. 

Lastly, Carmen ordered the remaining siblings into place. Effie pulled a dire face about having to kneel on a level with Nicky and Katherine. Tibby coaxed Brian from his spot on the sidelines and arranged him in the back row. 

And now it was the Septembers' turn. Sitting in the front, they clutched each other in a mass of hot black polyester, leaving a space in the middle for Carmen. "OK! Great!' Carmen shouted at them all in encouragement. "Just hold on one second.' 

Carmen nearly wrestled Ms Collings from the dais. Ms. Collings was the teacher who'd sent Carmen out to the hallway the greatest number of times, but she was also the teacher who loved her best. 

"We're all set,' Carmen said. "Here.' She demonstrated to Ms Collings the camera placement she wanted. For a moment Carmen studied the viewfinder. She saw them all, encompassed in the little frame – her beloved friends, her mom, stepmom, stepdad, actual dad, grandma. Her friends' moms, dads, families who felt as close as if they were her own. This was her whole life, right here. Her tribe. Everything that mattered. 

And this moment. This was it, somehow. All of them celebrating a day and an accomplishment that belonged to the four of them equally. This was the culmination of a shared life. 

Carmen threw herself into her pile of friends. She screamed, out of pure emotion, which got them all screaming. She felt the heave of flesh as every layer of their group seemed to sink into the whole more fully – arms wrapped around shoulders and waists, cheeks pressed together, wrinkly and smooth. Then Carmen burst into tears, knowing that in the picture her eyes would look very puffy indeed. 

Granted, Tibby was in a mood. All she could see was change. All anybody talked about was change. She didn't like Bee wearing heels for the second day in a row. She felt peevish about Lena getting three inches trimmed off her hair. Couldn't everybody just leave everything alone for a few minutes? 

Tibby was a slow adjuster. In preschool, her teachers had said she had trouble with transitions. Tibby preferred looking backward for information rather than forward. As far as she was concerned, she'd take a nursery school report card over a fortune-teller any day of the week. It was the cheapest and best self-analysis around. 

Tibby saw Gilda's through these same eyes. It was changing. Its glory days of the late nineteen eighties were far behind it. It was showing its age. The once-shiny wood floor was scratched and dull. One of the mirror panels was cracked. The mats looked as old as Tibby, and they'd been cleaned much less. Gilda's was trying to get with the times, offering kickboxing and yoga, according to the big chalkboard, but it didn't look to Tibby like that was helping much. What if it went out of business? What a horrible thought. Maybe Tibby should buy a subscription of classes here? No, that would be weird, wouldn't it? 

"Tibby, you ready?' Lena was looking at her with concerned eyebrows. 

"What if Gilda's closes?' Tibby opened her mouth, and that was what came out. 

Carmen, holding the Travelling Pants, Lena, lighting the candles, Bee, fussing with the dimmer switches near the door, all turned to her. 

"Look at this place.' Tibby gestured around. "I mean, who comes here?' 

Lena was puzzled. "I don't know. Somebody. Women. Yoga people.' 

"Yoga people?' Carmen asked. 

"I don't know,' Lena said again, laughing. 

Tibby was the one most capable of emotional detachment, but tonight it all lay right on the surface. Her irrational thoughts about Gilda's made her feel desperate, like its demise could swallow up their whole existence – like a change in the present could wipe out the past. The past felt fragile to her. But the past was set, right? It couldn't be changed. Why did she feel such a need to protect it? 

"I think it's Pants time,' Carmen said. The snacks were out. The candles were lit. The egregiously bad dance music played. 

Tibby wasn't sure she wanted it to be Pants time yet. She was having enough trouble maintaining control. She was scared of them noticing what all this meant. 

Too late. Out of Carmen's arms came the artifacts of their ritual. The Pants, slowly unfolding from their winter compression, seeming to gain strength as they mixed with the special air of Gilda's. Carmen laid them on the ground, and on top of them the manifesto, written on that first night two years before, describing the rules of wearing them. Silently they formed their circle, studying the inscriptions and embroidery that chronicled their summer lives. 

"Tonight we say goodbye to high school, and bye to Bee for a while,' Carmen said in her ceremonial voice. "We say hello to summer, and hello to the Travelling Pants.' 

Her voice grew less ceremonial. "Tonight we are not worrying about goodbye to each other. We're saving that for the beach at the end of the summer. That's the deal, right?' 

Tibby felt like kissing Carmen. Brave as she was, even Carmen was daunted by the implications of looking ahead. "That's the deal,' Tibby agreed heartily. 

The last weekend of the summer had already become sacred in their minds. Sacred and feared. The Morgans owned a house right on the beach in Rehoboth. They had offered it to Carmen for that final weekend, in part, Carmen suspected, because they had gotten an au pair from Denmark and felt guilty about not hiring Carmen to babysit this summer as she had done the summer before. 

The four of them had promised each other in the spring that it would be their weekend. The four of them and nobody else. They all depended upon it. The future was unfurling fast, but whatever happened this summer, that weekend stood between them and the great unknown. 

They all looked ahead to college in different ways, Tibby knew. They all had different amounts to lose. Bee, in her lonely house, had nothing. Carmen did; she dreaded saying goodbye to her mother. Tibby feared leaving the familiarity of her chaos. Lena flipped and flopped – one day she was afraid to cut ties, and the next she was dying to get away. 

The thing they feared equally and powerfully was saying goodbye to one another. 

After drawing for the Pants (Tibby won), reviewing the rules (unnecessary, but still part of tradition), and taking a brief hiatus to chew down some Gummi Worms, it was at last time for the vow. Like they had the summer before, they said it together. 

"To honour the Pants and the Sisterhood And this moment and this summer and the rest of our lives Together and apart.' 

Only this time, Tibby felt the tears fall when they said "the rest of our lives'. Because in the past that had always seemed like a distant road, and tonight, she knew in her heart, they were already on it.
