But with its
warren of narrow passageways leading off to hidden courtyards,
and the dark ribbon of the river running through a deep gorge
below it, Fossgate still felt as shady as its most famous resident,
the highwayman Dick Turpin, who was buried in a corner of St
George's churchyard.
Walking in to Oliver's felt like coming home to Eve. The
place had hardly changed since they first opened the doors all
those years ago. The atmosphere was cosy French bistro, dark
and intimate, with low beamed ceilings, red checked tablecloths,
and candles in wax-encrusted wine bottles.
It was bittersweet for her, coming back here. Everything had
a memory imprinted on it, from the polished floorboards they'd
sanded for hours on their hands and knees because they couldn't
afford to hire professional equipment, to the old lamps hanging
from the blackened beams, which they'd picked up in a fleamarket
on one of their shoestring holidays to France when Matt was a
baby. Oliver hadn't even had a restaurant then, but Eve was so
sure his dream would happen she'd let him buy them anyway,
even though it cleaned out their spending money for the rest of
the week.
The whole place was like a photo album of their lives together.
Among the empty vintage bottles displayed on the shelves behind
the bar, he'd even kept the Moët they'd cracked to celebrate
their opening night. Eve could never taste the sharp, dry fizz
of champagne without remembering how they had all gathered
around the bar after closing time, tired but euphoric, laughing as
Oliver tried to make an emotional speech.
Tonight, the place was already crowded with guests. Eve waved
at Jan, who smiled apprehensively back from the other side of the
room where she was talking to Frankie the chef.
She helped herself to a glass of wine from the bar and gave one
to Georgia.
"Make it last,' she warned. "It's the only one you're getting.'
"You don't say that to him.' Georgia shot a filthy look at Matt,
who was checking his texts, his shaggy dark hair falling into his
eyes.
"He's old enough to know better.'
"Is that why he threw up in the flowerbed last night?'
"Just the one,' Eve restated firmly. She scanned the crowd. "I
can't see your dad anywhere.'
"You know Oliver. He loves to make an entrance,' said a voice
behind her. "He's probably lurking round the corner, waiting for
everyone else to arrive.'
Eve turned round, coming face to shoulder with Adam,
Oliver's cousin. He had a new woman with him, a cool brunette
this time.
"Are you saying my estranged husband is an attention seeker?'
she said, mock stern.
"Oliver doesn't have to seek attention. He only has to appear
and it comes his way. It's the rest of us poor mortals who have
to jump up and down to get noticed.'
Eve smiled. There was no way Adam would have wanted to
be noticed. He was just about the shyest person she knew.
He and Oliver, both tall and dark with warm grey eyes, could
have been brothers. But while Oliver held himself confidently
upright, Adam seemed apologetic about his height, his shoulders
permanently stooped.
"I'd notice you,' said the woman with him.
"You say that now, but you haven't met my cousin. I'm telling
you, it was no accident he was born on Christmas Day.'
"Take no notice of him, he adores Oliver really.' Eve held out
her hand. "I'm Eve Robinson.'
"Imogen Walsh.' The woman's eyes widened. "So you're
Oliver's ex? Wow, I'm surprised you're here.'
"Are you kidding? This is the highlight of my social calendar.'
She was only half joking. The only dates marked in her diary
were the days when she had to put out the recycling bin.
"I think you're amazing. When I split up with a man, all I ever
want to do is take a pair of scissors to his suits.'
"I don't own a suit, but I'll take that as a warning,' Adam said
solemnly.
Imogen smiled up at him and stroked his chest. "Oh no, I'm
not letting you go for a while,' she purred.
How did he do it? Eve wondered. He was so quiet and selfeffacing,
he went out of his way not to draw attention to himself.
And yet he always seemed to have a new woman in tow.
She knew that underneath that shy exterior lurked a sharp
sense of humour and a warm, caring heart, but it had taken a
long time for her to find that out. She'd been seeing Oliver for
months before Adam even looked her in the eye.
She felt slightly sorry for Imogen. She thought she had him
now, but in a few weeks one or other of them would have lost
interest. Adam's only real passion was for his work. He'd inherited
the family's market-garden business when Oliver's father died
seven years before. Since then, he'd worked hard and turned it
into a thriving concern, taking on more land, opening a farm
shop and breaking into the organic market.
Maybe that was why he couldn't hang on to a woman for
long, she thought. No one wanted to come second to a sack of
potatoes.
"You haven't met Oliver,' he said. "You never know, you
could be swept off your feet by his sheer charisma.'
"I doubt it.'
"We'll soon find out, won't we? Here he is now.'
Eve had her back to the door, but she didn't need to be told
that Oliver had walked into the room. She could feel the tell-tale
prickle on the nape of her neck, just as she'd felt it that night
he'd strolled into the Student Union bar more than twenty years
ago.
"Is that his girlfriend?' Imogen whispered. "She's very—'
"Young?' Eve finished for her.
She looked at Anna, running through the usual envious inventory
of her youthful features. Twenty-four years old, skinny
and sexy, she wore a short black shift dress that showed off her
schoolgirl-slender legs. Shiny, spiky dark hair framed her elfin
face, making her big chocolate-brown eyes look even bigger and
more doe-like.
Eve felt her bulges oozing over her control pants just looking
at her. Anna was everything she wasn't. Not just thin and young
and pretty, but cool and confident with it. Eve had waited nearly
forty years for that kind of serene self-possession, and it still hadn't
arrived.
"Eve?' She hadn't realised she was gawping until Adam spoke
to her.
She pinned a smile on her face and grabbed the nearest empty
wine bottle. "Oops, looks like we're running low. I'll just go and
get another couple of bottles from the kitchen.'
It was a relief to be able to escape and lose her fixed smile for
a minute or two. Everyone was right, she shouldn't have come.
She didn't belong here, she was just making a fool of herself. She
wished she could have had more pride and kept her distance but
she couldn't resist it; it was like probing an aching tooth.
How many people had guessed she still had a massive, hopeless
crush on her almost-ex-husband? Everyone, probably. They
were all watching her – no doubt feeling sorry for her – and
not believing for a moment all her talk of staying friends for the
sake of the children. At least Oliver had no idea how she still felt
about him. She would have died of shame if he'd found out.
She was coming out of the storeroom with an armful of bottles
when he walked into the kitchen. Seeing him standing in the
doorway, Eve felt the familiar, treacherous tug of attraction.
"Adam said you were in here.' He came towards her, arms outstretched,
and for a panicky moment Eve thought he was going
to hug her, until he said, "Here, let me take those for you.'
She handed the bottles over, keeping a Rioja in her hand.
"Happy birthday, by the way.'
"Thanks.' He grimaced. "Just think, next year it'll be the big
Four-O.'
"I don't want to think about it, thanks very much. Georgia will
probably have me wearing a burkha by then.'
"You'll still look gorgeous.'
She fiddled with the label on the bottle to hide her confusion,
and said, "We were beginning to think you weren't coming
tonight?'
"We had a bit of a domestic crisis.'
"Oh?'
"Charlie was poorly this afternoon. Throwing up all over the
place.'
"Over-excitement, I expect.'
"That's what I tried to tell Anna, but she wouldn't listen. She
was convinced he had meningitis at least.'
Eve bit back the caustic comment. "It's only natural for a
mother to worry. Don't you remember what I was like when
Matt and Georgia were babies? Every time they hiccuped I was
on the phone to the health visitor.'
"I know. I'd just forgotten how exhausting it can be.'
He looked tired, Eve thought. Maybe the strain of having a
young girlfriend and a toddler was beginning to tell on him at
last. There were visible lines fanning out from the corners of his
eyes that she hadn't noticed before.
"How is he now?' she asked.
"Absolutely fine, just like I said he would be. Anna's mum's
looking after him, but it took ages to persuade her to leave him.'
He nodded towards the bottle. "Are you going to open that?'
"Shouldn't we go back to the party?'
"In a minute. Let's have a quiet drink and catch up first.'

 "I don't think Anna would like that, do you?'
"Why not?' He looked genuinely puzzled. That was Oliver,
oblivious to everything. Including the effect he had on other
people.
"I just don't think she'd appreciate us being alone together.'
She put the bottle down and opened the drawer, rummaging for
a corkscrew.
"Anna's fine about it. Anyway, you're family.'
"I'm not sure I qualify as that any more,' she laughed.
"You'll always be part of my family, Evie. Just because we're
not together any more doesn't mean I've stopped caring about
you.'
She wished he wouldn't look at her like that, stirring up all
those feelings she'd tried so hard to stop having for the past five
years.
She turned away, changing the subject. "Have you seen all that
food Frankie's made? It's enough to feed an army.'
Oliver sighed. "I told him not to go mad. Everyone's been
stuffing themselves all day, they're not going to want to do it all
again. I don't know why he does it.'
"Because he loves you?' Eve found a corkscrew and started to
open the bottle.
Oliver looked amused. "You'd better not let him hear you say
that. He wouldn't want anyone thinking he's a bloody poof !' He
mimicked the chef 's gruff Yorkshire accent.
Eve laughed, then yelped with pain as the corkscrew slipped.
"Bugger!'
"Let me see.' He reached for her hand but she pulled away.
"It's just a scrape.' She looked at where blood was already oozing
out of a small, jagged cut.
"Let me see,' he insisted, taking her hand and inspecting it. "It's
bleeding quite a bit. We'd better run it under the tap.'
"I can do it.'
"For heaven's sake, let me help you.'
She watched the water running over their hands. "Well? What's
the verdict? Will I be able to play the piano after this?'
"I expect so.'
 "That's good news. I couldn't play before.'
Oliver grinned. "Maybe this'll teach you not to mess around
with sharp objects.'
"Says the man who almost took his fingers off in an onionchopping
contest.'
"That just goes to show I know what I'm talking about, doesn't
it?'
They were still laughing when Anna walked in.
"Sorry to interrupt,' she said, "but everyone's wondering where
you are.'
Oliver let go of her hand. "Sorry, Eve had an accident. I had
to apply some first aid.'
Anna glared at Eve. "I'll tell them you're on your way, shall
I?'
She slammed back through the doors, allowing them to swing
shut behind her.
Eve turned to Oliver. "And you still think she's fine about us?'
she said.

