Pargeter has arrived from Pemberley. There the apple harvest
continues apace; Mrs Reynolds has enjoined him to keep me informed
about the stillroom – I now have every detail of the pears &amp; plums
which she has bottled. She is to try preserving medlars – I cannot
imagine how.
Apparently old Mountmain is anxious to purchase Tugg's Dell,
which marches with his land, &amp; would immeasurably improve his
shoot. I am not prepared to part with a substantial acreage of prime
land for a mere pecuniary return, &amp; have written proposing that his
Lordship exchange it for Puddelcombe Meadow, which conveniently
borders my trout stream.
[Omitted: more information about land transactions, yields and receipts for
home farm, redecoration of Miss Georgiana's private parlour, and estimates
for repairs to three cottages in Pemberley village].
Miss Georgiana seems a little dull &amp; out of sorts, says Pargeter; she
mopes around the house for much of the day. The weather has been
so bad that her morning walks have had to take place in the Picture
Gallery. Poor G!
That evening I dashed off another letter to her, gave it to Bolton
to post before I could change my mind, then went to Brooks's to meet
Byron as arranged. Byron in an outlandish black cloak which he said
had come from France. How do these fripperies continue to cross the
Channel, war or no war! He called it a rocolo or some such name. It
would not do for Peebles to catch sight of it – he is for ever wishing
me to emulate his Lordship's sartorial excesses. Tom Bullivant was
there. He tells me there is much disquiet about Perceval's retaining
the position of Chancellor as well as Prime Minister. I agree – it is
more than any man can handle. Byron was at the gaming tables, &amp;
I distinctly saw him hand over my money in exchange for counters.
I recognized the purse. He lost heavily, then appeared to bethink
himself, borrowed a large sum from the Bank, handed me back my
50l., ordered a fine supper for the three of us, and, having gorged on
pickled salmon &amp; brandy, repaired once more to the tables. I felt no
inclination to play, but went &amp; sat in the smoking room with Tom. I
took much Port Wine, &amp; raised no objection when Byron came to find
us &amp; carried us off to meet some "charming women' of his acquaintance.
I remember little of the evening after that. My bit of muslin was fair
&amp; curvaceous, with a loud laugh. She had fine paps to her. Her name,
I believe, is Clarabelle.
I am not sure who brought me home.
October 20th
Peebles exuded disapproval as he brought in my shaving water. Took
myself to church in the forenoon – All Souls, Langham Place. Cold
meats, then a quiet session with the Pemberley accounts. Dinner
alone. No Port Wine. To bed early. Wrote yesterday's &amp; today's
Diary.
The time has come for me to forward the first instalment of
moneys to that blackguard Wickham. I will arrange it with Pargeter
tomorrow before leaving Town.
October 21st
Trafalgar Day! Much celebrating &amp; flag-waving in the street. No
body seems to remember that this was also the day the Admiral died.
Out &amp; about in Town all day.
October 22nd
Yesterday evening Byron came &amp; persuaded me to accompany him to
Brooks's again for a Trafalgar Day celebration. I a trifle reluctant to
let myself in for more debauchery, but allowed him to prevail without
much difficulty. The fellows in festive mood. Cracked several bottles
of clairet with Colebrooke, Fitchett, &amp; some other old schoolfellows.
Byron drank no wine, saying indignantly: "I never touch liquor!' I
cannot fathom him.
They are all talking about His Majesty's violent grief at Her Royal
Highness the Princess Amelia's illness. They say she is very poorly
indeed. His Majesty is beside Himself, &amp; Colebrooke whispered that
he has it on good report that the King acts most strangely, &amp; looks
like to lose His reason once more.
Afterwards we all visited the bordello together. My charmer is
called Esmeralda – I was mistaken as to her name. She has told me
artlessly that her ambition is to perform circus tricks like Madame
Scacchi, &amp; that she is acting the courtesan to pay for lessons in
circus craft. At present she is learning to stand on a horse's back.
She showed me the calluses on the inside of her thighs from riding
astride, wearing only spangled stockings.
The distractions of this &amp; the previous days have been lively,
but I cannot shake off my anxieties. I have decided that London is
too hectic for me in my present mood, &amp; have resolved to return
to Hertfordshire &amp; Charles. Am writing this as they harness the
horses.
Arrived at Netherfield, to find a dinner-party planned: The Lucas
family, a Mrs Long, &amp; the Bennet ladies invited. I am sitting in the
Library, writing this. Miss Caroline has just come in from the garden,
bearing armfuls of chrysanthemums &amp; berries to dress the table. She
has trodden some fallen petals into the carpet, russet &amp; gold. Peebles
is upstairs laying out cravats for me to tie an Oriental – wretchedly
uncomfortable, &amp; a deal too formal for a country evening's entertainment,
but I am loath to disappoint him.
At dinner, Miss Caroline &amp; Mrs Louisa placed me between them: the
former whispered that this was to protect me from the local riff-raff.
Charles insisted on being seated next to Miss Bennet. She is handsome,
&amp; Charles has not been laggardly in furthering the acquaintance:
I noted that they greeted each other like long-lost friends.
Charles appears to be considerably épris – but then he is always
falling in love. There is little danger of her fixing his affections: she
has but a paltry fortune, I understand. Miss Caroline told me that
they have already spent three evenings together – an agreeable rural
interlude for Charles – &amp; pointed out the Mother to me. The latter
matron directed loud remarks at the person opposite for most of the
repast, ignoring her neighbours on both sides: she is indeed a strident
lady. She leant forward so far that I began to fear for her ribbons in
the soup. Then Miss Caroline indicated another young lady: "You
remember her, surely.'
I replied that I had never had the pleasure of meeting her.
"But she was at the ball the other day,' she protested.
"I have no recollection of it. Who is she?'
"Miss Elizabeth Bennet, younger Sister to Charles's Miss Bennet,'
she whispered. "I am told she is rather wild. She answers the gentlemen
as an equal, &amp; roams the countryside in a pair of stout boots.'
As I looked at this Miss Elizabeth, she turned her head, &amp; our eyes
met. She quickly looked away. She is somewhat undersized, &amp; too
thin. It must be all the exercise she takes.
When the ladies left the room, I was regaled by Sir William Lucas
with stories of his reception at St James's. What a prosy old bore!
Nor was there anything to interest me when we finally moved to
the drawing-
room. One of the Bennet girls, a mousy creature named
Miss Mary, in an orange gown, insisted on playing &amp; singing.
She attempted
"The Lass with the Delicate Air', distinctly off-key.
I amused myself watching Miss Elizabeth Bennet. She has a bold
manner,
&amp; always
seems to be laughing at something or somebody. Her brownish
hair escapes in untidy curls round her face; her
unexpectedly
dark eyes sparkle with mischief – scarcely befitting a
respectable young lady. Her complexion is quite brown – I daresay
she is too much in the wind &amp; sun, if, as Miss Caroline suggests, she
spends her days roaming the countryside unchaperoned. Whatever the
reason, she is positively weatherbeaten. I mentioned as much to Miss
Caroline, who laughed heartily, showing her fine white teeth, adhering
to one of which was a small fragment of some green vegetable.
October 23rd
Miss Caroline has just entered the Library, where I have been writing.
She enquired about "that tattered old moleskin book' which I
carry with me everywhere. I told her it was my Diary. She wished
to know if it was a very private diary. When I vouchsafed no reply,
she wondered how long I had been keeping it. I told her that it had
been my Mother's idea – then, unbidden, a picture rose in my mind:
Mamma, on that last sunny day at Pemberley, when she called me to
her &amp; gave me my first Diary. I remember her pale arm, that pearl
&amp; gold bracelet of hers – I wonder what became of it . . .? Try as I
may I cannot clearly recall her face. I was about twelve years old, &amp;
I wished she were not so languid, reclining on the day-bed by the
window. I scarcely heard what she said: I was listening for the sound
of distant doors banging, wondering if it was the under-housemaids
playing hide-and-seek in the attics again, &amp; whether this time they
would let me join in the fun. Yet at the same time I was aware that
this moment had a certain importance. I was too young to know that
Mamma was expecting to be confined at any moment – &amp; that within
three days my Sister would be born &amp; she – gone.
Keeping my Diary was the last thing she ever asked me to do. She
told me gently that I should come to cherish it as a friend. After her
death, I tried to be true to her wishes, &amp; ever since have obeyed her
injunction to write as frankly &amp; fully as I could.
I believe that it was my last interview with Mamma – tho' the
next day, as I rode past with Crabbe, I glimpsed her smiling at me
through the window. That same night she became ill . . .
Shew this book to Miss Caroline? Preposterous!

Drove to Meryton today with the ladies, as Mrs Louisa wished to exchange
her Library books. She tells me that Mme d'Arblay's new novel
is all the rage; but I cannot bring myself to read such flummery. We
met one of their new acquaintance – a Mrs Phillips, a vulgar, gossipy
person of some years. Miss Caroline, who seems to know everything
about the district, whispered in my ear that this Mrs Phillips is Sister
to Mrs Bennet, the lady with the numbers of "eligible' daughters.
Indeed, two of the said girls were present: Miss Catriona (or possibly
Catherine), a young lady with a plaintive voice, &amp; Miss Elizabeth,
whose cheeks were red from the cold. I overhead Mrs Louisa &amp; Miss
Caroline jesting about her appearance – "no better than a bumpkin'
– but to some, a rosy complexion may be no less alluring than the
Bingley Sisters' freckled pallor. They should take more exercise: I
must encourage them to walk round the shrubbery tomorrow.
Before dinner, billiards with Charles. Best of five frames. He goodnaturedly
annoyed at the fact that I beat him every time.
Still no further word from Georgiana.
October 24
Today I have the "blue devils' as Charles would have it: still no reply
from Georgie – I was sure a letter would come today. It did not
help that I have received a letter from James, enquiring anxiously
as to her welfare: "Why does not my Cousin Georgiana leave Pemberley
&amp; join you in Town? A lonely house in the wilds of Derbyshire is scarcely
a congenial setting for a young lady of her years, particularly in Autumn.'
Why does not she join me, indeed! When I desire nothing better!
A walk outdoors with my two hostesses. Tho' Miss Caroline
teazed me to converse with them, I scarce heeded a word that they
spoke. I found a greater measure of relief in a couple of hours' hard
riding. Caesar very nervous today – shied at fallen leaves, &amp; tried to
throw me three times.
This evening I have refused to play at cards, ruining Mrs Louisa's
hopes of a rubber, for her Husband will never condescend either.
Instead, I have been writing this – &amp; reading Hazlitt's Essay on the
Principles of Human Action.

