Personally, Bobby had never got it. He was as proud of his cowboy
roots as the next man. But he also loved horses – all types of horses,
from mustangs, to quarter horses, to exotic Arab thoroughbreds. His
father would rather die than see Highwood used for anything other
than raising cattle, he knew that. But really, what was so wrong about
applying traditional cowboy skills and techniques to racehorse training?
And where was it written that a great ranch had to be about beef cattle
and nothing else?
One day. One day, when Highwood was his . . .
He broke away from his daydreaming with a start at the touch of a
cold hand against his back.
"Sorry. Did I scare you?'
It was Chantal, Pascal Bremeau's young and very beautiful wife. He
hadn't heard her come in, and the cold of her fingers against his warm
skin gave him a shock – albeit a not altogether unpleasant one.
"No.' Like his father, Bobby was a man of few words.
"I did knock,' she lied, "but I guess you didn't hear me. You looked
miles away.'
Half French and half Venezuelan, Chantal oozed the dark, heavylidded
sultriness of South America, although her English was faultless
and bore no trace of an accent. Oddly, the contrast between that
clipped British voice and her pneumatically Latin body only seemed to
enhance her sexiness.
Bobby bit his lip and tried to think unsexy thoughts. His eighthgrade
math teacher naked usually did the trick, but not today. Nothing
seemed to be working.
She's Bremeau's wife, he told himself sternly.
He mustn't.
He absolutely must not.
"I thought you might like some company,' she said, with studied
innocence, before slowly and deliberately starting to twirl her fingers
through the still damp curls of his chest hair.
Inevitably he felt his cock start to harden and wished he had more
than a skimpy towel between him and this stunning girl. It didn't help
that she was looking even more gorgeous than usual this evening in a
crotch-skimming yellow sundress, which did little to restrain her full,
bra-less cappuccino-brown breasts.
"No, thanks.' He tried to sound firm. He started to prise away her
hand, but somehow ended up with his fingers intertwined with hers
and his eyes locked into her brazenly inviting gaze.
Goddam. This was going to be difficult.
With his heart rate rising and his dick taking on a life of its own,
twitching and jumping like it was being electrocuted, it was all he
could do to remember to breathe in and out.
He'd seen it coming, of course. Chantal was a shameless flirt. From
the very first morning he arrived at the estate, she'd taken to "dropping
by' the indoor school, often wearing nothing more than a pair of
frayed denim hot pants and a bikini top that wouldn't have looked out
of place on a Vegas stripper. Not that he blamed her for trying it on.
Her old man was no oil painting, and that was putting it nicely. Truth
be told, Pascal Bremeau was one fat, humourless, garlic-munching sonof-
a-bitch. Plus he was old, really old, and seemed to spend 90 per cent
of his time away on business leaving his bored, beautiful young wife to
her own devices. What did the guy expect?
But women and training didn't mix. Bobby resented anything that
threatened to distract him when he was working – and Madame
Bremeau certainly fitted right into that category. He had tried ignoring
her, had even been outright rude to her on a couple of occasions,
telling her to leave him alone and stay away from the stables, that he
wasn't interested. But his rejection only seemed to make her more
determined.
Tonight was the last night that Pascal would be away.
And he wasn't training now . . .
"Look,' he whispered, desperately trying not to focus on her pupils,
which were so dilated with lust she looked like she'd had a shot of
horse tranquillizer, "this really isn't a great idea, you know. Your
husband—'
"Isn't here,' she finished for him, backing him towards the bed and
slipping her hand expertly up beneath his towel. "But you are. You
know it's funny,' she flashed him a wicked smile, wrapping her fingers
around his cock like a vice, "Duval thinks you are too soft with Mirage.
But you don't feel at all soft to me.'
Fuck it.
Groaning, Bobby staggered backwards onto the antique lace
bedspread, pulling her down on top of him. God knew he shouldn't be
doing this – not with Bremeau's wife – but the girl was a force of
nature. Trying to resist her was like attempting to turn back the tide
with your bare hands. It would take a stronger man than he was.

Agonizingly slowly, she started to stroke him, licking her palm for
more lubrication, increasing her pace gradually as he instinctively
arched his pelvis forward and bucked against her. He closed his eyes,
just for a moment, and when he opened them again found that she
was kneeling over him, lifting up her lemon yellow dress to reveal a
neatly trimmed, very dark bush and no panties. Just as she was about
to lower herself down onto him, he grabbed her round the waist,
flipping her over onto her back as easily as he would a ragdoll.
"What are you doing?' she giggled, gasping as he climbed on top of
her, nudging her already spread legs wider.
"I don't like girls on top,' he said. And with that he thrust into her
like a rocket, with so much force that she had to reach back and hold
on to the headboard for support.
Bobby enjoyed sex in a simple, matter-of-fact sort of way. But it had
never consumed him with passion in the same way that his horses did.
Since the age of sixteen he'd attracted women so effortlessly that he'd
come to accept whatever sexual opportunities presented themselves as
no more than his due, enjoying them in the same way as he might
enjoy a good game of golf or a side of home-cooked ribs.
There were women that he loved, naturally – his mother, for all her
faults, was still very dear to him, and the McDonald girls, Tara and
Summer, the daughters of Hank's ranch manager, were like surrogate
sisters to him – but he had certainly never been in love, let alone had a
steady, semi-serious girlfriend. The idea had never even occurred to
him.
This pointed lack of commitment didn't seem to put women off,
however. If anything, his indifferent, take-it-or-leave-it attitude only
heightened his desirability to the opposite sex. But unfortunately,
experience had failed to turn him into a sensitive lover. With girls
falling into his lap like over-ripe apples, he had never learned to curb
his natural selfishness in bed. At twenty-three he still pursued his own
pleasure with the same robust single-mindedness as a young stud
stallion, quite oblivious of his partner's needs or desires.
Feeling his orgasm building almost immediately now, as Chantal
writhed and clenched beneath him, he made no effort to hold it back,
exploding into her like a breaking dam, burying his face in her neck to
muffle the sound of his own release.
Happily, she seemed amused rather than offended by the "wham,
bam, thank you, ma'am' approach, and not in the least bit put out that
she hadn't come herself.
"My goodness,' she laughed, smoothing down her dress and
rearranging her hair as he slumped back onto the bed, exhausted.
"Short but sweet, eh? Is that how all the cowboys do it?'

"I have no idea.' Bobby grinned up at her like a little boy, happy
now that he'd got what he wanted. "You'd have to ask them.'
He couldn't help but admire Chantal. She was that rarest of
creatures: a stunning girl with a nice, uncomplicated attitude to sex. It
was a welcome change from all the clingy "my-love-can-change-you'
chicks he seemed to wind up in bed with back home.
"I know I ought to feel guilty,' he drawled, watching her peering
into the mirror and rubbing off the tell-tale make-up smudges with her
finger, "but I don't. You're far too beautiful to regret.'
Chantal smiled. From anyone else it would have sounded like a line.
But Bobby was not given to flattery, and something told her that a
compliment from him was probably the real deal. She was just about
to turn and thank him, with another offer he couldn't refuse, when an
unexpected knock on the door froze both of them to the spot.
"Bobby? Are you in zere?'
Oh fuck. Pascal.
"Just a minute.' Struggling to keep the panic out of his voice, Bobby
leapt off the bed in an instant. "I'm, er . . . I'm not dressed. Give me a
second, OK?'
"What the hell is he doing home?' he hissed in a stage whisper to
Chantal, scrambling back into his pants while frantically gesturing for
her to go and hide in the wardrobe.
"I don't know.' She shrugged. She seemed marvellously unconcerned
by their dangerous predicament. "Why don't you ask him?'
Jeez, French women had balls of steel. What a piece of work! If he
hadn't known better, he could have sworn he actually saw her smile as
she clambered into the huge antique armoire.
Briefly he wondered how many errant wives of the French
aristocracy had used it as a hiding place before her. Hundreds,
probably. But this was no time to get historical. Shoving her right to
the back, he pulled the walnut doors closed behind her and turned the
key. Then, with one long, deep breath to steady his nerves, he opened
the door to her husband.
Bremeau had obviously just arrived home from his business trip.
Still dressed in a formal three-piece suit, he looked white as a sheet and
even more miserable than usual.
Bobby's heart skipped a beat. He couldn't have heard them, could
he?
"Bobby.' The Frenchman's short, stubby fingers worked nervously
as he spoke. "This is very bad, mon ami. Very, very bad.'
Holy crap. He had heard them.
That was it, then: the end of his career, and quite possibly his life if
Pascal turned out to be the murderously jealous type, which he looked
like he very well might be. And all over a stupid girl! How could he
have been so reckless? And with his work with Mirage only halffinished,
too . . .
"Eets your father.' Bremeau abruptly interrupted his panicked
internal monologue.
For a minute Bobby thought he'd misheard him.
"What? My father? I don't understand.'
"I'm sorry,' the older man mumbled awkwardly. "I . . . I don't really
know 'ow to say these, but . . . 'e 'as died, Bobby. In 'is sleep. About
four hours ago.'
Bobby stared impassively at the jowly, pale face opposite him.
No. No, there must be some mistake. It wasn't supposed to happen
like this. He wasn't ready.
"I 'ave arranged for the chopper to fly you to Nice airport in 'alf an
hour. You understand, no?'
Bremeau's look of concern deepened. Perhaps the boy hadn't
grasped his broken English? He kept waiting for him to say something,
but he looked utterly shell-shocked.
"Bobby? Are you all right?'
Stunned and mute, Bobby eventually managed a nod.
"Yes . . . yes. I'm fine. I understand,' he said quietly. "Thank you.'
"I'm so sorry.'
Reaching up, Bremeau laid a comforting hand on his shoulder. All of
a sudden the guilt he'd been unable to feel a few moments ago seemed
to punch him full force in the stomach. Hank was dead. His father.
Dead. And here was this Frenchman, a total stranger, trying to comfort
him, little knowing that not five minutes ago he'd been banging the
living daylights out of the poor guy's wife – the same wife who was
hiding in the closet right now.
The whole thing was like a sketch from a bad sit-com. Only it no
longer seemed funny.
His father was dead.
"I'm sorry, too, Pascal,' he whispered, almost to himself. "Believe
me. Sorrier than you know. For everything.'

