33
mercredi, le 26 novembre
It's a public health issue, I know.
I understand such feelings perfectly. This job I do, the
number of people I come in contact with. Living in a city
where disease flies in from all over the world. And the time
of year – the festive season when people are out partying,
splurging, doing things they wouldn't normally do because
they think, hey, it's the end of another year, I deserve a treat.
Then they wake up the next morning unsure of what they
got and whom they were with. And even if you do remember,
you never know at the time who has it and who hasn't.
I'm a disease-spreading vector. No one is safe, sure, but
some of us are more at risk than others, even with all the
precautions available these days – the free clinics, the
vaccinations, the public awareness campaigns.
And it's important to me. There's no such thing as paid
sick leave for call girls. And god forbid you end up in
hospital.
So I want to set your minds at ease as much as I can. I
want you to know.
I have had a flu jab.
jeudi, le 27 novembre
A late text from the Boy last night: "We were taken out for
free drinks after work. Am now in a tree.'
It's cold out there. I hope his rapidly shrinking boyparts
make it home safely and are up for warming again soon.
The first time we met it was his birthday, about one year
ago now. He was tearing up the dance floor in a club, almost
literally – the bouncers had their hackles up the moment he
34
and his equally large, drunken friends came in the door.
They weren't the only ones. I couldn't take my eyes off this
man who moved like water and threw his limbs around as
though they were only nominally attached to his body.
The otherwise crowded floor cleared a wide circle around
their group. They took turns chucking each other around,
laughing, like little boys. His eyes were shining, probably
from alcohol. His curly hair and freckles stood out in a
room of pale poseurs. I demanded a mutual friend introduce
us. The club was too loud, he looked down and smiled at
me, but didn't hear a word we were saying. I stayed on the
fringes and waited. When he went out in the hall to join the
queue for the toilets, I followed him.
"Happy birthday,' I said.
"Thank you,' he smiled. He didn't appear to recognise me.
He did seem quite interested staring down my top, however.
Hey, I thought. It's a start.
I stood on tiptoe and kissed him. He seemed puzzled but
didn't resist. I pulled at the sleeve of his shirt to drag him to
the smaller, quieter room. We found a corner of a red velvet
sofa and snuggled together.
"You can't do this,' he said.
"Why not?'
"You don't know me at all,' he said. "My name, where I'm
from. You know nothing about me.'
"I want to know you,' I said, squeezing my hand around
his arm, which was roped with thick muscles. His hands,
resting lightly on my waist, were easily the largest and finest
I'd ever seen on a man.
Just then another woman – maybe biologically not
female, it was difficult to tell in the dark – interrupted us.
"Love the boots, honey,' she said.
"Cheers.' I was wearing leather knee-highs with vertiginous
heels. They were practically hobbling me, but worth it.
The Boy looked down. "They are actually rather good,' he
said, fingering the skin just under my knee. I melted. "But I
don't think we should go back to the others. You'd likely
break an ankle dancing in those.'
"Guess we'll have to find something else to do?'
"I suppose,' he smiled, and we groped a bit longer, until I
caught a glance at my watch. It was time for Cinderella to
make her escape. "Come home with me,' he growled in my
ear, fiddling with the zip of my left boot. It was the kind of
order a woman dreams about. Irresistible.
"I have a boyfriend,' I said. It seemed only fair to mention
it. The Boy said he didn't care. I was technically in an open
relationship, but knew this man was not one-night material.
He was far more interesting than that, there was too much
crackling energy around him. "Well,' I said, "you can have
me one night or see me again. Which will it be?'
"I can't not see you again,' the Boy said. I shrugged – tant
pis. "Shameless trollop.' But he was smiling, and took my
phone number. He followed me as far as the bouncers. The
rest of his friends were still inside. There was a pause. I
could have invited him back and wanted to, but also knew,
as I walked out the glass doors, he'd be watching me go.
I went home and told the housemates I was in love. The
fact that I was also blind drunk and trying to balance four
candles in a fir wreath on my head is by the by.
The Boy and I met for drinks later that week but nothing
happened. I felt uncomfortable following up on the promise
of that first meeting. He did try at first – a lingering glance
here, a trailing hand there – but soon learned the boundaries.
He may have been a fully paid-up member of the bon
ton, but he was no cad. Or perhaps he was biding his time.
The relationship I was in was clearly not healthy. By the
time I split with that boyfriend and moved to London, the
Boy had new digs in Brighton. He drove up to meet me and
moved everything in to my new flat. We fucked for the first
time among the scattered boxes and suitcases and piles of
books on the floor. Wooden planks. I had friction scars for
weeks after.
samedi, le 29 novembre
I've been cleaning the make-up shelf, discarding crusty
bottles of drying nail varnish and foundation-sodden
sponges. In the beginning I thought this job would just be a
stopgap, but it's been absolute months now. It's become
almost routine, but I remember when it didn't always seem
like that.
Preparing for my first appointment had felt like making
up for the stage. I recall laying out a liquid base and a stick
one; eyeshadow, liner and mascara; lipliner, gloss. Preparation
had started early. Too early. But I had no inkling
of how to put it all together, how long it would take.
I showered and dried myself carefully in the white-tiled
bathroom, looking for stray hairs missed by waxing and
shaving. A quick blast of deodorant. Applied a drop of
cologne to my cleavage and inside elbows. Put on a white
lace bra and knickers, stockings, dried my hair. Part it here
or there? Which way should it fall? Hair up or hair down?
Fluffy or straight? I straightened the ends so they wouldn't
curl in the damp night air but otherwise left it alone. Small
pearl earrings.
I put the dress over my head then started on make-up.
Foundation, no powder. A damp tissue applied lightly to
take the excess off. Violet eyeshadow – only a touch. A dab
of silvery white eyeliner just at the inside corner of my eyes.
Cat eyes or not? Vamp or girlish? My hand was shaking
slightly. Unwound the mascara, wiped the excess on a tissue,
let it sit in the air a moment. Brushed on one layer. Then a
second.
My eyes in the mirror stood out a mile from the rest of the
face. I lined my lips, wondering how much to use and how
much would come off on him. What would I have to take
with me, would there be time to re-apply? With the tip of
my little finger I dabbed a liquid blusher on as lipstain.
Gloss. More gloss. I thought of the manager's advice: "Men
love glossy lips.' I suppose it doesn't take a genius to realise
why.
A touch of gel to keep the hair off my forehead and
cheeks. A clip to keep it back. I put the shoes on and buckled
them at the ankles. Black, patent-leather stilettos showing a
long stripe of instep. Incredibly high heels, but I'd once run
for a bus in them and had danced till morning in them many
times. Fuck-me shoes.
Then my coat. College scarf or fluffy blue one? The blue
would leave fibres on the coat; I decided against it in the end.
It was a cold night. Navy gloves with tiny buttons along the
wrist. I stuck a pin with a butterfly in the coat lapel. Nervous;
took deep breaths. Still a quarter of an hour to wait.
My mouth had gone dry. Went to the kitchen and poured
a drink. Was alcohol a bad idea? Didn't know. One couldn't
hurt. My lips left a crackling pink half-moon on the rim of
the glass. Packed a handbag. I was sweating inside the coat
and scarf and gloves. Still ten minutes until the taxi. Looked
at the location for the appointment again in the A–Z. Didn't
want to carry it with me. It was near a tube station. If I could
memorise the directions from the tube station, I should be
fine.
Went downstairs and stood outside. The cold wind
tickled the damp hair at my neck. Looked down my road.
No one was out walking. Very few cars came by. A bus
paused at the bus stop. No one was waiting; it drove on. A
small car came up behind it, a man looking out the window.
That must be the cab, I thought. Focus. I'm working as of
now. Smile, wave, give him the address. From here on I am
not me.
We found the house. Paid the driver. Up the walk, brass
knocker on the door. A light on inside. My hair was falling
in my face. I took the clip out and shook the hair loose.
Smiled. Rapped at the door. No turning back.
The next morning I woke up in my own bed. Held my
hand up, stared at it for ages. Was something supposed to be
different? Should I have felt victimised, abused? I couldn't
say. The finer points of feminist theory didn't seem to apply.
Things felt as they always had. Same hand, same girl. I got
up and made breakfast.
dimanche, le 30 novembre
The Boy has been casting around for a new position for
some time (working position that is, not sexual, though all
offers gratefully received). He's been unhappy at work for so
long, but it's secure, but this, but that, well, and so on, and
so forth. His workmates are the same crowd he ran with at
university. But now one of them has been made redundant
and he's starting to feel the full focus of the upper echelons
of administration looking carefully at what he does. I keep
suggesting military service, and not just because I think he
would fill out a uniform in a most attractive manner. So he
emailed his CV to see if there was anything I could do.
I returned it within the half-hour. Almost immediately the
phone rang. It was the Boy, and he was laughing.
"This is great stuff, kitty . . . but I don't think I can use
it.'
"No?'

"For one thing, I don't think the Army cares either way
about the size of my member.'
"You don't know that for sure. You could get anyone
interviewing you.' I hear the services are really very modern
these days.
"Nice thought.' I heard him scrolling down the email from
the other end of the phone. "Recovery time between ejaculations
should not be in the Other Qualifications section.'
"It's important to me, sweetie.'
"Doubtless. And "‘Oral sex: giving and receiving'’ under
Interests and Activities?'
"Are you saying they're not?' We laughed.

