People will tell you there is no essential difference between Monday and any other day of the week. The sun rises and sets just as it does on, say, Thursday. The meteorological patterns that govern the weather do not lay on any special horrors  at Monday's behest. It is not possessed by a malevolent alien life-force, nor is it occupied by evil spirits or gremlins.       
For Hope Shepherd, however, this was plainly so much tosh. When you were newly divorced, and all-at-odds with the world, Monday was a day like any other only in the same way that a rottweiler was like a poodle, or a self-assessment tax return was like a hair-appointment card.  Thus, as she jogged the last fifty yards to Cefn Melin Station with a box file under her arm and a thumping headache, she knew there was only one sure route to defeating the beast that was Monday and that was, simply,  by getting better organised to deal with it: in particular, by remembering all those things that should never be done on a Monday. Like taking  Friday's lunchboxes out of school bags. Like being forced to acknowledge that you cannot put a tin of beans in a sandwich. Like taking the school uniform you have remembered to wash on Sunday evening out of the washing machine. Like noticing that you do not have twenty pence for your son's bus fare. Like remembering you have failed to set the alarm again.
Of course, you could just cancel Monday altogether. Or designate it a non-contact day, like teachers had from time to time. A day in which hopelessly disorganised  people could pause, take stock and, well… get organised.
Except Hope knew that if you did that Tuesday would simply become The New Monday, which was why one of her New Year resolutions this year was to stop trying to re-schedule the Gregorian calendar and to simply lick herself into shape. It would be a challenge, however, because getting organised was not something that came easily to her. Getting organised was something her ex-husband used to do. And still did, no doubt. And  would do in perpetuity. Hope didn't do organised. Organised was boring. She  used to do spontaneity and optimism, didn't she? Yes. So much better. And optimism did work, in a roundabout way. Why fuss, for example, with the bother of remembering an umbrella if you knew perfectly well  it wasn't going to rain?
Except now it was. Which struck Hope as unfair, and a metaphor for the state of her life generally. She shunted her bag higher on her shoulder and broke into a run. Missing the train was an absolute no-no, because the next wasn't due for twenty minutes. She'd no business aiding and abetting a day that was already intent on frustrating her. This, she  thought, as she scuttled down the ridiculously long flight of steps – the station was in a cutting –  was what making all those New Year's resolutions was really all about. Greeting every new day with a smile. Yeah, right. She bared her teeth, her breath whistling as it tried to keep up with her, and jumped the last two steps before sprinting towards the platform.
  Hope didn't get the train often – she generally drove to work – but today she was off to the printers in town and  had to bite the fetid bullet that was rush-hour commuting. She ran faster. The train, she saw, was already at the station. 
She braced her shoulders, quarterback style, in preparation for pressing her way into the fuggy interior. Even from outside, her nose prickled under the assault of anti-perspirant and perfume, of jackets smoked overnight in essence of chip fat, of cloying post-weekend early morning breath. 
The doors on the eight-forty-two from Cefn Melin to Queen Street were of the concertina variety. There was a well – a deep step – between door frame and carriage, which had to be kept clear for the doors to sweep shut.  She needed to get her hand round a pole and pull herself up before they did. But even as she made one last heave out of no man's land, some sixth sense told Hope her day was about to get worse. And it did. As she moved fully on board and the doors began hissing, she  felt the crush of someone else trying to squeeze in behind her and an unlikely resistance as she lifted her right foot.  Hope had not, up to now, been aware of her laces. Which was why she had no reason to know that the one on the right was undone. But plainly it was, for as she tried to lift her foot from the doorwell, she  felt it begin to slip out of its trainer, like a resolute trout trying to escape from a net. She scrunched her toes up and swivelled to see, but before she  could do anything else, she was shunted hard from behind and  felt the chill wind of the morning – and it  just became chillier – now playfully caressing her besocked right foot. And then something else. Something infinitely more worrying.   The plump-plump of an item of unattached   footwear, as it fell the short distance between carriage and well.  And, although she couldn't see through the Narnian coatscape, her ears didn't deceive her. The doors  had shut. 
And if the doors  had shut…
"Er, excuse me,' she  panted at no-one in particular. "Do you mind if I just…er..oomph…excuse me…I'm sorry…..um, it's just that my trainer's come off.' 
The body closest to her, which was wide and smelled of  bacon, was  attached to a smiling female face topped off with an arrestingly-hued rain-hood.  She shuffled a little to make room. Hope peered at the floor. She  couldn't see her trainer.
"Come off, lovely?' asked the woman, even though it must have been completely obvious.  Because she too was now looking down at Hope's sock.
"Yes,' said Hope, dipping to scour the doorwell itself. She still  couldn't see her trainer. " Er.  Oh God –' The train began gliding slowly, but oh-so-surely, out of the station. A small explosion of panic whumped in  her stomach. Heads turned. "Oh God! Where's my trainer gone?' 
Feet  began to move. Eyes  peered downwards. Everyone around her was now looking at the floor.  Hope banged heads with a man in a suit.  It was at this point that she realised there were worse things than your trainer falling off. Immeasurably worse. Like your trainer falling off as you were boarding a train, and then – the realisation leapt up and bear-hugged her – failing to board the train with you. "Oh my God!' she cried now. " It must still be on the platform!'
A ripple of mild interest began to eddy around her.
 "Er, can someone  press the  alarm or something, please? My trainer – '
"I can't see it,' said another female voice, which belonged to a  stout lady with a stiff conker-brown coiff and an ivory pashmina, who was wedged against the window behind her. Was it she who had pushed her? Was it this hateful woman who had trodden on her lace? The woman  in the rain-hood peered through the perspex and shook her  bagged head. "I can't see it on the platform, lovely.'
The platform which was fast disappearing beside them. "But it must be!'  Hope gasped.
 The woman shook her head sorrowfully. " I don't think it was.'
A glimmer of hope surfaced. "Then it must still be here, then!'
The wodge of legs shuffled some more.
"I can't see it,' said a voice.
"Me neither,' said another.
 Because it wasn't there. Because it was under the train.
"You've got to laugh,' quipped the woman in the rain hood, patting her.
Yeah, right, thought Hope, miserably. Or you'd cry.
At the offices of Heartbeat, a little after eleven, there was a tangible joy de vivre in the air, of the kind that only an entertaining misfortune happening to someone else on a wet Monday morning can bring.
 Kayleigh, who did reception plus the filing and photocopying, had picked up Hope's left trainer and was clutching it to her chest as she gaped.
"What?' she said. "You mean you got off the train and walked all the way from the station to the shoe shop with one trainer missing?'
"Well, no, as it happens,' corrected Hope, dumping her box file on her desk and reflecting that having spent nineteen pounds ninety-nine on another (rather nasty) pair of trainers meant she  would now have to forego the Eva Cassidy CD  she wanted. "Have you tried walking any distance in one shoe?'
 Kayleigh shook her head.
"So I took the other one off as well.'
"So you walked there in your socks? God, wasn't everyone looking at you?'
"Yes.'
"God, that's dire! I'd be mortified.'
"Oh, but it gets worse.'
"Worse?'
 "Yes,' she said.  "Because I stepped in something unspeakable outside Benetton. Sick, to be precise. So then I had to take my socks off as well.'
"What? You mean you walked all the way to the shoe shop barefoot?'
"Barefoot.'
"In January?'
"In January. God, I'm so wild.'
 "I don't doubt it,' said Simon, with habitual tenderness. He was sitting opposite Hope wearing a pea-green sleeveless sweater. "Oh, dear,' he added. "You must have felt such a prat.'
 Hope irritably  pulled a pen from her pen pot. "Oh, it's not that,' she said, though this was entirely untrue. On alighting at Queen Street station, her most compelling thought was that as she had never been so excruciatingly embarrassed in her life she might as well do the thing she most wanted to at that moment. Which was to sit down on a bench on the platform and burst into tears. But she hadn't done it, and for very sound reasons. One being that if she had burst into tears her embarrassment would have leapt, at a stroke, to unimaginable proportions, and the other being that she wasn't allowed to anyway, another major New Year's resolution being that she wasn't going to burst into tears over nothing any more.
And she had made the shoe shop and  the memory was fading. As her mother would say, "Darling, nobody died.' 
"Well, it was a bit,' she conceded now, reflecting that listening to Eva Cassidy might not be an altogether uplifting pastime anyway, what with her having died.  "But mainly it's the money. Fifty-five quid I paid for those trainers! And it's been raining all morning. So even if it's still there it'll be fit for nothing.'
"It'll be fine,' soothed  Madeleine, who had  come in from a meeting of her own, and who thought nothing of spending that amount of money on lunch. "I used to have  my au pair put all my kids' trainers in the washing machine. They come up a treat.'
"And that's assuming it hasn't already been mangled by fifteen trains,'  Hope  added. "Or zapped by four million volts. Or –'
"But someone will have seen it and handed it in, surely?'  Simon gently  persisted. He  persisted gently in all things. He was that kind of man.
 Hope shot him a look of frustration. "That's just the point! There's no-one there to hand it in to. There's no-one there, period. The station's unmanned. And besides, who's even going to see it if it's down on the line?'
"You never know,' Simon said. "Someone might have seen it.'
Hope lifted her foot and peeled down one of her new socks. There was a blister the size of a sprout on her heel.
"Oh, come on,' she said irritably. "And pigs might fly. Besides, even if someone did see it, Simon, who in their right mind would pick the bloody thing up?' 
Before he could utter a another platitude, she stood up and took herself off to the toilets. Because quite without warning, the tears, ever threatening, had welled in her eyes in treacherous floods. 

