	Anne Boleyn holds out her tiny plastic hands, which are peeling as if she's contracted some nasty Tudor skin disease. Alongside her, Anne of Cleves stares into the middle distance. Her wary expression seems familiar and it's only when I turn around that I realise why: my mother's face is composed in the same mask of careful neutrality. 
       Whenever life gets awkward, her eyes glaze over, as if she's teleported herself back home to her "babies', the three Maine Coon cats that are Mum's reason for living. But she doesn't fool me. Every time Dad says something daft (i.e. pretty much every time he speaks), her pale lips purse, fleetingly, a dozen new lines of disappointment appearing like tiny needles around her mouth. Then they're gone: no one notices but me.
"	A few cannons are nothing compared to the Ebola virus. Or Sarin gas. Or DIY. Did you know that a thousand people a year end up in casualty from sandpaper alone?' Dennis considers this a killer blow.
	My father shakes his head pityingly. "I'm delighted to say that I didn't know that. And if I did, I wouldn't be showing off about it.'
	The other tourists have finally realised that Dennis and Dad aren't an English Heritage-sponsored sideshow, but just two blokes having the kind of spat you could see in your local pub any night of the week. "Torture chamber's this way,' a weary mother tells her ginger-haired twin sons. "Whips and branding irons and a rack where they used to stretch little boys who refused to eat their greens.'
	Dennis whispers, under his breath, "There's a word for people who think ignorance is bliss.'
"	And there's a word for people like you,' Dad says, not under his breath at all. "Smart-arse.'
 	OK, so maybe today wasn't the best idea. It's Dennis's fault: his mother's idea of an outing for her eight-year-old son was to send him on a "treasure hunt' around the local shops until he found one willing to sell him twenty Benson and Hedges to bring home. So he's never realised that wintry day trips to damp, draughty castles are simply the modern version of thumbscrews: torture for all the family.  
       Thank God for out-of-town superstores with Sunday opening: shopping beats heritage every time when it comes to domestic harmony.
       Mum's lip needles appear again and I think it's time to change the subject. "Maybe life wasn't too bad if you were King but somehow I doubt Henry's wives felt all that safe.'
	My mother looks at me gratefully, her face relaxing enough to remind me how pretty she was, once. "That's true. What was it we learned at school? Divorced, beheaded, died, divorced, beheaded, survived!' She nods in satisfaction. "Funny the things you remember.'
       I haven't exactly lightened the mood. We turn to stare at the crash-test-dummy wives, who surround the fat king, his codpiece obscenely prominent. Dad only agreed to come as research for his forthcoming role in the Operatic Society's production of Henry - The Musical! but the part of a womanising, gluttonous patriarch fits him like a glove. 
       I remember studying the Tudors at school, sitting at the back of the History lesson with my best friend Lorraine, trying to work out which queen we most resembled. I saw her eyes narrow and braced myself: to this day, Lorraine combines ruthless honesty with a bitchy streak. I kept my fingers crossed as she considered my Tudor doppelganger. Please, please don't let her say poor plain Anne of Cleves with her long nose and pointy chin, or sour-faced old Catherine Parr with her sulky lips. 
       But she must have been in a generous mood, because she chose Catherine of Aragon. It wasn't a bad likeness: Henry's first wife and I share the same round face, big eyes and flushed cheeks (I wonder if hers, like mine, went red at the slightest provocation). And while neither of us could be described as skinny, we both got a decent cleavage as a consolation prize. 
       Lorraine wanted to be Jane Seymour, until she turned the page in Kings and Queens for Secondary Schools and realised Henry's third wife was distinctly beaky, had a double chin and looked nothing like the actress who did the ads for Le Jardin de Max Factor. In the end she settled for Anne Boleyn, "because Henry the Eighth dumped Catherine of Aragon for her as Anne was prettier. Like me and you!' And then she giggled. 
       "…but what I don't understand,' my father is saying, "is how come the most powerful man in the country had to keep getting married. One wife is enough for anyone surely?'
       Mum's lips purse so hard that even Dennis notices, but Dad ploughs on regardless. "I mean, sow his regal oats, sure, but wouldn't he get a nightly smorgasbord of ladies in waiting dying to lie back and think of England? Perk of the job and all that –"
       "Talking of smorgasbords…' I interrupt, spotting my chance, "all this talk of death is making me hungry. It must be tea time by now?'

While more sensible families are tucking into IKEA smorgasbords, their kids safely immersed in the children's ball pool, we're being royally ripped off. Dennis has paid £20 for four teas and four "authentic Elizabethan cakes'. I love all cakes, but these taste as if they were authentically baked the same week poor Katherine Howard lost her head.  
	Rain thuds down on the corrugated iron roof of the King's Buttery (which my father keeps repeating in a silly, high-pitched voice, "The king's buttery, he's covered in the stuff, that's why he's such a lard-arse,' and then laughing at himself). It's a modern building, if a World War Two Nissen hut counts as modern, and inside, you can see your breath in front of your face. The beige fan heaters produce very little warmth, but make the air smell scorched.
	We've found a seat by the tiny window, and I wipe away the condensation with my fingers. Framed by the glass, the castle's like a drawing from a child's picture book, with stone walls washed grey by the rain, and a perfect ring of a moat to keep enemies out…or the women in. The castle windows are even smaller than the one I'm peering through and I wonder whether the occupants felt lucky to be there, or trapped.
	Dad's fallen silent, and Mum's stirring her tea with the little plastic stick: the grey liquid whirls like filthy bathwater going down the plughole. 
       "Tuesday will officially be the most depressing of the year,' I say, to break the silence. "According to the statistics.' 
	Oddly enough, this doesn't seem to cheer anyone up, but Dennis tries to liven things up. "Don't tell me…let me guess why. Is it because it's the beginning of the week?'
	I shake my head. "It's part of it, but not the main thing. Anyone else?'
	Mum begins to fiddle with a knot-effect gold button on her pink fluffy cardigan, so she's obviously not playing. 
       Dad shrugs. "The weather in January is the worst of the year. So is it to do with seasonal depressive pre-menstrual tension or whatever hypochondriacs get?'
"	That's another contributory factor,' I say. "But there's something more obvious. Dad, you definitely ought to get it, it's your specialist subject.'
	My boyfriend and my father exchange looks of undisguised rivalry. Dennis tugs at the kiss-curl in his fringe, a sure sign of irritation. I'm already regretting the remark about specialist subjects, as Dad's main areas of expertise are: a) women young enough to be his daughter; b) the best tailors for bespoke suits in Bangkok; and c) the love songs of Rogers and Hammerstein. Whereas the area of expertise I was referring to was…
"	Got it!' Dennis claps his hands together. "It's credit card bills, isn't it? This is the week when the wages of Christmas sin come back to haunt us, in the shape of huge bills. Well, I say, us. I mean, anyone daft enough to rely on credit in the first place.'
	Dennis has never had a credit card, or an overdraft facility. He even got through university (BA Hons, Social Policy) without going into the red and prefers the certainty of standing orders to fickle direct debits. Lorraine thinks that makes him "the dullest man in the known universe, worse than Tim Henman or Prince Charles.' But I love his utter dependability. Surprises are seriously over-rated.
	Dad tuts and chews his cake with grim determination. After forty years as a bank manager, he's used to being in the right. "Yes, January is dismal. Which is why we're taking that Caribbean cruise next month. What about you two? Any holiday plans?'
	He folds his arms across his chest in triumph. He knows the answer to this one already. We don't do holidays. Not abroad, anyway.
"	We might take a cottage in Cornwall at Easter,' Dennis says. His lazy mother never took him to the seaside, so he imagines Famous Five-style picnics on sunny beaches, rather than entire days spent in the car, chasing clouds from coast to coast, in the vain hope that it might stop raining for ten minutes.
"	Far East's unbeatable at this time of year,' Dad says, sensing victory.
	I sigh. "Dad, stop it.'
	Dennis takes my hand. "The Foreign Office website is very insistent that no part of South East Asia is 100 per cent safe for British tourists.'
"	As if anywhere is 100 per cent safe,' Dad mutters.
"	Tenerife's lovely at this time of year,' Mum says.
"	OK, OK,' I say, holding up my hand. "Dad, you won't be happy till you've taken the piss so why don't I do it for you? I know I'm safer in the air than I am walking down the street. I know there's a whole world out there waiting to be discovered. I know I'm a great big cowardy-custard chicken scaredy-cat. But it's just the way I am, all right?'
	Dad looks sheepish and I realise I must have been talking rather loudly as people are staring. "Now, now, Bean. That's a bit harsh. What's wrong with wanting my only daughter to live a little?'
	Dennis grips my hand more firmly. "We like staying at home,' he says, "and if more people took our attitude, the polar ice caps wouldn't be melting, would they?'
	It's not that I don't want to fly. I did it reluctantly when I was little, but the older I get, the more terrifying it seems. And however reassuring the safety statistics, I can't bring myself to travel in a tin box with no visible means of staying airborne. Not that it hasn't been frustrating. After university, I got endless postcards from backpacking college friends who'd been celebrating Christmas on the beach in Fiji, or swimming in Iceland's Blue Lagoon. Dad offered to pay for a course he'd seen advertised in the Daily Mail called "Get High: Overcoming your Fear of Flying'. But then I met Dennis and he told me that fear was nature's way of preserving the human race, and that I didn't need to turn myself into someone else because he loved me exactly as I was.
	That's when I knew we were made for each other.
"	I doubt one trip to the bloody Canaries would be responsible for the end of the world,' Dad mumbles, but he knows he's defeated. We sit listening to the rain on the roof. 
"	Ought to start heading back,' Dennis says eventually, "before the Sunday traffic gets too heavy.'
	I look at my watch. It's two thirty in the afternoon. 
	In the car park Dennis averts his eyes from Dad's gas-guzzling 4x4, and Dad can't resist a sly chuckle at our mauve super-mini (chosen by Dennis because it tops the European NCAP safety league tables). As I kiss my parents goodbye, I realise I'm rather looking forward to the most depressing day of the year: at least at work, you don't have to pretend to be enjoying yourself. 

