Chapter One
1985,
Colchester, Essex
Maria turned her head and listened with relief to the temporary
sound of silence that flowed up the stairs towards her. It was a
welcome break from the constant bickering and backbiting that
usually echoed around the walls of the thirties semi. It was especially
nice not to have to listen to her mother constantly snapping
away at her father like a bad-tempered terrier worrying at a rabbit
hole.
Maria admired him for being able to successfully turn a deaf ear
to most of the sniping, for the way he could rise above all the putdowns
and insults that were aimed at him with such accuracy. But
at the same time it infuriated her that he let his wife talk to him
as she would to a naughty child, with the same tone, the same words,
even the same disapproving expression on her face that Maria herself
had grown up with. Much as she loved her father she often thought
things might have been better for everyone if he had occasionally
retaliated and asserted his authority in the family home.
The next sound she heard was the front door beneath her bedroom
window clicking shut as he quietly let himself out of the house.
She wanted to scream after him, "Stick up for yourself for once.
Just once. Just once tell her to shut the fuck up . . .' but the words
echoed silently in her throat because despite her youth Maria had
a good understanding of the situation in the Harman household.
She knew that custom and practice meant that Sam Harman's
time for asserting himself with his wife had long since passed and
now that the children were all grown, he just let his wife's vicious
tongue wash over him and quietly got on with his other life away
from the family home as much as possible.
Looking out of her bedroom window Maria watched intently as,
with his head on one side and his lips down-turned, her father
climbed into his car and drove off. It struck her for the first time
that he was starting to look older. The once bright sandy hair was
dull and flecked with grey and thinning slightly on top and there
was an aura of sad disinterest about him when he was in the house.
Yet when he was heading away from home his shoulders straightened
and the corners of his lips twitched upwards again and he
turned back into the man that Maria adored. She guessed where he
was heading and she certainly didn't blame him. In fact she wanted
to go with him to the discreet bolt-hole that only she knew about.
To the place that was bright and happy and where her father could
relax and be himself.
Sighing deeply, Maria turned away from the net-draped window
and slumped onto her bed in angry frustration.
Once again her mother had clamped down heavily and confined
her to her room for a relatively minor misdemeanour and also put
her on punishment duties for a whole week. On slave rota was how
Maria described it.
At just sixteen and about to leave school, she hated her situation
and her mind was totally focused on her future freedom and what
she would do with it. Constantly she fantasised about life away from
the claustrophobic presence of her mother and the oppressive atmosphere
of her hated family home.
"Maria!'The familiar angry voice interrupted her thoughts, reverberating
up the stairs and through the bedroom door. "Maria, you
still haven't done the dishes, I'm getting so tired of telling you, you
know you have to do them every day this week after every meal.'
Maria ignored the command and waited expectantly, knowing
just how frustrating her mother found it when she didn't jump to
attention.
"Maria, just for once listen to me and move yourself.' The voice
was getting closer. "Get downstairs now and get the washing-up
done, you know I should be up at church by now, there's a requiem
tomorrow and all the flowers have to be done for the vigil.'
The bedroom door flew open and Finola Harman appeared in
the doorway, hands on broad hips and sensibly shod feet planted
firmly apart.
"Oh, wow! How absolutely wonderful, bet you can't wait!' Maria
muttered drily without looking up from the book she had grabbed
at random. "A lovely uplifting funeral for you and your holy cronies
to get your teeth into, I don't know how you can take all the excitement.'
She paused before continuing."Maybe I'll do the dishes later,
maybe I won't. Then again, I might just wait until the golden boys
get in so they can help me.' Unable to stop herself, she smirked
slightly and continued to focus on her book, knowing it was a surefire
way to send her mother into orbit.
"After all,' Maria continued, sarcasm oozing from every word,
"they're soooo much cleverer than me, soooo much nicer than me, I'm
sure they can do it soooo much better. In fact they're so bloody
marvellous I don't know why you don't frame them and put them
on the wall for everyone to admire.'
Finola's face visibly darkened as she responded angrily through
gritted teeth. "Leave your brothers out of this, my girl. Get yourself
downstairs right now and do as you're told, I've had enough of your
eternal defiance.' Finola wagged her finger up close to Maria's face.
"Do you want to spend the rest of your life in punishment? I never
had this with your brothers, they're such good boys.'
Raising her eyes to the ceiling, Maria unwrapped herself from
her blanket and stood up, revelling in the fact that she stood a good
nine inches taller than her mother.
"OK, I tell you what.' She sighed theatrically. "I'll do the washing
up if you stop going on and on about it. It's only a few lousy pots
and pans after all, hardly a matter of life or death. I doubt that poor
old sod who's going to be buried tomorrow cares about the dishes.'
Finola pursed her lips and gave what Maria had always called "the
glare'. Her eyes narrowed until the furrows between her eyebrows
sank into crevices and the lines around her mouth bunched together
as she pursed her lips. It fascinated Maria that any woman could
deliberately make the worst of themselves and yet that was how
Finola Harman looked. Her greying hair was self-cut straight across
the bottom at chin level and pushed back off her face with a thin
plastic Alice band and her chin nestled uncomfortably on the tight
collar of her plain white blouse which was buttoned right up to the
neck. Her only concession to femininity was a floral apron fixed
round her expansive waist, and tights.
"You have a vicious streak in you, girl.' She paused and shook her
head. "One day you'll get your comeuppance. Then you'll come
running to me for help and what will I do? Nothing, nothing at
all, that's what I'll do because you're—'
"Yeah, yeah, I know,' Maria interrupted. She looked her mother
straight in the eye, "I'm no good, in fact I'm completely useless at
everything, as you keep telling me.Well, as soon as I'm out of here,
which will be soon, I promise, I'll sink or swim on my own, thank
you very much. I wouldn't ever come running back to you for help.
I'd sooner die.' She pushed past and loped off down the stairs three
at a time to the kitchen. Finola stomped purposefully after her.
Maria watched as her mother, still tutting and muttering to herself,
whipped off the apron and put on her all-encompassing and wellworn
coat before picking up her leatherette shopping bag and leaving
the house without saying goodbye.
After a dismissive glance at the carefully stacked dishes waiting
for her, Maria reached for the telephone.
"Hiya, it's me. Coast is clear for a couple of hours, she's off to do
the flowers at church and the golden boys are gonna meet her there.
See you on the corner in five?'
She licked her fingers and ran them through her hair and under
her eyes before grabbing her key and hot-footing it down the road
to meet Davey Allsop, the local bad boy who was like a magnet to
her.
Maria and Davey had been drawn together when the Allsop family
had moved across the town and he had transferred to the same
school.The pair had quickly formed an unholy alliance of rebellion
that caused problems both at home and at school. Unlike Davey,
Maria never did anything really bad but somehow it was always just
bad enough for Finola to be informed and for Maria to be confined
to barracks, as Davey laughingly called it.
It hadn't taken Finola and her friends long to hear the whispers
that Davey had been expelled from his previous school. That, along
with several other rumours about the family that got bigger in the
telling, was enough for Finola to form her own judgement on the
Allsops.
Suddenly the family was the talk of the parish and Maria had
been banned from having anything to do with Davey. Predictably,
Finola's disapproval had made Maria even more determined to stick
with him.The fact that the stereotypical bad boy was good looking
and sexy and flattered her like mad was a bonus.
Maria walked quickly down the road to the intersection at the end
of the street, checking occasionally over her shoulder, to make sure
no one was around. Her eyes scanned the street not only for her
mother but for her dreaded older brothers as well. She knew she
could deal with any of them if she had to but she really didn't
want a confrontation with the volatile Davey. She especially didn't
want him face to face with her mother, the woman he hated with
a terrifying intensity. Finola Harman had, with mission-like zeal,
made the Allsop name mud in the area and he had sworn he would
get even with her somehow. Maria hoped it was all talk and that
he would never actually do anything, but she didn't want to tempt
fate.
Tall and voluptuous and looking more confident than she felt,
Maria strode quickly along the tree-bordered crescent of sturdy old
houses where she had lived all her life.
King's Crescent looped round in a semicircle off the busy main
road which was lined with shops and led straight into the Essex
town of Colchester. The crescent was generally quiet and peaceful
because it didn't go anywhere other than back to the main road so
no one bothered to use it unless they either lived there or were
visiting.
As Maria approached the corner she heard a loud whistle followed
by the stuttering roar of an engine. Davey was on the opposite side
of the road astride a rickety old motorbike.
"Whose is that, for God's sake?' she shouted as she skipped across
the main road, weaving in and out of the stream of traffic. "Surely
it's not yours.'
"No, it's me brother's, he let me borrow it in exchange for a tank
of juice. He's completely skint as usual. This is one mean machine.'
Davey laughed as he twisted the throttle. "Fancy a spin?'
"Not a chance, and that's no mean machine, that's a death trap
on wheels. Anyway, you've not even got a licence, have you?'
"A licence?' Davey crossed his eyes and faked a big cheesy grin.
"Who needs one of them? This is a piece of cake, even a five year
old could ride it.' Davey turned the throttle as far as it would go
and revved the sickly sounding engine even louder. Throwing back
his head he took off into the traffic and, tugging the handlebars up
into the air, sped away on just the rear wheel.
Maria watched and laughed as he disappeared round the corner
in a haze of blue fumes. 


