


"Get a grip, Juliet.  He knows he's attractive; he probably squeezes every hand he kisses. “The cards stacked.”  Was not that almost what the oily Jimenez had said?  How odd. Coincidence?'
She could bear no more.  She needed to return to her hotel to ring her parents and her friends.  Once more she would have to tell her parents that she had failed.  She could not bear to talk to them while she was upset for that would distress them more than the fact that she had not succeeded.  Although neither was really musical they had tried to be supportive as she had studied and even now that she had finished postgraduate training and should reasonably have been expected to be earning money they were still sending small monthly cheques to keep her solvent. 
She said her goodbyes, collected her coat, and slipped out.  She would walk; the evening air would clear her head, and the beauty of April in Paris would soothe her wounded spirit.  It did not.  The skyline was as dramatic as it had been that morning when she had walked along her heart full of hope, in love with Paris, in love with music and in love with life.  She continued on down the Avenue de l'Opéra to the Palais Royal and the Louvre and carried on towards the river. The buildings on the banks of the Seine were just as magnificent, the trees along the wide boulevards were still springing into vibrant young life, the lights that illuminated historic buildings or played with ripples on the river were just as bright, but they failed to reach her, to cheer her.
"Face it, Juliet, face it.  Maybe it is time to quit, to say it's not going to work.  It's high time you were supporting yourself instead of having to rely on an allowance from your parents.'
She did earn some money by giving piano lessons or accompanying singers.  Sometimes she played with her dearest friend, Hermione, who was a violinist and, like Juliet, going the rounds of the competitions circuit, but she was not earning a living wage.   Her troubled thoughts accompanying her rapid footsteps, Juliet hurried along the pavements of a city built for love and did not even notice the appreciative glances she received.  It was cool enough for her to wear her coat but she had not buttoned it and it blew behind her as she walked, revealing her slim body in her well fitting trousers.  For the final she had considered wearing an evening gown, but it would stay in its wrapping.
"It should be raining,' she said aloud and then hoped that the two young men leaning over the parapet on the bank did not understand English. Ashamed of her rather selfish outburst Juliet smiled an apology, J'aime Paris, and hurried on and, just as she reached her hotel, her mobile phone began to ring.  She sat down on a bench, just outside in a courtyard full of sweetly scented potted plants, to answer it.
It was her agent, Aldo Navarini, who was exuberant and, as always, upbeat and supportive.   "I wish I could be with you. The results are already on the Net and the adjudicators' remarks are fab, Juliet; they can do you nothing but good.  Reading them I find it hard to see why you weren't short-listed.'
She told him what Alexander Stoltze had said and he yelled yippee so loudly into her ear that she felt she could have heard him without the telephone line.
"Fandabidozee.  With Stoltze in your corner you're sorted, lassie.  He is one powerful man.  Pity he couldn't swing the rest of the panel though.  You'd think if he was as influential as they say he is...  Never mind that for the moment: we'll have lunch as soon as you get home and you can go over the whole thing with me and we'll try to see where you went wrong. There has to be something basic that we're missing.'
"Aldo, basically I think they don't want women.  If the American wins all Hell will break loose but Morrisett is good, almost as good as I thought I was.'  She sobbed.  She could sob with Aldo.
"You're sending me negative vibes, Juliet. Not allowed. We'll crack it.  You're the best - even Stoltze said so - and with him in your corner there is only one way to go.'
She prayed he was right.  A sponsor, even though she wanted to do it by herself, could make all the difference.  Stoltze had watched her conduct, had heard the result she had achieved with the orchestra and had said that he liked what he saw and heard; but still she had not placed and he was the senior judge.  How did it work?    Next time.  Next time she would win.  For now she would go back to Edinburgh and she would work and improve and next time she would win.
She rang her parents who wanted her to return home immediately and were displeased that she was going first to Edinburgh.
"We really need to talk sensibly about your future, Juliet,' said her father, using his calm-doctor-in-the-consulting-room voice. She could picture him, like her, tall and slim, his brown hair greying with age.  "Of course we're sorry that you're upset; we thought you would at least place.  After all, at College you won everything. So what's different now?'
"I don't know, Dad.'
"That wasn't really a question, dear, but remember we're here for you.  Now, if you have to go to the flat with your friends, fine, but then, as soon as possible, come home.'
"I have to plan a strategy with Aldo, Dad.  He is one of the best agents in the business and I'm lucky to have him.'
"He hasn't done much for you so far.'
How often did she have to explain that every orchestra in the world already had a conductor, and that it could take years to achieve anything worthwhile?
"Dad, tell Mum that as soon as I've had my meeting with Aldo I'll come home and we'll talk.'
 
*                                                *                                         *
 
Once back in Edinburgh Juliet arranged to meet Aldo Navarini for lunch at one of his favourite restaurants, Bouzy Rouge, on Alva Street.  The décor, wood tables, bright tiles, modern art on the walls, cheered Juliet as Paris, latterly, had failed to do.  Before ordering a meal they sat with some fresh warm French bread and a glass of wine and poured over the adjudications, not only her own but the others.  Aldo finished reading and leaned back in his chair and, as always, Juliet found herself praying that the frame would take the strain.  Her agent was a big man in so many ways and she worried, not only that he would disgrace himself by breaking a restaurant chair but that his overburdened heart would cease to function.   She had warned him several times but he laughed, talked about bones and genes.
"We're all big, Juliet.  My grandmother - dear God, she was one formidable woman.  Six feet in her stocking soles.'  He tore off a piece of bread.  "What a smell, freshly baked bread; nothing like it.' He popped the bread in his mouth, straightened up and looked at her closely.  "For the life of me I can't figure out where you went wrong, lassie.  Tell me again what you were wearing.'
"Brown trousers and a pink T-shirt for the initial heat and black trousers and a really beautiful white silk shirt for the semis; almost everyone else was wearing exactly the same – white  shirts usually for the men.'
He frowned.  "You should have worn a dress or a skirt, short; you have great legs.'
Juliet threw her napkin down on the table in exasperation.  "I've told you a hundred times that I will not go that route.  I have to succeed on merit.  Besides we were almost told to stick to trousers and shirts for the heats – androgyny or anonymity perhaps.'
Aldo smiled, his heavy-browed Italian face crinkling with amusement. "Of course you'll be recognised - very soon - as a rising star but do you really have to look like one of the lads?  You have to make your sex, your femininity, a selling point.'
Juliet's anger spilled over. "What, great legs and - would you believe - she can read music too. You have got to be joking.'  And then she took pity on him for he worked so hard; and so far, since she had been spectacularly unsuccessful since graduation, he was earning nothing from her, and still he believed.  "Besides, Aldo, well-cut trousers are very sexy.'
He laughed, relieved that she was over the worst of her anger.  "Now we have to look at some of the other competitions.   There are several, but which ones for you?'  He took some papers from his bulging briefcase. How about the Grzegorz Fitelberg International Competition?  You win if you can pronounce it.  Sorry, rotten sense of humour.'  He skimmed the page.  "No use.  Every four years.  You should have done it last year. Astrakhan Masterclass.  Russia in October.  Fancy it?  We could find out more.  I have the websites. Colin Metters Masterclass in Leipzig first week in November: you could do them both: Russia and Germany always look good on the résumé.'  He skimmed another page.   "Then you could try Chile or Argentina or even Australia or, closer to your home in Bonny Dundee, how about Orkney?'
The waiter returned with their order, saddle of venison with blueberry coulis for Aldo and a lighter selection, pan-fried chicken with foie gras and orange sauce for Juliet.
Although the smells wafting up to her were making Juliet's mouth water, she took the papers from Aldo and, while the wine waiter poured more wine, read.  "St Magnus Festival.  Orkney Conducting Course.  This isn't until June next year.  And I want competitions, Aldo, and auditions.  Most of these are courses.   I need to earn some money.  It's humiliating to have to depend on my parents.  It's almost impossible to get a paying job when I have to drop out every few months.'
"I know and I have a few feelers out; let's see if we can get you an assistant's post somewhere, but, in the meantime, let's look at courses and competitions. And there's always teaching.'
She ignored that.  She was meant to conduct, and although taking a master class in Poland or Chile or Australia could improve her skills, it all depended on who was leading the course.  She had skimmed Aldo's lists and had heard of very few of the teachers.  Not, she tried to be fair, that that necessarily meant anything.  Even if they were not world-famous conducting names like Abbado, or Mutti, Ashkenazy or Barenboim, or any one of a dozen others, they could easily be highly gifted and successful teachers.  She would look at the websites, gather information, and make decisions.  In the meantime she would have to search for a job, just as soon as this delicious meal was over, and she would have to visit her parents.
On her way back to the flat she dropped in at an employment office and signed on as a client.  Her confidence was so battered by the defeat in Paris that she was prepared to take almost any job that would earn her some money.  Even in the Job Centre she was made to feel totally useless since it appeared that she had absolutely no marketable skills.  She was a musician though, spoke reasonable German, and she could drive.
"This wee job might have been made for you,' said the manager.  "The Edinburgh International Festival needs people for all manner of jobs, picking up actors or artists of one kind or another from the airport, transporting the odd tuba, you name it, general dogsbody.  I think you're a shoo-in.'
"Fine,' said Juliet.  "I'll apply.'  She surreptitiously crossed her fingers and thought but did not say that she hoped some orchestra would rescue her long before then.

