Rob Grant
PART ONE:
March 1st
BREAKFAST
Menu
Carrot Juice
Some Sort of Shitty Muesli Pot with Yoghurt
and Honey
-
A Double Sausage &amp; Egg McMuffin2
Another Double Sausage &amp; Egg McMuffin2
(Both with Hash Browns)
-
Absolutely Nothing At All
"I had to fast. I can't do anything else,' said the hunger artist.
"Just look at you,' said the supervisor, "why can't you do
anything else?' "Because,' said the hunger artist, lifting his
head a little and, with his lips pursed as if for a kiss, speaking
right into the supervisor's ear so that he wouldn't miss anything,
"because I couldn't find a food which I enjoyed.'
(Franz Kafka: A Hunger Artist, 1924)
ONE
Grenville Roberts got out of bed. That was no mean
achievement, by any means. The effort left him breathless
and slightly dizzy, and he had to sit down again for fear he'd
faint. Then he'd have to lift himself up off the floor, which
would be a substantially more gruelling enterprise, even
assuming he sustained no major damage from the fall.
Of course, now he was sitting on his bed once more, and
sooner or later he'd have to stand up again. What if that left
him equally breathless and dizzy? Would he be condemned
forever to stand up and sit down on his bed, like a victim
of some mythological Greek torture? That would be a fine
thing, to spend eternity helpless as a gigantic jack-in-thebox.
He supposed it was only a matter of time before things
would get that bad. Before he could no longer leave his
bedroom without the aid of an elephant-rescue winch and
the coordinated efforts of the Air-Sea Rescue Team.
But his dizziness passed, his breathing eased and he stood,
this time successfully, and made his way to the bathroom.
He performed his ablutions efficiently and without relish.
He took a shower, of course. He couldn't remember the last
time he'd taken a bath. He did, however, remember that he'd
barely got out of it alive.
He dried himself, again, no meagre challenge. There was
a lot of him to dry, and vast expanses of it were harder to
reach than the hidden jungles of Papua New Guinea. For all
he knew there were nomad tribes concealed in inaccessible
creases in his back.
Now came the really hard part: getting dressed.
He selected his clothes. Not too difficult. He had very few
that still fit him. And today the choice was dictated for him
anyway.
He paused at the dresser drawers where he was sifting
through the vast expanses of black cotton that constituted
his underpants these days, and caught his reflection in the
mirror. It always shocked him to see his face, even though
he'd seen it not fifteen minutes earlier, when he'd shaved. It
was nothing like the image of himself he still carried around
in his head.
How had this happened to him? How did he get here? It
wasn't as if he'd entered cow-pie-eating competitions on a
daily basis. It wasn't as if he chewed through his own weight
in beef dripping every morning, or sat down to lavish banquets
every dinner time, the table creaking and groaning
under the weight of suckling pigs and roasted swans.
Some are born fat. Some achieve fatness.
Others have fatness thrust upon 'em.
And so it had been for Grenville.
He wasn't born fat. He had been, for most of his life,
actually quite slender. In fact, when he'd suddenly noticed
he'd acquired a slight belly in his late twenties, he'd been
quite shocked. Horrified, even. He'd assumed it was a consequence
of his happy love affair with beer, a beautiful relationship
he'd regretfully abandoned. It had become clear he
could no longer indulge himself with whatever comestibles
took his fancy and remain trim. Furthermore, it seemed
inevitable he would have to start consciously taking, God
help him, some kind of exercise.
Exercise.
Dear oh dear.
But he did it. He sucked it up, and he did it. He endured
the mindless boredom of lifting up weights and putting
them down again in expensive gymnasia for a while. He
tolerated the moronic repetitiveness of Healthclubland, with
its vile liniment smells mingled with brutally over-applied
aftershaves, and the casual fashion display of depressing male
genitalia in the changing rooms, and the eye-gouging chlorine
in the swimming pool, and the six-hour wait for a cup of
coffee in the cafeteria. He put up with it all until the very
prospect of dropping a coin into the slot of a gym locker
filled him with such dread, he could no longer face it.
But by then, the rebellious belly had been pounded into
submission.
Or so he thought.
It crept up on him slowly, with all the relentless patience
and irresistible brutality of tectonic plates. His trousers
started getting tighter, cutting a bright pink band of pain
around his midriff, which he didn't even notice until he
unbuttoned them at night.
He finally, with some reluctance, gave up the morning
wrestling match, lying flat on the bed, trying to tug twoand-
a-half-feet width of material over three feet of waistline,
and moved up a size.
Thirty-two inches. Thirty-four. Thirty-six.
After that, things started to get harder. He spent many a
Saturday on his hands and knees in obscure corners of
department stores and tailors' shops, desperately seeking out
a stray pair of Wranglers in the inexplicably, unfairly and
unforgivably rare size of thirty-eight inches.
He still remembered the glorious day he had chanced
across a pair of branded khaki slacks that measured an
insanely generous forty-two inches. Forty-two inches! How
had they come into being? Were they discarded props from
Land of the Giants? Had they been part of a clothing consignment
bound for Texas that had been caught by the wind
and somehow wafted all the way across the Atlantic to land
in this very store? Whatever mysterious magic brought them
there, they were Grenville's now. True, they were slacks, but
Gren had long ago given up even dreaming of making a stab
at dressing fashionably. Simply being able to dress at all was
ambition enough.
They were slacks, but they fitted him. They fitted him easily. And for a while, Grenville enjoyed the bliss of sartorial
comfort again. Experienced the indescribable delight of
owning a pair of trousers that zipped up without a struggle.
A pair of trousers that didn't force his testicles to grind
together like Tibetan worry balls with every step. He wanted
to seek out the magnificent seamstress who had constructed
those ingenious pantaloons, smother her with kisses, shower
her with gifts and propose marriage.
And then, one day, and all too soon, even the forty-twoinchers
could no longer accommodate him. True, he'd worn
them virtually non-stop for the best part of two years, and
they were all but falling to pieces, but his drifting girth had
outgrown them anyway.
He went hunting again, but after five consecutive Saturdays
of crawling through obscure piles of stock to no avail, he
had to face up to the terrible truth.
It could no longer be blamed on the moronity and shortsightedness
of all clothing manufacturers, their suppliers,
their buyers and the bastard parents who spawned them all.
Grenville Roberts was no longer Off The Peg.
Somehow, he had fallen outside the accepted limits of
human dimensions. He was no longer a member of the
category labelled "normal'.
In a curiously insane twist of logic, the only sort of apparel
he could reasonably expect to buy in a regular clothing store
that might actually fit him was sportswear. Drawstring jogging
bottoms, jogging tops and offensively coloured plastic
shell suits.
Now, just exactly who, along the clothing supply and
demand chain, took the imprisonably lunatic decision that
the only clothing that overweight people might ever be
allowed to purchase should be ugly exercise gear? That all
fat people really yearned for was unsightly neon-orange and
lime-green jogging suits. Did this madman look out of his
window one day and say: "You know what: all you ever see
these fat people doing is running and exercising. If we could
only cater to that market, we'll make a mint.' Whoever he
was, the man was a fucking business genius. You have to take
your hat off to him. Though, let's face it, it will probably be a
pink and purple baseball cap.
But you mustn't get the impression that Grenville stood
idly by and allowed all this to happen to him. That he just let
the weight pile on and on without trying to get on top of it,
to wrest back control of his body from his mad metabolism.
He did not go quietly into that dark night.
He dieted. Of course he dieted. He dieted to Olympic
standards.
He gave up fats. He gave up sugars. He gave up dairy. Red
meat? Forget about it. He even, Lord have mercy, gave up
alcohol. He gave up any food that was in any way remotely
pleasant. He ate bread the same texture and flavour as
sandpaper-encrusted cardboard smeared with the merest
hint of fly duty posing as tasty yeast spread. Then he gave
up wheat altogether. He found himself eating tiny garamflour
pancakes smudged with a tiny suggestion of Fuck Me
If That's Not Butter. And then he read a terrifying article
about the carcinogenic properties of chickpeas and had to
relinquish even this pathetic balm to the appetite. He
became sitophobic: from being a sensual delight to anticipate
with pleasure, food now seemed to belong in the same
category as weapons of mass destruction. The fat content of
nuts made them as deadly as bullets. An avocado pear
started looking as lethal as an anti-personnel fragmentation
grenade.
He joined clubs. He had red days and green days. He lived
only on Speedslim shakes. He followed Rosemary Conley's
advice for his hips and his tum. Then he stopped combining
proteins and carbohydrates. Then he gave up carbohydrates
altogether. Then he gave up proteins and carbohydrates. He
never snacked. He would sooner have shot his own mother
than have eaten a chocolate bar. He stopped eating altogether
after one o'clock in the afternoon. He tried living on raw fish
and rice. Then he even gave up the rice. He ate kelp. Kelp and
only kelp, Lord have mercy.
And each new effort, each new push, would produce the
same results. For the first few weeks, he would lose weight.
Then he would stop losing weight and tighten up his regimen.
He would lose a little more weight, and plateau out
again. Then he would be starving, eating only nonsense, and
still not losing weight, and he would give up. Then, in a few
short weeks, he would be back at his original size, and then
some.
And one day, he found himself standing in front of a salad
bar and realised there was nothing in there he was allowed to
eat, that he'd ingeniously managed to negotiate himself into a
position where pretty much all he thought about was food,
and yet he could not eat any of it.
So he gave up giving up.
He decided that if he'd never started any of this diet
nonsense, he'd probably be about four stone lighter than he
was right now. Enough was enough. Or rather not enough
was enough. He would eat what he wanted, within reason.
And that worked, in a way, for a while. His girth stopped
growing. It wasn't going away, but it wasn't getting any
bigger.
Result: happiness. After a fashion.
And then he met The Girl.
He'd imagined all that was behind him, that he'd never
have to go through all that dating palaver again, and he'd
settled into his fairly comfortable and happily successful
routine, was almost cruising through his slightly lonely existence,
when Blam! she'd walked through the door of his life,
and he was, to all intents and purposes, sixteen again.
And he'd gone back to the diet drawing board.
It was hard to find one that hadn't already failed him at
least once. He managed to boil it down to the GI diet and
the Paul McKenna "I Can Make You Thinner' regime. Paul
McKenna sounded quite interesting, but Gren had serious

