Shopping makes me very grumpy indeed. People assume that
women love shopping, but no woman I know does. These days
when I am shopping I am so grumpy I feel drawn to using a
stick. It would be useful for everyday life, to flick people with
who are annoying me, holding me up, dawdling, knocking into
me, getting in the queue before me. Maybe a little cane, or one
of those rambler's poles, something to flick at people's ankles,
stop them putting their feet up on train seats, stopping them
leaving their rubbish or spitting on the
pavement. There would be a hundred and
one uses. Or I'd like one of those huge
clompy prams young mothers have
now, with huge wheels and chassis the
size of a small car. I could accidentally
on purpose snag people's ankles with it,
or use it as a ram raider on young people who are throwing litter
on the ground or being objectionable. Except if I did have such a
pram I would look like a mad old bat who should be in a mental
institution or a tramp, since there would be no baby in it.
Other people are becoming a serious source of grump for me.
Shopping would be fine if there were no other people involved.
I'd like my own little pedestrian lane, my
own check-out queue, I might even share it
with other nice grumpy old women, and
my own parking bays. Because we are in a
hurry, we are hormonally challenged and
our lives are made up of dreary little jobs
no one else can be bothered to do.
I start the taking-back task and plot a
time-efficient route round the city centre. At least the
Christmas shoppers won't be there; I'll be able to park on the
top floor of the multi-storey, just nip straight into the big stores,
be home in time to have a sit-down and watch an episode of
Desperate Housewives . . . But it's strangely busy on the way into
town. Actually, nearly as busy as it was the week before
Christmas. Why? How could I have forgotten? The sales have
started. That is just so very cruel. You get the Christmas
shopping out of the way, you go in to take it all back and you get
the crowds and the hassle and the queues all over again. Except
this time there is an additional queue at Exchanges and
Refunds. A queue so long that they rope it off like at Disney.
They obviously staff it with the newest, youngest of their
assistants; better still, they stick up a sign saying PLEASE BEAR
WITH US, STAFF TRAINING IN PROGRESS, which means that
every single pair of knickers, every single travel clock that is
being taken back because it was loathed and detested by its
recipient is having to be cross-referenced on a big long list.
Because they've reduced it now. And if you don't have the
receipt, your nice friend who queued up to buy it in the first
place paid £29.99 for it and they are offering you £10.99 for it,
in vouchers, not even in real cash. Which all takes about half an
hour per customer, so you give up, or you run out of time, and
you could simply run up and down in the shop and scream and
scream and scream until you're sick. Or you could run amok
among ladies separates and throw
everything on the floor so they have
to pick it all up again. You give up
and lug some of it back home,
which is a low point, especially
knowing it is not even nice
enough to go into the
recycled-presents cupboard.
December 31st
As a teenager New Year's Eve was the bit of Christmas that
you looked forward to the most. You'd been imprisoned with
family for what seemed like an eternity, pretended to like vile
novelty socks given to you, and received more bath bubbles and
notelets with blackberries and squirrels on them than anyone
could hope to use in an entire year. You deserved to be able to
break out on your own a little bit, let your hair down and go a bit
wild. As a child I occasionally watched my parents get a little bit
wild on New Year's Eve. When I say wild I mean they'd do the
Twist to Chubby Checker. I saw them kiss one year, no, snog
even, which was frighteningly shocking. The thing about being
an only child is that you can persuade yourself that your parents
only did it once, OK maybe twice, and in fact you do persuade
yourself of this, that their sex life was entirely functional,
entirely minimal. But the snog seemed to imply something
different. It was a relief when someone turned the telly on and
put a stop to it.
Now as I watch my own ELDEST DAUGHTER get ready for
New Year's Eve, I realise – as realise I must – that she is about to
start her own life, that in seven months' time she will have
effectively gone, on her gap-year trip to Ghana, and then on to
university. My nest is emptying. My stomach flips. I feel sick at
the thought. She goes out, naturally, with a summer dress on, no
coat, no tights and sling-back shoes, and looking simply
gorgeous. How could any boy appreciate her? How could they
ever know how special she is? How can anyone love her as much
as I do? At her age, at New Year's Eve parties I was probably
snogging someone under a pile of donkey jackets in the spare
room, so logic tells me she will be doing something remarkably
similar. Which is something else to worry about, not least
because she is staying the night at
Laura's which if I was doing an
impression of her I'd say with some
mimed inverted commas, because
staying at Laura's I imagine is code for
"don't even think about coming to
collect me, I can do what I like now . . .
and if I choose to stay out till 3am frankly you can't stop me'.
I get wistful and nostalgic, think about how my life has changed
over the years and how what I do on New Year's Eve has changed
with it. In my twenties I went away with friends at New Year.
Rented cottages by the sea, with far fewer bedrooms than couples,
slept in until two in the afternoon, drank bottles of red wine, got
silly and giggly, stayed up all night . . . played drunken games of
sardines. I called my parents at 12 and talked to them pityingly.
I wore tight jeans, I looked good, I talked a lot. Smoked a lot.
Flirted a lot. I had a ball. Then in my thirties New Year's Eve was
an occasion to chum up with close friends with small children.
Staying at each other's houses with a car full of Babygros and
changing bags and listening devices and everyone pale and dizzy
with exhaustion. Dancing with a baby on your shoulder to West
End Girls, bouncing baby on the bed with you in the morning.
Snuggling up to them. Smelling their hair, bathing them and
blowing bubbles through the flannel, singing "Me and My Teddy
Bear', drying them after bath time on your lap in a warm towel
with a hood on it, reading some Ahlberg Peepo or Bye Bye Baby.
In reality I was too exhausted to appreciate it, but of course
looking back now that ELDEST's days at home are literally
numbered, it seems in retrospect a golden time. Even something
as awful as taking it in turns to do the early shift with baby
(meaning post-4am) seems memorably wonderful. Reason tells
me that my memory has played tricks on me, but it's still hard.
And now I'm a Grumpy Old Woman, New Year's Eve feels like
just another evening, the magic has gone, all that false and
alcohol-induced revelry simply makes me want to reach for a
hot-water bottle and a good book. But you can't. It is not allowed
just to have a nice early night and a good night's sleep. My
mother calls. She's in Devon with a friend. It is her first New
Year's Eve without my father. And she sounds surprisingly well.
We go to the Warburtons' drinks party. I find the small talk
overwhelmingly dull until someone tells me the Foresters have
split up. It's always the couples you think are blissfully happy
that split up. It's like the curse of Hello! magazine, the moment
they do a feature about how much they love one another, or
redo their vows or whatever it is celebrities endlessly do, you
know it's doomed . . . they'll be divorced by the end of the year.
At the party, YOUNGEST DAUGHTER hangs out with all the
other young people playing pool, and I am a little envious.
Envious that they're having more fun, have some loud music on
and there is a lot of giggling, whereas with the grown-ups there
are a lot of dull groups of people talking about their "nice quiet
family Christmas' and their loft lagging, garden features and
skiing holidays. Dull dull dull dull. Trouble is at my age you can't
take the edge off it all . . . you can't drink too much (you're
driving) and you don't take drugs, so you get bored very quickly.
Or I do. I am trapped in a body that people think means I am
dull. Look 20 or 30 and people assume you're fascinating, even
though you're not, but get to my age, get a bit of life behind you
and frankly something interesting to say, and young people
assume you are a non-person. You could tell them something
really outrageous, like pretend you once used your Rampant
Rabbit to make a meringue, really startle them, and they'd still
just look through you. I can't be bothered, I feel wasted on them.
I wander into the teenagers' room, which I feel is my spiritual
home, in the hope that they will take me in, assimilate me as an
honorary adolescent, which is what I feel like, and ask me to
stay. They don't. Actually YOUNGEST asks me to go away.
Lost and feeling I don't fit anywhere I open the back door for
some fresh air, wanting to go home, and find a group of
smokers, standing out in the freezing cold, with a bottle of red
wine and some malt whisky. They are pretty drunk, and they
assume I've sneaked outside for a ciggie too. There is a lovely
camaraderie that happens with smokers now that they are
despised and told to stand outside; they bond and become the
naughty smokers, feel a bit wicked and behave like overgrown
teenagers. Sometimes I find this irritating, but tonight I actually
find them fun. I find myself having a cigarette for the first time
in 15 years, and a very large glass of red wine. Talk gets on to sex
and there is a lot of giggling. Tall flicky-haired girl says her
friend is in terrible relationship – sex happens twice a week – I
sympathise, feel a bit dizzy, a bit hazy round the edges, say,
"God, how awful, I can only manage once a week and sometimes
that's a bit of an effort.' Soon realised flicky-haired woman and
the others means twice a week is appallingly infrequent. Felt
stupid and took hasty retreat back inside but not before I had
had two cigarettes and about three glasses of red wine, a beaker
full of malt whisky – and this on top of the white wine I had
already consumed when bored out of my brain earlier.
Text ELDEST DAUGHTER "Happy New Year, love you loads'
and send it, then realise I sent it to someone at work – must put
my glasses on when I text in future.
Had a nice dance to "Hi Ho Silver Lining' with the GRUMPY
OLD MAN, caught YOUNGEST watching horrified at the old
man's Mick Jagger impression and my evident lack of
embarrassment at anything. Spared her the sight of us kissing,
knowing the damage done by my own equivalent.


