CHAPTER 1 Tiger Feet and Cups of Tea

'You don't have to do it,' said Victoria, from the end of the phone-line. 'It was only a bit of a fun. Drunken high spirits and all that.'

'No, I want to,' I said, keen to move the conversation on to a discussion about how we might go for a drink together soon. 'And by my reckoning, the terms of the bet should allow me enough time.'

'Well, one way or another, we'll know by the time I get back.'

'Get back?'

'Yes, I'm moving to New York for a couple of years so I can work with some of the songwriters over there.'

'Oh,' I said, hoping that my tone of voice hadn't revealed the deadening thud of disappointment which my heart had just felt. 'And when do you leave?'

'Thursday.'

'Oh. I see.'

'Good luck with the bet though.'

'Yes. Thanks.'

Curses. 

As a teenager, like most of my peers, I had always pretty much hated country music. As far as I was concerned, it was sung by old people wearing silly hats who churned out tunes which all sounded the same, with lyrics that made you feel nauseous. I had this picture of it being the kind of music that was enjoyed by people who'd been bullied at school or - and I'm not sure how I ended up with such a specific category - by those who walked with severe limps as a result of injuries sustained in the workplace. Myself, I eschewed this musical genre because I was hip, and as a hip person I listened to Mud, Sweet and Suzi Quatro like all the other hip people at my school. I was happy with my musical tastes and I 

didn't need anyone to come along and start meddling with them. 

Consequently I was extremely concerned one day when I found myself inadvertently singing along with 'Blue Bayou' by Linda Rondstadt and then, only moments later, turning up the radio when Kenny Rogers started crooning about Ruby not taking her love to town. More worryingly still was that I was forced to admit to myself that I actively liked the song 'Sundown' by Gordon Lightfoot. What was happening to me? Had I gone soft? Of course at school I kept this information close to my chest whenever playground badinage turned to the subject of one's favourite songs of the day, and I would simply walk away if ever the conversation descended into a routine rubbishing of country music (although I did tend to stick around for discussions about the pros and cons of Dolly Parton, mainly because I had noticed that these very rarely focused on her melodic range or the timbre of her voice).

Only now do I understand what was happening to me all those years ago. I was beginning to appreciate lyrics. Somehow the pop songs of the day were failing to interest me on enough levels. I was becoming drawn to songs which could communicate an idea or arouse an emotion within me. Mud's classic 'Tiger Feet' was fine to jump around to excitedly, but it did little to stimulate any deeper thoughts. 

That's neat, that's neat, that's neat, that's neat,
I really love those Tiger Feet

What exactly were 'Tiger Feet'? And why was the singer so keen on them? Trust me on this, a detailed study of the lyrics provides very few answers to these salient questions.

Country &amp; Western music I discovered, however, offered a boldness in the lyrical department which defied belief. Kenny Rogers shamelessly sang about both Lucille and Ruby, two women who were leaving him, one despite two hungry children and a crop in the field, and the other because his legs (and presumably another valuable part of his anatomy) had been rendered inoperative by the Vietnam war. The contrast with Mud's song couldn't have been greater, unless of course Tiger Feet is actually a term to describe the injured feet of a war veteran, but somehow I doubt it.

Another reason why I was drawn to country music was because it didn't appear to take itself too seriously, unless of course its fans were simply too daft to recognise the comic nature of some of the songs its writers had produced over the years. Proof of this was contained in an email which a friend sent me, listing the following country titles which, believe it or not, were actually written and recorded:

'Drop Kick Me, Jesus, Through The Goalposts Of Life'
'I Fell In A Pile Of You And Got Love All Over Me'
'I Don't Know Whether To Kill Myself Or Go Bowling'

Subtle they may not be in their imagery, but almost every aspect of life is covered in these masterpieces - religion, love and death. I'm particularly fond of the doleful 'I Don't Know Whether To Kill Myself Or Go Bowling', a song which is not afraid to confront this everyday social dilemma. But the country music writers didn't leave it there. The list goes on:

'I Wanna Whip Your Cow'
'I'd Rather Have A Bottle In Front Of Me
Than A Frontal Lobotomy'
'If My Nose Were Full of Nickels, I'd Blow It All On You'

None of life's stones is left unturned by these intrepid lyricists. In these three titles we are forced to consider the vital issues of money, drink and animal flagellation. Some of us may be disturbed by the raw honesty of 'I Wanna Whip Your Cow', but isn't it a feeling that all of us have felt at some point or another? How much better to have the subject explored through music than for us to do what we do day after day when we see someone else with a cow - lapse into denial and in spite of our natural urges, pretend that we don't want to whip it. There are yet further contributions to our understanding of life:

'My Head Hurts, My Feet Stink, And I Don't Love Jesus'
'She Got The Ring And I Got The Finger'
'You Can't Have Your Kate And Edith Too'

The quality just doesn't dip.

'You Can't Roller Skate In A Buffalo Herd'
'Pardon Me, I've Got Someone To Kill'

These are two of my particular favourites. 'Pardon Me, I've Got Someone To Kill' serves as a gentle reminder that manners are always important whatever the situation. It's also nice to see a song in there which tackles what we humans have done to our environment. In the plaintive 'You Can't Roller Skate In A Buffalo Herd', the writers draw our attention to America's dwindling buffalo stocks and the sad repercussions for those of us who made it our business to roller skate among them. A song which works on so many levels, being variously melancholic, didactic, edifying and enlightening, while all the time remaining fundamentally not very good. 

Having read through the email which contained these song titles, I began to wonder if the country music scene would be one in which my particular brand of song could flourish, albeit with a few minor modifications. If I was really going to have a hit, then perhaps Country &amp; Western could give it to me. There seemed to be room for wit within a lyric, but with the whole song communicating some kind of message. These country bods had no time for the ambiguous, esoteric, or sometimes facile lyrics of the pop world. And what's more there seemed to be more than an even chance that you could get a release even if your creation was unusual or eccentric. Given that I already had an idea for just such a song, this was most propitious. 

I'd come up with the title a couple of years ago while idly wandering around a park when I should have been trying to write an article for a newspaper about how young stars are exploited and used by a cynical entertainment industry. Like most writers I claim that going for a bit of a walk can stimulate the imagination and facilitate the creative process. This can be true, but more often not, it has a more useful purpose in acting as a buffer to the unsavoury task of actually sitting down and starting work. The brain asks the question 'Walk in the park or work?' and the body answers by slipping on some outdoor shoes and heading for the door. 

As I strolled along the park's meandering tarmac path, deep in thought about how useful it would be if I were deep in thought about the subject on which I was later hoping to write, my attention was drawn to a yellow and white blob on the ground before me. A tiny bird's egg had fallen from a tree above and smashed on the path. For a moment, the sight of the fractured shell and the splattered yolk made me feel a little sad. Here before me was a perfect analogy for how the hopes and dreams of talented youth are smashed by those who cynically hold the media's reins of power. If only I had made that observation then, how much easier my morning's work would have been. Instead I came up with a song title. 

'You Broke My Heart Like A Bird's Egg
But Now The Yolk's On You'

It was, I thought, a work of genius. As I walked home I ran the title around in my head and I managed to convince myself that all it needed was a bog standard country melody and a few more words and it was a cast-iron hit. This, if nothing else, was proof of how good walking in the park is for stimulating the imagination. At the time, however, it had got no further than that. The title had been logged in an old notebook, but the song had never been written. Now, with my mind on the task of having a hit record, doing something about the 'Bird's Egg' lyric became something of a priority. 

Jane was the perfect person to call on for advice. I'd met her through the producer of all my hits to date, Jakko, when she'd been working as a music publisher. After years in the music business she'd recently decided that she wanted to work with people who were more mature, and so she'd left to bring up two small children. When I called her up and told her about my plans to make 'Bird's Egg' a hit, she made what I considered to be an unusual suggestion.

'Why don't you try collaborating with another songwriter?' she mooted.

I'd never really considered this before, having always written songs on my own up to this point.

'It would feel too weird,' I said, with resistance.

'You'd enjoy the process,' said Jane, assuredly. 'You really would. I'm sure of it. You should start off with Steve - you'd get along swimmingly.'

'But how can I start writing with someone I've never met before?'

'You'll be fine. Writers do it all the time these days. Steve's been working out in Nashville where they collaborate on a daily basis with people that they've never met before in their lives.'

'Really?'

'Yes, why don't you give it a go?'

'I don't know. Anyway, what makes you think he'll want to do it?'

'I'll impress on him what a great songwriter you are.'

'How?'

'I'm not sure yet, Tony, but rest assured I shan't be mentioning "Stutter Rap".'

On the morning Steve was due to arrive, I began to have serious misgivings about this whole thing. What were we actually going to do? I didn't know what music he liked and I had absolutely no idea what kind of a song he wanted to have a go at writing. All I knew about Steve were the things that Jane had told me - that he was a professional songwriter, that I'd like him, that he was used to collaborating with new people, and that he'd written songs for Boyzone, Belinda Carlisle and Natalie Imbruglia. 


