<text id="A09" category="" words="2012" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'THE END OF SEGREGATION: 40 YEARS LATER: Breakthrough rippled through society Sharing football fields &quot;let people know we could get along&quot;' The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, December 3, 2006, Pg. 4F; 'Condos crushing an era in Atlanta: There's More.' The " Author="TODD HOLCOMB; WALTER WOODS;" PublicationDate="December 3, 2006; July 2, 2006;" SampledFrom="All; Beginning;" WebAddress="Nexis UK">

Black fans were on one side of the stadium, white fans on the other. Off-duty police officers were in the stands, school detectives on the sidelines.

But the worst never happened 40 years ago when black and white high school football teams played each other for the first time in Georgia.

Raymond "Tweet" Williams was the head coach of Turner High, one of seven all-black city schools allowed to join the previously segregated Georgia High School Association in 1966.

"It let people know we could get along," Williams said. "There were people in the North that didn't believe we could do that. It brought about a mutual understanding that people are people."

The impact of the GHSA's legal and cultural shift touched all societal edges and set in motion the landscape for today's high school athletics.

Mainstream media for the first time began recognizing the exploits of the state's black high school athletes. Major colleges wanted to recruit players from local black schools. Head coaching opportunities expanded for blacks in metro Atlanta. 

Before 1966, black high school teams in Atlanta were often presumed by many whites as weaker and poorly coached.

Willie Hunter, an assistant coach in 1966 at Atlanta's Carver High and later a longtime head coach in city schools, said that even some African-Americans doubted the black coaches.

"It broke down a lot of myths," Hunter said. "People realized that blacks could coach. We realized that one group was not superior to the other."

Atlanta schools were progressive in integrating the head coaching positions. In 1968, Ted Sparks was named head coach at Southwest High, making him the first African-American coach at a predominantly white school.

"It was a frightening experience, of course," Sparks said. "I wondered what are the feelings of the parents, the kids themselves. Are they going to accept me? I think ultimately I got their respect."

Black coaches spread

That's not to say racial tensions between white coaches and black players, and vice-versa, didn't boil over many times in the coming years around the state.

Sparks' "Remember the Titans" adventure didn't last long, either. Within three years, the upper middle-class Southwest school district was virtually all-black, not as a response to Sparks but to integration in general.

In 1973, when Southwest won the Class AA title, it was a first for a black coach or an all-black team in the GHSA.

Seven African-American coaches have won GHSA state titles since then, six with virtually all-black teams.

Today, 41 of 96 head coaches in the larger metro Atlanta counties --- Cobb, Gwinnett, Fulton, Clayton and DeKalb --- are African-American.

But only three are at schools where there are more whites than blacks --- Centennial High, Shiloh and Lakeside. In rural Georgia, African-American head coaches are rare, even at predominantly black schools.

"I think we're kidding ourselves if we think that all the racial issues have been solved," said Ralph Swearngin, executive director of the Georgia High School Association. "I think what we do find is that it brought communities together. We were cheering for Bulldogs or whoever it was, whether the players were black or white."

Media coverage for blacks and their schools changed dramatically as well. Just a few years before, future basketball hall of famer and high school quarterback Walt Frazier passed through Atlanta's Howard High virtually unnoticed in major newspapers. 

"[Many] didn't get the publicity that would've propelled them into the Northern newspapers and maybe the larger schools," said former Fort Valley State College coach Stan Lomax, who was at powerful Risley of Brunswick when the high school organizations merged.

'New world' opens

In 1966, The Atlanta Journal and The Atlanta Constitution began covering the black high school sports for the first time. Carver tight end Roy Stanley and Archer guard Larry Brown were the newspapers' first black all-state players in 1966.

"You had a whole new world opening up to us," Stanley said. "Most of the blacks in this area went to the historically black colleges and universities. [Now] we were able to go to the teams that we were seeing on TV --- the Michigan States, the Notre Dames."

They were given chances like the one enjoyed by Jonathan Dwyer, the Kell High running back who set the Cobb County career rushing record this season. Dwyer will play at Georiga Tech, one of a slew of college suitors who coveted him.

One of seven African-American starters on his high school team, Dwyer says he has an appreciation for what those before him endured.

"In today's world, it's about character, and back then, it was more about color and race," Dwyer said. "Everybody gets along real well now."

Those who remember the 1960s believe it's important that today's coaches and players are mindful of how far high school sports in Georgia have come.

"Kids think that the schools always played against each other," Hunter said. "They don't know what we had to withstand. The whites didn't want to integrate."

GHSA in vanguard

Four years before full integration in Georgia high schools, or before Georgia Tech or Georgia fielded their first African-American college players, high school football in Georgia had entered the modern era.

The all-white North Fulton team beat all-black Murphy in the first historic game at old Cheney Stadium. Black schools won 23 of the next 28.

But more significant, the apprehension that accompanied the first game faded with each new game. 

Wallace Davis, who retired in 2004 after 29 seasons as head coach of Carver in Columbus, was a star player in the all-black Georgia Interscholastic Association before integration and was an assistant coach in the first game between blacks and whites in Columbus in 1968.

"If it hadn't been for high school football, integration would've been a big failure," Davis said. "People forgot all about black and white when it came down to winning. It was the greatest thing that could've happened for white and black relations."

It was something that would prompt Dwyer to say: "On the field, we're like brothers."

Williams, who left high school coaching in 1971, was Turner's coach for 15 years before the school competed against whites. Even now he can be overwhelmed by the effects of a change 40 years ago.

"When you see how these kids are today, the camaraderie they have, there was a time when I never thought I'd live to see that sort of thing," he said.; 


They're the architectural equivalent of swinging '60s bachelors --- funky, modern buildings that evoke the Space Age, cocktail shakers and JFK. 

But many of them are having a hard time surviving to middle age.

In metro Atlanta and around the state, modernist buildings erected from the 1950s to the 1970s --- from featureless slab skyscrapers to wacky cylindrical bank branches --- are quickly succumbing to the wrecking ball.

The demise of the architecturally cool, the curious and the offbeat is driven by several factors, say a small group of architects and preservationists. Among them: Atlanta's condo craze and the hunger for prime real estate it creates, especially in Midtown and downtown, and decay (many of the structures are approaching 50).

Several choice modernist examples already have been lost, and others have grim futures. The next to go will be one of Atlanta's largest examples, the 615 Peachtree building at North Avenue and Peachtree Street --- a neighbor, ironically, to Atlanta's best example of preservation, the Fox Theatre.

Cousins Properties, the Cobb County developer, already has begun demolishing the 1959 tower, most recently a local office for Wachovia Corp. Cousins plans to replace 615 with --- not surprisingly --- a 30-story tower of newfangled condominium units and other buildings. The complex will be named Fox Plaza.

Many locals, including downtown advocates eager to have new neighbors, see 615's clearing as progress. But, the Fox aside, metro Atlanta has a spotty record of sparing notable buildings, and modernist fans worry the city may someday miss its curious, modern history.

"The public takes these resources for granted," said Tom Little, a local architect and president of DOCOMOMO Georgia, the local branch of an international group committed to saving modern buildings. (The group takes its name from the words documentation, conservation and modern movement.) "We're quickly losing an era of architecture in Atlanta."

Already victims to the bulldozer or marked for destruction:

* Atlanta's Alcoa Building, which the aluminum concern built on Peachtree Street in 1957. "It used cast aluminum screens and aluminum components to show the highest goals of what Alcoa was about," Little said. It was demolished two years ago for the expansion of The Temple, a synagogue next door.

* Midtown's Atlanta Cabana Hotel, a Miami-style lodge where Martin Luther King Jr. and Harry Belafonte were once refused service. It was built in 1960 and torn down in 2002 to make way for condos.

* The Atlanta Constitution building, which the newspaper opened on Alabama Street downtown in 1948. The building, which is on DOCOMOMO's list of endangered structures, is owned by the state and has been slated for demolition to make way for transportation projects.

Losing these landmarks is a shame, said Steven Moffson, an architect and preservationist with the state Department of Natural Resources. The buildings are "hugely important, and part of the landscape of post-World War II America," he said.

'New' trumps 'dated'

Well, maybe, others say. The need for new developments and residents in the city outweighs any sentimentality about a style of architecture, said A.J. Robinson, president of Central Atlanta Progress, a downtown booster group.

In the case of 615 Peachtree, the building is inferior to newer structures, and erecting something new is better for the district, said Robinson, a former developer with architect and developer John Portman.

Robinson said most companies probably wouldn't want to lease suites in a dated building like 615, and condo consumers are even more finicky. Instead, he said, "we should celebrate the fact it's being replaced by new residences."

The demand for new high-rise homes around Atlanta has made developers target many aging structures that for years escaped most people's notice.

Last year, about 4,700 newly built condo units were sold or put under contract in intown neighborhoods, said David Haddow, president of real estate consulting firm Haddow &amp; Co. That's a 74 percent increase over the 2,700 new units sold in the same area in 2004.

Developers like Novare Group, Wood Partners and Cousins are seeking land to build even more units, often at the expense of dated buildings. The Cabana Hotel, for example, was demolished for Novare's hip condo tower Spire.

Modernism is a fuzzy definition for a style of architecture and design that emerged in Europe in the 1920s and immigrated to America during and after World War II. Its migration was both figurative and literal.

Many of its disciples fled the Nazis for intellectual havens like Harvard University.

Glass boxes sprouted

Modernists wanted to celebrate a new age of technology, Moffson said, and they used what were then high-tech building materials like concrete, steel and glass, often in simple forms sheared of Old World ornamentation.

The style's popularity coincided with America's postwar building boom in the 1950s.

Fifty years ago, modernism --- and a branch of it known as the "International Style" because its simplicity was meant to translate into any culture --- was the preferred look for the modern corporate image, Moffson said.

The United Nations used the style for its New York headquarters in 1951, and companies like Seagram built their own modernist monoliths in capitals of commerce like New York and Chicago.

The concept and its variations endured through the 1960s and 1970s, and its boxy, featureless office floors even helped encourage the cube farm.

In Atlanta, modernist architects built the Atlanta Constitution and Equitable buildings downtown and the soon-to-be-demolished Peachtree Hills Apartments in Buckhead. Modernism also lent itself to a number of smaller, local shops, offices and bank branches.
Around Georgia, modernism cropped up in city halls, fire stations and other post-World War II public buildings, including the University of Georgia's Stegeman Coliseum in Athens.

</text>
