<text id="A15" category="" words="2005" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Seymour makes trip ; Lineman's status is still in doubt' The Boston Globe, 30 October 2006, D7; 'Scarlet Knights finally out of their rut' The Boston Globe, 22 October 2006, C16; 'SPORTS LOG' The Boston Globe, 22 October 2006, C2" Author="Mike Reiss; Mark Blaudschun; Staff" PublicationDate="30 October 2006; 22 October 2006; 22 October 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

PATRIOTS NOTEBOOK 
MINNEAPOLIS - Defensive lineman Richard Seymour traveled with the Patriots for tonight's game against the Vikings, although whether he plays is still in doubt. 
Seymour, who missed portions of the team's practices leading up to tonight's game, remains questionable on the injury report, giving him a 50-50 chance of playing. 
He injured his left elbow Oct. 22 at Buffalo, and has been wearing a brace on the elbow during practices. 
While Seymour made the trip, the team traveled without three starters - right guard Stephen Neal (shoulder), safety Eugene Wilson (hamstring), and tight end Daniel Graham (ankle), as well as reserve guard/center Russ Hochstein (knee). 
With Neal out, the Patriots normally would turn to Hochstein. But since Hochstein is out as well, the team likely will choose between third-year veteran Billy Yates - who filled in for Neal on two late series last week against Buffalo - or second-year player Nick Kaczur at right guard. 
Kaczur played some guard in training camp last year, but primarily has been a tackle, both in the pros and in college at Toledo. Yates was signed off the practice squad Oct. 21 and has experience at center and guard. 
With Wilson out at safety, the Patriots figure to turn to nine- year veteran Artrell Hawkins once again. Hawkins filled in for Wilson in wins over the Bengals and Dolphins, but came off the bench last week when Wilson returned from a hamstring injury. But Wilson injured his leg in the third quarter of the team's win over the Bills and has been limited since. 
Graham has been sidelined since injuring his ankle Oct. 1 against the Bengals. In his absence, the team has turned to Benjamin Watson and rookie David Thomas in its two tight-end sets. 
Behind enemy lines 
Former Patriots receiver Bethel Johnson is expected to handle the Vikings' kickoff return duties tonight in his second game since signing with the club Oct. 10. 
Vikings special teams coordinator Paul Ferraro also acknowledged that the Minnesota coaching staff tapped Johnson's knowledge of the Patriots, although he's not sure how much the team can gain from that. 
"We certainly talk about where he came from, what they did and that kind of thing," Ferraro said. "But there aren't any secrets. You look at the film and you can see what somebody is trying to get done. The New England Patriots are as sound and well-coached as any special teams unit in the league in my opinion. You put on the film, you see what you're going to get. They're not fancy but they're very physical. 
"Again, some of that is a little bit overrated. Those things change week to week, year to year. [Patriots special teams coach] Brad Seely knows that we're talking. Obviously, you're going to check with Bethel and just double check and make sure you've asked those questions, but there aren't a lot of secrets out there." 
Brown inching closer 
Receiver Troy Brown enters tonight's game with 531 career receptions, within striking distance of the franchise record of 534, held by Stanley Morgan (1977-89) ... Running back Kevin Faulk was upgraded from questionable to probable on the injury report ... Bill Belichick has a 1-3 career record against the Vikings. He's 1-1 as Patriots coach, with the team losing, 21-13, in his third game in New England, before posting a 24-17 win Nov. 24, 2002 ... The game is the Patriots' lone scheduled appearance on "Monday Night Football" this season, and the team's only game in a dome ... With tonight's game to be played on an artificial surface, quarterback Tom Brady looks to improve on his 18-1 career record on those surfaces ... The game will mark Brady's 96th consecutive start, which is third among active quarterbacks behind Brett Favre (248) and Peyton Manning (144) ... Rookie Willie Andrews enters as the Patriots' leader in special teams tackles, with eight. ... Harvard's Matt Birk, now in his ninth NFL season (all with the Vikings), will start at center in his 105th career regular-season game after missing all of 2005 because of hip and hernia injuries. 

PITTSBURGH - Rutgers stories. 
You want them? 
We've got them. 
Lots of them. 
Many ending with punch lines. 
Like the time Rutgers started to chart a course out of the dark ages as an Eastern independent and scheduled a game against the University of Tennessee. 
That prompted a pregame question from the Tennessee media: "What is a Rutgers?" 
But those were the bad old days, when Rutgers couldn't find its way out of a 10-by-10 room that had an 8-by-8 door. 
The new Rutgers went to a postseason game last season for the first time since 1978, dropping a 45-40 decision to Arizona State in the Insight Bowl. 
The magic ride has extended through the first half of this season, arriving at last night's game against Pittsburgh at Heinz Field. When the 19th-ranked and unbeaten Scarlet Knights met the once-beaten Panthers in a pivotal Big East game, the level of the Rutgers program was higher than it had been in 30 years. A win would elevate the Scarlet Knights to 7-0 for only the third time in the 134 years Rutgers has been playing college football. 
A win would guarantee the school's second consecutive bowl appearance, a first in the history of the program. 
Even with the recent success, the stories keep coming. 
At Rutgers, the expectations were so low that in 1998, following 2-9 and 0-11 seasons, then-coach Terry Shea was voted Big East Coach of the Year after a "successful season." The Scarlet Knights' record? 5-6 overall and 2-5 in the Big East. 
A year later, Rutgers returned to a more familiar neighborhood with a 1-10 record, which led to the dismissal of Shea and the start of another coaching search. 
Next up was Greg Schiano, who was hired in December 2000. The 34- year-old University of Miami defensive coordinator was the youngest head coach in the history of the Big East. 
Still, the stories of Rutgers's failures overwhelmed its successes. In the past two seasons that has changed, although the change has come with cynicism. 
Take this fall for instance, and the tale of a groundhog named Piscataway Phil. 
Phil, legend had it, came out every fall and saw his shadow, which meant another losing season for Rutgers. 
Phil didn't see his shadow last year, and the Knights went to a bowl game. No one has seen him this season, as Rutgers has won week after week. 
In fact, school officials are bringing in extra bleachers for the Thursday night ESPN game against Louisville Nov. 9, which could potentially match an 8-0 Rutgers team against an 8-0 Louisville team, although Louisville plays No. 4 West Virginia before it meets Rutgers. 
Again, the cynics have come out, prompting one longtime Rutgers observer to say, "They're bringing in bleachers now. I remember when they were bringing in people [to pad the crowd]." 
Last night's encounter was more than a Big East game, it was a Big East game between teams who apparently have turned the corner. 
Pittsburgh, which has made a strong revival in Dave Wannstedt's second season as coach, has flirted with fame before, dating to the days of Tony Dorsett, and then Dan Marino. The Panthers, led by quarterback Tyler Palko, who was leading the nation in passing efficiency, were off to their best start since the Marino-led team of 1982. 
But Rutgers, the state University of New Jersey? 
No. 1 in the country in scoring defense (8.33 points per game). 
No. 2 in the country in overall defense (221.3 yards per game). 
And there's running back Ray Rice (149.8 rushing yards per game, 11 TDs), who appears on a number of Heisman watch lists. 
"I've always been convinced, whether it's football or basketball, that Rutgers had the chance to be very successful," said Big East commissioner Mike Tranghese, who has watched the revival of his football league after it was raided by the Atlantic Coast Conference, which enticed Boston College, Miami, and Virginia Tech to join. "They made a lot of choices over the years that were incorrect." 
One of the choices director of athletics Bob Mulcahy made was to hire Schiano. 
When Rutgers stumbled again (2-9 and 1-11) in Schiano's first two seasons - as it had so many times through a series of coaches who had been brought in to revive the program over the past 20 years - the "Fire Schiano" movement began. "There was a lot of pressure on Bob to get rid of Greg," said Tranghese. "I talked to Bob about it and told him, `If you think he's the right guy, give him what he needs."' 
Mulcahy gave Schiano a contract extension, a boost in pay, and a vote of confidence that had substance. "They haven't had a lot to cheer about," said Tranghese. "To Greg's credit, he never thought that he couldn't take the program to the next level. When Bob hired Greg, it was as bad as it could be, both internally and externally. Greg has done so much to change that." 

Football
Chiefs quarterback cleared to practice 
Kansas City quarterback Trent Green, who was knocked unconscious in the Chiefs' season opener, has been cleared to practice. Green has missed nearly six weeks while recovering from a severe concussion he sustained Sept. 10 against Cincinnati. Green is expected to begin team workouts Wednesday ... Byron Leftwich's sore left ankle felt better, but the Jaguars quarterback remained questionable for Jacksonville's game at Houston. Leftwich missed practice Friday, wore a protective boot, and then had an MRI. Results showed "nothing serious," team spokesman Dan Edwards said ... Former University of Michigan coach Bo Schembechler was watching the Wolverines play from the hospital and feeling OK, the school announced during its game against Iowa. The 77-year-old Schembechler felt ill Friday at the taping of a weekly television show, was hospitalized, and held for observation in the cardiac unit. 
Auto racing 
Alonso qualifies ahead of Schumacher 
Fernando Alonso, closing in on a Formula One championship, was fourth fastest during qualifying for the Brazilian Grand Prix in Sao Paulo. He finished ahead of Michael Schumacher, the seven-time Formula One champion who is retiring after the race. Schumacher enters the season finale trailing Alonso by 10 points and with only a remote shot at an eighth title. Felipe Massa won the third pole position of his career, on the 2.67-mile Interlagos circuit ... Four members of the Toyota Formula One team were ambushed by gunmen near the Interlagos track, but no one was injured. Toyota spokeswoman Fernanda Villas-Boas said about 20 teenagers stopped her group and other cars as they left the circuit a day earlier. "Some people tried to escape and they started shooting," she said. "We lowered our heads and were able to flee. Thankfully, nothing more serious happened." ... Sebastien Bourdais clinched his third straight Champ Car series title while French countryman Nelson Philippe won the Indy 300 in another incident-filled Australian race. Bourdais secured the title when American A.J. Allmendinger, his closest pursuer for the season championship, crashed out on the 19th lap ... World of Outlaws sprint car series founder Ted Johnson died in Norman, Okla., after a long battle with cancer. He was 72. 
Skating 
Hedrick, Lamb win in Cup warm-up 
Olympic champion Chad Hedrick won at 5,000 meters and Maria Lamb captured the 3,000 in the fall World Cup qualifier for the US speedskating team in West Allis, Wis. Hedrick won in 6 minutes 43.08 seconds, far slower than his gold medal time of 6:14.68 at the Turin Games. Lamb won the women's 3,000 in 4:22.49 ... Maxi Baier, who at age 15 won the 1936 Olympic pairs figure skating title with her future husband, Ernst Baier, died in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany. She was 86. 
 Miscellany 
Federer beats Nalbandian to reach final 
Roger Federer moved a step closer to his 10th title of the year, routing David Nalbandian, 6-4, 6-0, in the semifinals of the Madrid Masters.

</text>
