<text id="A19" category="" words="2013" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'In numbers, university females pulling way ahead of males' Athens Banner-Herald, 21 August 2006, n/a; 'As temperature drops, Athens, Ga., retailers gear up for holiday sales season' Athens Banner-Herald, 1 October 2006, n/a:" Author="Rebecca K. Quigley; Don Nelson; " PublicationDate="21 August 2006; 1 October 2006; " SampledFrom="All: Beginning; " WebAddress="Factiva">

Aug. 21--As a man, Seth Gurney is a distinct minority in the College of Veterinary Medicine at the University of Georgia. 

Gurney says his friends in medical school probably consider small-animal medicine a "woman's profession," but he never had reservations about attending the nearly 78 percent-female vet school. 

"I like (caring for) animals over people," said Gurney, who considered medical school as a back-up plan because he could expect to earn enough as a doctor to make up for the expense of schooling. 

In 1975, only about a quarter of students in UGA's professional schools -- law, pharmacy and veterinary medicine -- were women; today women make up 70 percent of professional school enrollment. 

In that same 30 years, women have overtaken men as a majority on campus and continue to widen that gender gap. 

In fall 1975, 45 percent of all UGA students were women. By 1988, the number grew to almost 55 percent and by 2005 to 57 percent, generally following the national trend. 

Female students are moving ahead of their male peers as early as secondary school, where educators have trouble graduating college-ready boys, setting the stage for a gender gap in college and beyond. 

Labor experts say once the genders are off balance, the problem only seems to get worse, since men aren't likely to enter a fields dominated by women (and visa versa), and if they do, are less likely to be promoted. 

"Women and men should feel equally valuable in any occupation," said Mike Wald, regional economist for U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 

Why more women? 

More and more women are attracted to professional fields for flexibility -- whether physical, financial or personal, experts say. 

Second-year pharmacy student Tracy Dobbs originally considered medical school but pharmacists are in demand and have more flexible schedules than doctors. 

"I wanted to go into pharmacy because I want to have a family, and the hours and the salary are good for that," Dobbs said. "I can work part-time and get the hours I want." Pharmacy school also is a better financial deal because, as a four-year program that begins at the undergraduate level, the HOPE Scholarship pays for it, she said. 

In fall 2005, about 67 percent of pharmacy students were women, up from 62 percent in 1998. 

Thirty years ago, pharmacy students were predominantly male, but as recently as the late 1990s, the student body was balanced between men and women, said George Francisco, the pharmacy school's associate dean for academics. 

"If you look at it, it's probably more career and salary-driven -- you can still make a good living with a part-time salary," Francisco said. 

Pharmacy pays well compared to other health-care fields but is more flexible -- pharmacists can leave and return to practice without disrupting a patient base, Francisco said. 

Vets don't enjoy as flexible a schedule for starting a family, said vet school acting associate dean Paige Carmichael, who recommends that vet students have children while they are still in school and have more time. 

But in the past few decades, vet work has changed -- some vets specialize in small-animal work, an attractive change for professional women who don't want to handle horses and cattle. 

About 78 percent of vet school students in fall 2005 were women, a 19 percent increase from 1998. 

"Twenty years ago, you treated everything," said Carmichael, who once was a small-animal vet herself. "(Now) they don't have to treat a horse if they don't want to." A wide income difference between veterinarians and doctors may draw medically inclined male students to medical school instead of vet school because of the higher payback for the investment, said Ashley Neary, a second-year vet student. 

Women also are more prepared than their male counterparts in terms of the grades, test scores and other prerequisites for vet school, Neary suggested. 

The drop-off in male enrollment after the first four years of college, especially from undergraduate business programs, is all about the job market, said risk management senior Taylor Noland, who, after weighing graduate school with getting a job, decided against an advanced degree. 

"You have to take a job from the opportunities you are given," Noland said, adding that getting an MBA right away isn't necessary. "The skills that you learn at MBA school you're not going to need for the next 20 years." The HOPE Scholarship also doesn't pay the higher cost of graduate school where "not many kids can afford to go right out of college," Noland said. "If you go get a job with a company, they're going to pay for grad school down the road." Men also may be less comfortable asking parents to help pay for graduate school, he said. 

Solving the puzzle The gender gap is widening, many experts say, because girls are maturing faster, are more focused than boys and engage in activities that are more "developmentally advantageous," said UGA President Michael Adams. 

Lifestyle, including financial goals and a lack of preparation -- male students often spend more time with sports than studying -- are factors that contribute to the widening gender gap from college to graduate school, Adams said. 

"When I came along, it was expected if you were a really good student, that you went on to graduate or professional school," Adams said of the culture among male students. "I think we've lost some of that in the last 30 years." Women continue to outnumber men at the undergraduate level, but the difference has grown even wider in graduate school, from about 42 percent female in 1975 to almost 58 percent in 2005. 

The lack of an engineering school at UGA -- Georgia Tech was about 73 percent male in fall 2005 -- could be tipping the scales toward a female majority, compared to other major American universities that have engineering programs. 

The vet school's emphasis on research and public health has begun to attract more men to the school, where the doctoral program is now evenly divided by gender, Carmichael said. 

The number of men in the vet school has been inching up in the last couple years to 24 percent this fall, even though only about 17 percent of the applications for admission were from men. 

In the pharmacy school, men have made up about 35 percent for nearly a decade, but that doesn't bother school administrators. 

"We really don't see it as a problem," Francisco said. "The biggest consumers of health-care needs are women, so I don't see it as a bad thing that there are more women (becoming pharmacists)." A stronghold of women hasn't deterred third-year pharmacy student Chad Coulter. 

Coulter was attracted to the health-care field but didn't want the trappings of a medical degree. 

"It's shorter and I really didn't want to get out when I'm 30," he said, adding that some male students he knows are opting for an even shorter, yet still lucrative, route in the business school. 

Men aren't shying away from all graduate and professional programs, however. 

The law school generally maintains a gender balance in its student body, even as the number of women has grown in the last few years. Women studying law outnumbered men by a narrow margin in fall 2005 and this fall's incoming class is 55 percent male and 45 percent female. 

Students who enroll in the law school reflect the applicant pool, so some years there are more women and some years there are more men, said Giles Kennedy, director of law admissions. 

"We don't have any targets or goals" and don't do anything to specifically recruit women, Kennedy said. "I think what happens over time is we just take what's been given." Regardless of a gender balance in some schools and programs where more men and women are enrolling, the overall gap in higher education continues to widen with every entering class. 

At UGA, the number of men in freshman classes has dropped from 43 percent in 1998 to 37 percent in 2006. 

Educators need to do a better job preparing boys for college, and once they are there, do a better job of encouraging talented male students to seek advanced degrees as a "valuable alternative" to entering the workforce right out of college, Adams said. 

"Usually by age 25, people have finished their formal education" and are unlikely to return for a higher degree, said labor economist Wald. 

Men have left higher education behind in favor of high-paying jobs like construction and mining, he said. 

"I think it's taken us several years to get into this situation and it's going to take us several years to get out of it," Adams said. "We may need to do some more marketing ... (and) we've got to change some social norms." The loss of American males in higher education is "a serious problem," he said. "I don't believe anybody has figured it out yet." ;

Oct. 1--Crisp, cool evenings and football frenzy can mean only one thing... it's time to get ready for Christmas. 

The first day of fall (Sept. 23) is barely a week old, yet many of Athens' major retailers are well into gearing up for the Christmas holiday, a crucial season for sales. 

Twenty-five percent to 40 percent of retailers' annual revenue stems from holiday sales, said Kathy Grannis, a spokeswoman with the National Retail Federation. 

In 2004, shopping malls took in $227.8 billion -- 28 percent of their annual sales -- in November and December, according to the International Council of Shopping Centers. 

"(Holiday sales) definitely have an impact on retailers planning and when they plan," Grannis said. "And it has an impact on how they plan for the following years." In marketing circles, the trend of holiday shopping starting earlier and earlier is known as "Christmas Creep." "It's a retail mentality that you need to be first out of the gate, and people keep making the race longer and longer," said William Cody, managing director of the Baker Retailing Initiative at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School, according to a recent story in the Philadelphia Inquirer. 

Experts say the importance of holidays sales to retailers' bottom line can't be underestimated, but Grannis said major retailers also simply are giving consumers what they want. 

"Retailers start holiday shopping early because consumers are asking them to," Grannis said. "If consumers continue to buy before Halloween, retailers will keep (starting early)." In order to serve those customers who plan for Christmas months in advance, the Hobby Lobby crafts store in Athens initiated its first phase of Christmas merchandise this past summer. 

"We're a crafts store, so for everybody who likes to get done ahead of time, we usually set up around June," said Gretchen Adams, store manager of the Athens Hobby Lobby. 

Adams added that Hobby Lobby puts up its Christmas trees and related items in August, then follows up with what the store calls its second phase -- merchandise such as Christmas tins and wrapping paper -- after Thanksgiving. Adams said her store doesn't really decorate the store, but let's its large seasonal section provide the store's holiday appearance. 

Decking the halls at Michael's Arts &amp; Crafts shop begins in August, said Joe Murdock assistant manager with the Athens Michaels. 

"We got the first bit of Christmas in August, and it comes in slowly," Murdock said. "We haven't set up our trees or all the ornaments." Murdock said the first wave of seasonal inventory Michaels puts on display includes Christmas houses, the small buildings people use to create miniature Christmas villages. The store also began selling craft items and make-your-own ornaments in August. 

Michael's has been receiving two truck shipments a week since August, Murdock said, and one of those two weekly trucks is filled with Christmas merchandise. 

Early August is a fairly typical time for retailers to begin stocking holiday goods, Murdock said, because many people, especially those building tiny villages, want to make sure they get a certain house or store before the items are sold out. Numerous consumers also plan and design their Christmas décor well ahead of December, Murdock said. ;

</text>
