<text id="A22" category="" words="1998" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Watchdog Group Accuses Churches of Political Action' The New York Times, 26 October 2006, p. 19; 'Teenager Charged In Threats at School' The New York Times, 8 October 2006, p. 2; 'Accused Priest's Long Flight From Law in U.S. and Mexico' The New York Time" Author="STEPHANIE STROM; STEVE STRUNSKY; JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr." PublicationDate="26 October 2006; 8 October 2006; 21 October 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; End" WebAddress="Factiva">

A nonprofit group has filed a complaint asking the Internal Revenue Service to investigate the role that two churches may have played in the re-election campaign of Kansas' attorney general. 
The complaint by Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, a nonpartisan legal watchdog organization, cited a memorandum from the attorney general, Phill Kline, a Republican, directing members of his campaign staff to recruit churches to distribute campaign literature and serve as the sites for events. 
''This is the top law enforcement official in the state who is encouraging everyone to break the law,'' said Melanie Sloan, executive director of the watchdog group. ''He's either abysmally unfamiliar with the law, or he's deliberately violating it.'' 
A spokeswoman for Mr. Kline, Sherriene Jones, did not return calls to her office. 
In his memorandum, Mr. Kline identified two Topeka churches, the Light of the World Christian Center and the Wanamaker Woods Church of the Nazarene, which he said had participated in ''lit drops'' by handing out campaign literature. A woman who answered the telephone at Wanamaker Woods Church said the church had no comment. 
The Rev. Greg Varney, pastor of Light of the World Christian Center, issued a statement saying that Mr. Kline had preached at the church on July 9, but insisting that no illegal activity had occurred. ''At no time here at our church did Phill bring up politics, re-election or campaign contributions,'' the statement said. 
Mark W. Everson, the commissioner of the I.R.S., has repeatedly warned that the agency will crack down on religious organizations that violate laws barring charities of any type from involvement in partisan political activities. 
This election cycle, additional accusations of such violations have been made against religious organizations in California, Minnesota, Missouri and Ohio. 
Whether the I.R.S. has responded to those complaints is unknown; the agency is barred by law from disclosing its investigations. 
All Saints Church, an Episcopal congregation in Pasadena, Calif., has said it was under investigation, but no other church named in complaints that have become public has acknowledged an I.R.S. inquiry. 
Despite a report last year by the Treasury Department's inspector general that concluded political considerations had played no role in the I.R.S.'s selection of nonprofit groups for review, the agency's silence regarding its investigations has led to accusations of political bias. 
''From what we know, the I.R.S. has gone after liberal organizations primarily, the N.A.A.C.P. and the liberal church in California,'' Ms. Sloan said, referring to the inquiry into All Saints Church. An I.R.S. investigation of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People was closed with no finding of wrongdoing. 
''Clearly, there are violations on the conservative side, and no action appears to be taken.'' Ms. Sloan said. ''If they're being even-handed,'' she added, ''I certainly can't tell.'' 
Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington also filed a complaint with the I.R.S. last week against the Living Word Christian Center in Brooklyn Park, Minn., accusing its senior pastor of violating the law by openly stating his support for a Congressional candidate. 
''We can't publicly endorse as a church, and would not for any candidate,'' the senior pastor, the Rev. Mac Hammond, told his congregation during a service on Oct. 14 as he introduced Michele Bachmann, a Republican state senator who is running for a seat in the United States House of Representatives. ''But I can tell you personally that I'm going to vote for Michele Bachmann,'' he said. 
During her remarks that followed, Ms. Bachmann said that she had been called by God to run for the House seat after three days of fasting and praying with her husband. 
The Star Tribune in Minneapolis later reported that Mr. Hammond could not vote for Ms. Bachmann because he does not live in her district. 
Mr. Hammond did not respond to messages seeking comment. 
The Star Tribune quoted Mr. Hammond as saying he had ''learned my lesson.'' 

There have been 34 school shootings in the United States in the last 10 years, resulting in the deaths of 54 students and 14 teachers, administrators and others, according to a timeline on www.infoplease.com . 
None in New Jersey. 
But in Hawthorne last month, prosecutors determined that an oral threat by a 16-year-old student to shoot his principal, vice principal and fellow students at Hawthorne High School, and to blow up the school, was sufficiently serious to file criminal charges against the teenager. 
There was no evidence that the boy meant to carry out the threat, which was uttered on Sept. 22 after the principal and vice principal intervened in an argument the boy was having with another student, said Michael O'Shea, Passaic County's chief assistant prosecutor. 
The youth, a junior, was suspended pending the outcome of a psychiatric evaluation and is being home-schooled, Mr. O'Shea said. If found to be delinquent -- guilty, in juvenile court parlance -- he could be compelled to undergo counseling, placed in his parents' custody or held for up to two years in a juvenile jail. 
The incident, which was not publicized by officials, was reported last week by The Record. The boy's name was withheld because he is a juvenile. 
''Apparently, it was an emotional outburst,'' said Mr. O'Shea, who noted that it occurred before the shootings last Monday at an Amish schoolhouse in Pennsylvania and other recent incidents in Wisconsin and Colorado, and was not a copycat case. 
''However, in this day and age,'' Mr. O'Shea said, ''schools and police must respond with extreme caution, and that's what they did.'' 


The letter said the priest wanted a change of scene ''for family and health reasons.'' 
In September, after protests over the case in front of the Mexico City cathedral that drew national attention, Cardinal Rivera Carrera read a statement urging Father Aguilar to turn himself in, ''for the good of his own conscience and to avoid more damage to the church.'' 
In the United States, Father Aguilar served under Cardinal Mahony in Los Angeles. Through a spokesman, Cardinal Mahony, who is named in the civil case, said his office reported Father Aguilar's abuse of two altar boys to the authorities in January 1988. 
The spokesman, Tod Tamberg, said the principal of the church school left a message on an answering machine at the office of child protective services on the afternoon of Jan. 8 of that year; Father Aguilar left the country the next day. 
The Los Angeles police say the vicar for clergy, Msgr. Thomas Curry, tipped off the priest on the morning of Jan. 9 that he would be investigated, two days before their detectives were informed. Father Aguilar slipped across the border that night. 
Mr. Tamberg confirmed that Monsignor Curry had confronted Father Aguilar with the accusations against him that morning and stripped him of ministry duty. The priest told Monsignor Curry he was going to stay with relatives in Los Angeles during the investigation, but he fled the country instead, Mr. Tamberg said. 
''Our school officials acted appropriately,'' he said, ''and so did church officials, to remove this guy from the ministry.'' In the next nine years the parents of at least five boys in Mexico have formally accused Father Aguilar of sexual abuse or rape as he continued to work in parishes. 
''The frustration is unbelievable,'' said Detective Federico Sicard, the Los Angeles investigator who has been seeking Father Aguilar for 18 years. He added: ''When things like this happen we fail them. The justice system failed these kids.'' 
Father Aguilar's troubled private life first came to light in 1987 in Cuacnopalan, a dusty farming town where he headed a parish for more than a decade. 
Many older parishioners still defended Father Aguilar as the best priest they ever had. But there were also hushed reports among some parents that the priest had molested and fondled boys in the congregation, and at least one youngster, who died of complications from AIDS in 1996, told friends that he had complained to the diocese, town officials and residents said. 
''There were a lot of comments about his relationships with the boys, that he had problems with the youngsters,'' Melquiades Alcantara, 61, recalled. Cardinal Rivera Carrera, who was then the bishop of the Tehuacan Diocese, did not mount an inquiry. He told La Prensa that an attack on Father Aguilar -- along with persistent rumors about his homosexuality, not pedophilia -- had persuaded him to ship the priest off to Los Angeles in early 1988. 
After Father Aguilar was in Los Angeles nine months, two altar boys complained that on several occasions he had lured them into his residence and fondled them. 
Three months after the case was reported to the authorities, a grand jury indicted Father Aguilar on 19 counts of lewd acts upon a child, involving 10 children. But by then he had fled back to Mexico. The Los Angeles authorities immediately sought to have him indicted in Mexico and extradited to California. 
It took seven years for the Mexican attorney general's office to issue an arrest warrant, Detective Sicard said. Three months after it did, the statute of limitations on the sex abuse charges ran out. 
The priest was never arrested, but allegations of new abuses hounded him. In the early 1990's he served as the associate pastor at two churches in Mexico City. Joaquin Aguilar Mendez, who brought the suit in Los Angeles in September, was an altar boy at both. Mr. Aguilar Mendez says FatherAguilar brutally raped him in October 1994 inside a rectory after he had misbehaved at Mass. He was 13. 
Lawyers for Mr. Aguilar Mendez say he and his parents reported the rape to the police three weeks later. The police did three rape tests and told them that they had lost the results all three times, the lawsuit claims. 
A prosecutor, the lawyers allege, offered the parents a bribe to drop the charges. The parents refused, but the complaint never resulted in a trial, Mr. Aguilar Mendez said. 
In late 1995 or early 1996, Father Aguilar returned to Tehuacan, where he was assigned to the small San Vicente Ferrer church, clergymen there said. Within a year his parishioners were once again leveling charges of child molestation. 
Four mothers filed charges of sexual abuse with the local prosecutor, though other mothers said the number of victims was far higher. Cecilia Flores said her son was only 10 when the priest tried to put his hand down the boy's shorts. ''How many injustices has this priest committed?'' Mrs. Flores asked. 
That investigation dragged on for six years. The state judge handling the charges, Carlos Guillermo Ramirez, has never issued an arrest warrant in three of the cases and ruled out rape charges in all of them. 
Even as the investigation was proceeding, Archbishop Rosendo Huesca Pacheco of Puebla, just 71 miles away, gave Father Aguilar permission in 2001 to serve as an assistant priest in another village. ''We didn't know there were charges against him,'' said an official in the Puebla archdiocese, the Rev. Amador Tapia. 
In 2002 a state tribunal in Puebla finally ordered that the priest be arrested for the ''corruption of minors.'' Father Aguilar appealed to a federal judge, who canceled the arrest warrant because the statute of limitations had expired. 
In 2003 Judge Ramirez found Father Aguilar guilty of a lesser charge of touching the genitals of one boy, but acquitted him of the top charge of corruption of minors. He sentenced the priest to one year in prison and a $765 fine, according to court papers. 
Father Aguilar was allowed to pay a slightly larger fine to avoid prison and disappeared once again. 
In recent months he has been seen saying Mass in tiny towns in the states of Puebla and Morelos. The Tehuacan diocese has never defrocked him. 
Photo: Joaquin Aguilar Mendez, right, a former altar boy, has sued the Rev. Nicolas Aguilar, shown in photo at left. (Photo by Tomas Bravo/Reuters) 
Map of Mexico highlighting Tehuacan: In the Tehuacan area, there were complaints about Father Aguilar.

</text>
