<text id="A28" category="" words="2005" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Karr case folds with DNA: Tests fail to place suspect at scene of JonBenet Ramsey's death' The Atlanta Journal - Constitution, 29 August 2006, A1; 'Short-term pain for airlines predicted' The Atlanta Journal - Constitution, 11 August 2006, C1; 'Motorist'" Author="BOB KEEFE; RUSSELL GRANTHAM; GEORGE CHIDI " PublicationDate="29 August 2006; 11 August 2006; 28 August 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Middle" WebAddress="Factiva">

Boulder, Colo., prosecutors abruptly dropped their case against John Mark Karr on Monday, just an hour before he was supposed to appear in court in the killing of JonBenet Ramsey. 
The Boulder district attorney's office said Karr's DNA didn't match the male DNA found at the scene of the death of 6-year-old JonBenet. 
The prosecutor's office also said Karr's family provided evidence that he was with them in Atlanta at Christmas in 1996 when JonBenet was killed. 
Karr told authorities he had killed JonBenet, and he was arrested Aug. 16 in a stunning turn in the decade-old mystery. 
But last week, Gary Harris, a lawyer for Karr's family, said the family had a photo from Christmas 1996 that includes Karr's children. Karr wasn't in the photo, but family members said he had not missed a Christmas gathering until five years ago, and that they knew if his children were there, he was there. 
In an interview Monday with MSNBC, Harris said of the DNA: "I knew it wouldn't match." 
Now Karr, 41, is scheduled to be transferred to California to stand trial on five unrelated child pornography possession charges dating to 2001. 
Henry Lee, a well-known DNA expert, said that a DNA match would be important in any prosecution of Karr, but only if prosecutors could establish Karr was in Boulder at the time of the killing. 
"If you cannot establish that he was in Boulder, you cannot establish that the DNA was his," said Lee, who served as a consultant to investigators in the weeks after Ramsey was found strangled and with a fractured skull in her parents' basement. 
In court papers, District Attorney Mary Lacy defended the decision to arrest Karr and bring him back to the United States for further investigation, saying he might have fled and may have been targeting children in Thailand, where he was arrested. 
That argument did not persuade critics, however. 
"We're deeply distressed by the fact that they took this man and dragged him here from Bangkok, Thailand, with no forensic evidence confirming the allegations against him and no independent factors leading to a presumption he did anything wrong," said Seth Temin, Karr's court-appointed attorney. 
Colorado Gov. Bill Owens weighed in as well: "I find it incredible that Boulder authorities wasted thousands of taxpayer dollars to bring Karr to Colorado given such a lack of evidence," he said in a written statement. "Mary Lacy should be held accountable for the most extravagant and expensive DNA test in Colorado history." 
Boulder authorities already had a black eye from their pursuit of the Ramsey family as suspects, an avenue they eventually abandoned. 
Lacy vowed to keep pursuing leads in JonBenet's death: "This case is not closed." 
But it was not clear what options authorities had --- and whether the events to date might make any prosecution untenable. 
"You still have an unsolved murder, and the next person who comes along if potentially accused is now going to have in front of them this as a defense," said B.J. Bernstein, a former assistant district attorney who is now a defense lawyer in Atlanta. 
"With every mistake they [investigators] make, the more difficult it will be to ultimately find who did this." 
Both Karr and the Ramsey family have strong ties to the Atlanta area. 
JonBenet was born at Northside Hospital before her family moved to Boulder when she was 1. 
Several months after JonBenet's death in 1996, her parents moved back to the area, settling in Vinings. Patsy Ramsey died here in June of ovarian cancer. Both she and JonBenet are buried at St. James Episcopal Cemetery in Marietta. 
Ramsey family members in metro Atlanta just days ago had looked forward to a resolution of the case. "Relieved, relieved, relieved, relieved," was the response at that time of JonBenet's aunt, Paulette Davis. 
Now those hopes are gone. "I don't know what to say," Davis said Monday evening. "I just want to have some quiet time." 
Accounts of Karr's life are somewhat murky, but he spent most or all his first 12 years in metro Atlanta, before moving to Hamilton, Ala., to live with his grandparents. He returned to Georgia after graduating from high school and had several local addresses, including his father's in Atlanta and his mother's in DeKalb County. His second marriage, in 1989, was performed at the Gwinnett County courthouse in Lawrenceville. 
He went back to Alabama in the early 1990s and later moved to Calilfornia. 
Karr's brother, Nate, had insisted since Mark Karr's arrest that authorities had the wrong guy. 
"We're sure he's innocent," Nate Karr said at the time. "We heard that there's good DNA evidence. I hope they can test him as soon as possible so they can exonerate him." 
Monday evening Nate Karr's phone went unanswered, and his voice mail box was full. 
Mark Karr told reporters in Thailand that he was with JonBenet at her Boulder home the night she was killed, and prosecutors' court documents refer to his "repeated admissions." But questions were raised almost immediately about his account. 
"He's obsessed with JonBenet, and like many obsessed people I think he just wanted to be part of the story," speculated Scott Robinson, a Denver attorney who has followed the murder case from the beginning. "I think he wanted to become part of the JonBenet saga ... and boy, he did he ever." 
In documents released Monday by the district attorney's office, it is clear just how obsessed Karr was with the murder --- and why investigators were led to believe he was involved. In e-mails to a University of Colorado journalism professor, Karr said he accidentally asphyxiated JonBenet during sex. 
"Under the circumstances, the DA's office did the right thing to bring him back ... just as they did the right thing to quash the warrant against him right now," Robinson said. 
After Karr's arrest, the Roswell Police Department was lauded for providing unspecified "technical assistance" in the matter. 
"Sometimes it goes your way, sometimes it doesn't," Sgt. James McGee, the department's spokesman, said Monday after hearing the news from Boulder. "It's just one of those things. We deal in probable cause." 
Karr isn't exactly a free man, he noted. 
"California still wants him," McGee said. "He's got some trouble." 

The specter of new terror attacks involving airliners comes at a sensitive time for an industry just now showing signs of recovery from the financial turmoil after 9/11. 
Airline industry experts predicted the economic effect would be limited --- unless more threats emerge or the security clampdown is overzealous. 
"Hopefully we're not going to see a drop in traffic," said James May, president of the Air Transport Association, in a teleconference with reporters. "We've only been into this for 24 hours. It would be entirely premature to speculate." 
Airlines including Atlanta-based Delta, reorganizing in bankruptcy court, will feel a short-term revenue hit from flight cancellations and so-called "book-away" by worried travelers, the experts said. 
"That will right itself next week as long as business travelers have some confidence" that British authorities netted enough would-be terrorists to foil their plot to blow up U.S.-bound jets, said Kevin Mitchell, chairman of the Business Travelers Coalition. 
"The caveat is we don't know the facts yet and we may not for a while and [federal authorities] may keep the onerous restrictions on, and that will hurt Delta," Mitchell said. "What business traveler is going to check his $2,000 laptop?" 
Currently, the most restrictive security rules that ban travelers from taking their computers and other carry-on items apply only to flights from the United Kingdom to the United States --- a popular international market but a tiny percentage of all flights. 
According to a published report, only about 3 percent of the 3,800 daily flights out of the United Kingdom are trans-Atlantic. Delta has seven daily flights to the United Kingdom, including five from Atlanta, out of more than 4,200 daily flights systemwide. 
Delta has boosted international flying this year as part of its strategy to restructure in bankruptcy court. The company has recently shown improved financial results, and an executive said Thursday the airline will "continue to be confident in international markets." 
"We also think customers will continue to have confidence in air travel," said Glen Hauenstein, Delta's executive vice president of network operations, in an e-mail. 
Delta recently said it will buy long-sought flying rights from United Airlines between New York's John F. Kennedy airport and Gatwick airport in London. 
In an e-mail message to corporate travel managers, Mitchell of the Business Travelers Coalition worried that business travelers may be put off by the additional security measures that U.S. and British authorities instituted early Thursday. 
Security check lines in U.S. airports stretched for hours Thursday after all liquids and gels, including drinks and toothpaste, were banned from carry-on bags. Today, the Transportation Security Administration also is expected to start secondary checks at boarding gates, at least on a random basis. 
The Air Transport Association's May said the checks could slow passenger processing but also should instill confidence. "I hope it's going to encourage people to fly," he said. 
Mike Boyd, of the aviation consulting firm the Boyd Group, wasn't as optimistic. 
"The fact that suntan lotion is going to be taken away from people in Omaha doesn't make me feel safer," he said. Airlines will suffer financially "if the hassle factor goes back to the level where it was" shortly after 9/11, he said. 
One part of the industry that could benefit is charter companies that offer business travelers seats on small private planes and a way to bypass clogged airports. 
"I hate to get a benefit from anything as awful as terrorism," said David Lee, founder of AirShares Elite, an Atlanta-based group that operates 50 single-engine, four-seat planes. "But lines that stretch into the parking lot [at Hartsfield-Jackson] and airline delays are good for our business." 
Pat Epps, founder of Epps Aviation at DeKalb-Peachtree Airport, said he didn't expect a surge in new charter business. 
"Airline delays are a plus for us," he said. "They provide another reason for people to consider aircraft charters. But it's a blip. I think the airlines will get back to normal pretty soon." 

"She had a job, a stable job. ... They think it's a suicide because they found a gun in there. Everything is weird. I don't believe it. They have to look for everything." 
Villegas lived with Vasquez's family, renting a tiny bedroom scarcely wider than two outstretched arms. Villegas had been in the United States for about five years, and with the Vasquezes for the last year, said her brother Bulmaro Villegas at her funeral Sunday. 
"We have to leave our country to have the life you want," Bulmaro Villegas said. Lupe's life was "another Mexican dream." 
Villegas was a jokester, fond of singing and dancing, her brother said. "You never knew when she's angry," he said. 
She left her 6-year-old daughter, Manuelita, with her mother and grandmother in Guanajuato, Mexico, to earn better money for her daughter's care. 
Villegas' friends said she picked up odd jobs where she could. One day, she might be putting up dry wall at a strip mall in Norcross. The next day, she might be framing houses. 
She would come to El Rancho Market on Buford Highway to pick up some beers or a snack after work some days. 
"Her clothes would be paint-speckled," said Victor Castaneda, the market owner. "Not only her clothes, but her body, too." 
Villegas earned about $500 a week doing such labor, her brother said. She sent from $300 to $400 of that home. 
But she had recently landed a new job with a housemate, working contract construction jobs. 
Thursday would have been her first day at work, said Roberto Villa-Lobos, a member of the family she was staying with. 
"She was going to go to work with me at 6:30 a.m.," Villa-Lobos said. She had bought new gear for the work --- a tool bag, hammers and measuring tape. "She was so happy."

</text>
