<text id="A37" category="" words="1997" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Risky Business PyongYang isn't about to give up its weapons. The challenge now is to find more effective ways to uncover and squeeze the illicit trade in nuclear technology' Newsweek, October 30, 2006, Pg. 0; 'Death Squads Online: As if things weren't bad" Author="Mark Hosenball and Christopher Dickey; Christian Caryl and Michael Hastings; Owen Matthews and Sami Kohen;" PublicationDate="October 30, 2006; October 16, 2006; July 31, 2006;" SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning;" WebAddress="Nexis UK">

North Korean diplomats on the prowl in Berlin are easy to spot. They wear badges with portraits of "Great Leader" Kim Il Sung--and the more important the official, the bigger the badge. But tracking others suspected of shopping for the technology needed to produce a nuclear weapon is rarely so simple. The supply lines used by the world's proliferators are almost as complex as the weapons themselves, and neither the United Nations' nuclear watchdog, the International Atomic Energy Agency, nor the intelligence services of the United States and other powers--let alone the international legal system--can fully meet the challenge.

"We are still grappling with the clandestine network we discovered a few years back," IAEA Director General Mohamed ElBaradei told a conference on nuclear safeguards at the organization's Vienna headquarters last week. "When we know now that on a CD-ROM you have designs for centrifuges [capable of enriching uranium to weapons-grade], and possibly even weapons design, that makes you very worried."

U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice was in Asia last week trying to persuade leaders in South Korea and China to enforce U.N. sanctions against Pyongyang for its Oct. 9 nuclear test, but the chances of the Great Leader's son, Kim Jong Il, voluntarily giving up his nation's nukes are slim at best. The challenge now is to prevent the North's program from advancing, and to stop Kim from selling his scientists' know-how to terrorists or other states. Equally important is the job of blocking the shadowy civilian suppliers of nuclear technology, who are even harder to track. Last week ElBaradei warned that in addition to the nine countries known or strongly suspected to be nuclear-weapons states, including North Korea, an additional 30 could have the technology to build the bomb "in a very short time."

AQ Khan, the "father" of Pakistan's nuclear-weapons program, spawned the first generation of atomic death mer-chants in the 1980s, supplying expertise, designs and parts for profit. His suppliers played a direct role in building up the nuclear programs of Libya, Iran and North Korea. But even with Khan under watch at home in Pakistan and supposedly out of business, the illicit traffic in nuclear technology continues. "The system [is] a moving target all the time," said ElBaradei.
 
Some of the news is good, according to IAEA investigators in Vienna, and it's important to keep that in mind amid the many scary headlines. "Suitcase bombs" and other imagined devices expected to show up on the atomic black market after the breakup of the Soviet empire have never actually surfaced. Without such ready-made weapons, the chances are slight that any terrorist organization, even Al Qaeda, could pull off a nuclear attack. Criminals have also found it impossible to get their hands on significant quantities of the "fissile materials"--plutonium or highly enriched uranium--needed for the core of a bomb. The database of the IAEA's Security Division, which tracks cases of stolen, missing and intercepted nuclear materials going back to 1993, is largely a record of scams, most of them quite clumsy, and none of them involving nearly enough material to make a nu-clear weapon.

Still, though rolling up the AQ Khan network was a noteworthy victory, that investigation was plagued by miscommunications, blown covers and legal confusions that will have to be resolved if there are to be further successes. A case in point: the area around Haag, Switzerland, near the Liechtenstein border, holds a collection of precision-engineering firms known among investigators as Vacuum Tube Valley. Friedrich Tinner, an owner or player in several of these companies and a longtime acquaintance of Khan's, denies charges he intentionally helped produce components for clandestine nuclear programs. But one of his sons, Urs Tinner, is alleged to have played a pivotal role: first by making vital parts for Libya's secret nuclear program, then as an informant for the CIA, helping to expose it.

Urs Tinner's story began in the 1990s, according to U.S. and European officials who worked closely with the CIA's efforts to penetrate these operations. Those sources (asking not to be named because of the sensitive subject) say U.S. intelligence gained potential leverage over the Tinners in the late 1990s, when Urs ran afoul of French authorities. One of the French security services tipped off the Americans.

Urs went to work for Scomi Precision Engineering (SCOPE), a company set up in Malaysia by Khan associates to produce high-tech components, ostensibly for use in the oil industry. Urs supervised production of pieces for centrifuges, according to a detailed report issued by the Malaysian police in 2004. The components were loaded on the BBC China, a Libya-bound ship, which was inter-cepted in October 2003 by a team of U.S. and other agents. Within weeks, Libyan leader Muammar Kaddafi, his operations now exposed, ended his nuclear program and gave up a trove of intelligence about his suppliers. The incident remains the biggest counterproliferation coup on record.

The CIA kept its eye on Urs, along with his brother Marco and their father, the intelligence officials say. But a few months after the BBC China bust, German border police arrested and jailed Urs, apparently unaware of his CIA ties, and then extradited him to Switzerland, where Marco and Friedrich were later picked up. The old man was freed, but his sons remain in detention, pending possible charges under a Swiss law banning traffic in nuclear technology from Swiss soil.

Before the arrests, the brothers denied any wrongdoing. A family spokes-man said Urs had worked for SCOPE but had no idea that parts were going to Libya. The CIA declines to comment on the case. What's clear is that the Tinners are now useless, either as moles or as surveillance targets, to investigators trying to discover where AQ Khan's seeds of destruction might still be sprouting.

With the potential danger of nuclear proliferation so great, a more organized approach to stopping it clearly is needed. The IAEA is neither a spy agency nor a police force; it is an international organization answerable to the same countries it is supposed to be inspecting. To gain more flexibility, the Bush administration launched what it calls the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) in 2003. It is "not a treaty-based approach," says the State Department, but rather a cooperative effort among willing nations to fight the spread of nuclear weapons. Some of the PSI's most successful actions have been to freeze bank accounts around the world that belong to known or suspected proliferators.

The IAEA would quickly be overwhelmed if it tried on its own to track all the potential traffic in "dual use" technologies that might, or might not, be used to make nuclear components. (Hence, national laws against dual-technology exports are a crucial supplement to the IAEA's work.) "One has to be careful not to wind up counting nuts and bolts and valves," says a Vienna-based diplomat who watches proliferation issues closely but is not authorized to speak on the record. "It will suffocate you." New or improved technologies can help, from data mining programs to better explore the vast array of information that the Internet has made available, to satellite imaging, air sampling and isotope analysis. But the mission remains excruciatingly difficult. Still, those who make it their life's work know that it's a job that has to be done--and done better, today, than ever before.;

Not long ago, Mohammed Kika found out that his name had appeared on a London-based Web site run by Sunni exiles from Iraq. The Baghdad man was accused of betraying other Sunnis to a Shiite militia in the mixed neighborhood of Mansour, receiving a $200 bounty for each one he identified. The posting even disclosed the name of the barbershop where Kika could be found. He ran for his life, friends and family told NEWSWEEK. At first he hid out in the Shiite neighborhood of Karrada, and then he fled the country.

Iraq's sectarian war is spreading onto the Web. Some Iraqis, like Kika, have been forced into hiding or exile after being targeted on the Internet. Others may have run too slowly. Sunni and Shiite Web sites offer warnings to Iraqis about neighborhoods and ministries that may have been infiltrated by militias, but the sites are also increasingly used as tools by those seeking names, addresses and occupations of citizens to kill. (NEWSWEEK has found at least eight of these sites, but we have decided not to publish their Web addresses.) The outings are openly endorsed by some Iraqi leaders. Jalal al-Din Saghir, an influential Shiite cleric and parliamentary deputy, sponsors several sites. "Some of the Web sites can be used to catch spies by tracking their movements," he told NEWSWEEK.

Rising sectarian violence has become the No. 1 threat to Iraq's stability, with more than 2,500 Iraqis killed violently in September. Much of the killing is linked to death squads in Iraq's heavily Shiite police force, an agency that would scarcely exist without U.S. training and funding. Last week the U.S. military removed an entire Iraqi national police brigade from duty after American soldiers received reports that the unit was involved in death-squad activities. Military investigators are tracing possible links to the notorious Mahdi Army militia, which is believed to be running Shiite death squads in Baghdad. Efforts to build a reliable Iraqi police force seem nearly hopeless anyway: this summer alone the Interior Ministry reportedly fired at least 1,700 bad cops.

And the violence in the streets keeps getting nastier. Until recently, death threats in Iraq arrived the old-fashioned way--a flier found on a family's doorstep, warning them to leave the neighborhood or suffer the consequences. Now Iraq's sectarian killers have discovered the anonymity and long reach of the Internet.

Sunni sites provide Arabic-speaking users with a place to swap information--true or not--about alleged collaborators with Shiite death squads in Baghdad. One site's Iraqi correspondents write in with news and views--as well as exposés of corrupt officials or snitches alleged to be aiding the death squads. One of the site's organizers, Ali Ahmad, denies that he promotes violence with his site, and says he just "publishes information to fill a vacuum that the authorities can't. People can't go to the police," says the 48-year-old, an Iraqi exile and British citizen. Last week the site published a warning "not to go to the Ministry of Higher Education to accept fellowships, because it is a trap by a death squad." Another site lists more than 300 names, birthdays and locations of suspected Shiite militia members. Shiites have sites of their own, where believers are urged to avenge suicide car-bomb attacks by slaughtering Sunnis. "Let's torture them and don't be silent," wrote one recent poster.

The U.S. military tries to monitor the e-traffic, hoping to head off the killers. But the stepped-up drive against the death squads is tough on both sides: last week at least 13 U.S. troops were killed in Baghdad, one of the city's worst weeks for Americans since the war began. More bad weeks may be ahead as the fight continues. One post last week offered advice to members of the Mahdi Army on how to avoid capture by U.S. forces. "Don't wear black," the writer advised, referring to the standard Mahdi Army uniform. Other tips: "Hide your weapons," don't stand in groups, and "never admit you're a member of the militia." Just what Iraq needs: online hints for sectarian butchers.; 

Israel launched airstrikes on Lebanon in response to attacks by Hizbullah earlier this month, and George W. Bush called it "self-defense." But what to tell the Turks, who over the last week lost 15 sol-diers to terror attacks launched by sepa-ratist Kurds from neighboring Iraq? Many Turkish leaders are pressing for cross-border tactical air assaults on the guerrillas. But Bush, fearing yet another escalation of the Middle East's violence, urged Prime Minister Recep Tayyip to hold off. "The message was, unilateral action isn't going to be helpful," says a senior U.S. official, describing the 15-minute phone conversation. "The president asked for patience."

</text>
