<text id="B02" category="" words="2003" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Risky prescription: Doctors with ties' Miami Herald, December 22, 2006, 30A; 'Fix juvenile justice's 'broken' system' Miami Herald, March 29, 2007, 24A; 'Lawmakers should get priorities straight,  OUR OPINION: FINISH INSURANCE REFORMS BEFORE TACKLING TAXE" Author="N/A; N/A; N/A; N/A; CAROL MARBIN MILLER AND MARY ELLEN KLAS" PublicationDate="December 22, 2006; March 29, 2007; April 27, 2007; April 27, 2007;  January 11, 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="http://nl.newsbank.com and http://miamiherald.com">

OUR OPINION: PATIENTS NEED MORE DISCLOSURE, STRICT CONFLICT RULES When a doctor gives advice to a patient, there should not be even a smidgen of doubt that the advice is based primarily on what is best for the patient. Yet conflict rules are so lax that doctors often have relationships - personal or financial - with laboratories, drug companies, medical suppliers and others that could affect their advice to patients or, heaven forbid, the medical outcome of the drugs or procedures they recommend. Girlfriend hired This is why the situation with University of Miami cardiologist Alberto Interian Jr., who is romantically involved with a sales representative of a company that sells heart-implant devices, is so disturbing. A Miami Herald story last week described how Dr. Interian asked vendors of different brands of the device to hire his girlfriend - and appeared to shift business to the company that agreed. Audits by UM and by Jackson Memorial Hospital, where Dr. Interian also practices, documented a sharp rise in sales of the device to the company the woman represented. Investigators for the Miami-Dade County Commission on Ethics and Public Trust found that the relationship constituted ``unethical behavior.'' However, the commission didn't file a formal complaint because it lacks jurisdiction to discipline a UM employee. As for UM, the school has demoted Dr. Interian and has since tightened its ethics rules. UM's policy now discourages personal relationships that can create a potential conflict. In a telephone conversation, Dr. Interian adamantly defended his behavior, saying that he disclosed the personal relationship to Jackson officials. Besides, he said, ``Most of my patients know about the relationship . . . and they haven't said a thing about it.'' Dr. Interian is a well-known and highly regarded expert in cardiac-rhythm ailments. His situation points out how difficult it can be to separate a doctor's personal interests from the interests of patients. Patients are likely to develop a bond with their doctor, and to trust him, long before they ever become aware of a doctor's financial connections or personal ties with vendors and drug companies. Financial reward This is why it is important for medical gatekeepers - hospitals, medical associations, healthcare providers, state and federal governments and the doctors themselves - to identify and discourage potential conflicts and require that doctors disclose their personal and financial ties. UM is not alone in trying to fashion policies - albeit belatedly in this instance - that regulate doctors' behavior. Reformers and healthcare providers nationwide worry that a doctor's advice might be influenced more by the potential of a financial reward than what is best for patients. Doctors interact with patients when they are desperate, sick, in pain or otherwise vulnerable. Patients need the protection of greater disclosure and tougher ethics rules.


Not long after Gov. Charlie Crist appointed him to head the state's Department of Juvenile Justice, Walt McNeil put himself on the record as recognizing what many advocates for troubled youths have long known. DJJ Secretary McNeil said that the state's juvenile-justice system is ''broken'' and needs fixing. Mr. McNeil, a former Tallahassee police chief, has an uphill challenge.
Perennially underfunded
Part of the problem is that the DJJ -- which contracts 85 percent of its programs to private providers -- has been perennially underfunded. Last year the Legislature identified a $100 million deficit in DJJ's budget and allocated an extra $21 million, which upgraded salaries and benefits of providers' direct-care staff. A study found that the turnover rate for these staffers was 55 percent, prompting a crisis for providers. Some of DJJ's requests for proposals have drawn no bidders or have been canceled because of a lack of experienced bidders. The reason is money, or lack thereof. Though the Legislature faces a revenue shortfall this year, it should not forget the remaining $79 million deficit at DJJ. Advocates, acknowledging the shortfall, are asking for $45 million new dollars for next year.
One way you know that DJJ needs fixing is that, even though violent crime overall is down, the state has one of the country's highest rates of trying juveniles in adult court. If DJJ were more effective at turning around troubled youth, fewer of them would be committing new crimes serious enough, or frequently enough, to land them in adult court. So while more money would help DJJ, Mr. McNeil needs to identify the most effective treatment and rehabilitation programs and be sure they are emphasized.
Also, laws passed in reaction to a 1990s crime wave that included several killings of tourists by teenagers toughened up the state's attitude toward juvenile delinquents. It's time to revisit some of those changes.
• Restore judges' authority to decide if a juvenile should be tried as an adult. Right now, state prosecutors make this choice. While most prosecutors act responsibly and judiciously in bringing adult charges against a juvenile, a judge should ultimately decide the youth's fate in court. A judge should also determine a juvenile's competency to stand trial.
• Restore blended sentencing, in which a judge can impose a combination of juvenile and adult sentences for a juvenile who may have gotten in trouble one too many times, but appears salvageable. The adult sentence could be withheld as an incentive for the youth to stick with the juvenile program and straighten up.
The goal is twofold: public safety, of course, but also taking steps to intervene and rehabilitate juvenile offenders before they become career criminals.



Up in Tallahassee, it's beginning to look a lot like 2006. With only a week left in the regular session, tough issues like property- tax reform and insurance reform remain tied up in knots. With each passing day, it becomes more likely that any resolution will be a hurried, half-baked affair. Lawmakers shouldn't let this happen -- again.
Floridians literally can't afford a replay of last year's session, when the most pressing issue -- wind- storm-insurance reform -- was left for the last day. Predictably, the final version failed to provide any real relief from exorbitantly high rates. Legislators came back home with lame excuses: Well, you see, we were handed a bill on the last day of the session on a take-it- or-leave-it basis and, gosh, we had no choice but to vote in favor of it because we were told it was the best the leadership could do. Special session
In the end, homeowners had to wait almost an entire year until newly inaugurated Gov. Charlie Crist called a special session in January that led to the first real rollback in rates in well over a decade. But that does not mean that Florida's insurance system has been fixed. Important issues, such as expanding the state- run insurance company's ability to compete with private companies, were left for this session. And wouldn't you know it? With only days to go in the regular session, that little item hasn't been resolved yet.
Understandably, property-tax reform has received much more attention this year because Florida's tax structure hasn't been overhauled in nearly 20 years. Some version of tax reform is likely to be approved in the next few days, but it should not be pushed forward at the last minute if the House and Senate are at odds, which is where things stand as of today. Senate has doubts
The House version provides far more "relief," but relies on a provision that would try to compensate for eliminating property taxes by raising sales taxes. The Senate has its doubts, which we share. If there is no agreement, it would not be the end of the world because the Taxation and Budget Reform Commission is examining the issue and could come up with its own thoughtful recommendations.
Insurance reform, however, can't wait. There's already been one special session, and Gov. Crist is unlikely to call another. A ''glitch bill'' that fixes the more obvious problems in the reforms approved earlier this year -- such as mandating that all claims be paid within 90 days -- still awaits final action. So does another bill that deals with improvements in Citizens Property Insurance.
We are just five weeks away from the onset of a hurricane season that promises to be active. That should be incentive enough to make insurance reform a priority for state lawmakers.


The mess at Broward County's ChildNet could be worse in only one way: It could involve harm to some of the 1,000-plus young charges of the private foster-care agency.
But so far, at least, the mounting problems involve job abuses -- charges of theft and fraud and unqualified workers -- but no child abuse. There could be more trouble ahead, though. The FBI served search warrants at ChildNet's offices this month but hasn't revealed its investigation's target. Acrimonious relations
The Department of Children &amp; Families pays ChildNet $65 million a year to operate the county's foster-care system. ChildNet is one of 20 private agencies in the state created four years ago to take over Florida's troubled foster care. State- wide performance has been mixed, but ChildNet was considered one of the better agencies. Nevertheless, relations between DCF and ChildNet have been acrimonious at times. In light of ChildNet's disappointing miscues, more accountability and transparency from these agencies are needed -- and DCF must sharpen its oversight without becoming overbearingly bureaucratic toward the private caregivers.
In testimony before the Florida Senate Children and Families Committee Tuesday, DCF Secretary Bob Butterworth blamed Peter Balitsaris, ChildNet's CEO until he was fired by the agency's board on April 13 after an internal investigation uncovered many irregularities. "The CEO was not accountable. Every time we tried to get information, we were turned down. We were concerned they were not meeting the [standards] we were supposed to meet," Mr. Butterworth told the committee.
Could DCF have tried harder to obtain information? Perhaps. Certainly, though, ChildNet violated hiring standards. Two recently fired employees in charge of facilities management and security have extensive criminal records -- one was imprisoned for manslaughter. There are charges of theft of $6,000 in Wal-Mart gift cards intended for foster children and an agency computer that contained sensitive information. There are also suspicions that someone took kickbacks from an auto shop that didn't repair ChildNet vehicles it contracted to fix. 
CFO is fired
Personnel problems traveled around ChildNet's food chain. Its CFO, also fired by the board, is accused of submitting falsified invoices to the DCF for illegal payments. Some 20 ChildNet workers may have invalid or suspended driver licenses, disqualifying them from transporting children.
ChildNet, which had shown much promise, needs new professional leadership and a housecleaning. At the same time, the DCF needs to find the right oversight balance for the foster caregivers -- as in vigilance but not oppression.

The sudden death of an apparently healthy Panama City teen at a military-style youth lockup prompted a prominent South Florida lawmaker to demand Tuesday that the controversial programs be shut down, while state officials say they will reexamine the policies that allow the use of physical force against children in state care.
Martin Lee Anderson, 14, who stopped breathing less than three hours after being admitted to the Bay County Sheriff's boot camp last week, is the most recent Florida child to die in the custody of state youth corrections officials under questionable circumstances.
"These places are terrible, they have been shown to be unsuccessful, and they should be shut down, " said state Rep. Gustavo "Gus" Barreiro, a Miami Beach Republican who chairs the House Criminal Justice Appropriations Committee, and heads a separate committee that is investigating the treatment of youth in state care. "I think they should be eliminated."
The Department of Juvenile Justice, which contracts with counties to operate the boot camps, will review all the sheriff's offices' policies, said Cynthia Lorenzo, a DJJ spokeswoman in Tallahassee. Lorenzo declined to discuss the case.
Said Rep. Dan Gelber, a Miami Beach Democrat also on the oversight committee: "How is it that we are incapable of simply preserving the lives we are entrusted with?"

</text>
