<text id="B04" category="" words="2012" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Putin's Gas Squeeze.' The Wall Street Journal, 3 January 2006, p. A24; 'Cancer Prognosis.' The Wall Street Journal, 23 February 2006, p. A16; 'The Somali Stakes.' The Wall Street Journal, 28 December 2006, p. A14." Author="N/A" PublicationDate="3 January 2006;  23 February 2006; 28 December 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; End" WebAddress="Factiva">

Vladimir Putin certainly has a flair for timing. The Russian President is assuming the chairmanship of the G-8 democratic nations in the same week that he's been attempting some Soviet-style energy extortion against Ukraine.
Moscow has been demanding a nearly fivefold price increase for the natural gas it sells Ukraine. As these "negotiations" proceeded, the Kremlin bought up future gas supplies from Turkmenistan, limiting Kiev's access to alternative sources. When Ukraine refused to bend, Russia cut off all supplies on January 1, apparently including the contracted delivery of Turkmen gas to Ukraine that runs via pipeline through Russian territory.
The Kremlin's real goal here isn't money so much as political influence over its democratic, free-thinking and formerly subservient Slavic neighbor. A year ago Ukraine's Viktor Yushchenko used his "Orange Revolution" to defeat the Kremlin's handpicked presidential candidate and turn toward the West. The energy squeeze is Mr. Putin's attempt at revenge, notably coming less than three months before Ukraine's parliamentary elections.
Russia's claim that it is only seeking "fair market prices" would be plausible if a market existed. Ukraine pays prices well below the international average, but gas, unlike oil, is not heavily traded and global comparisons are not very useful. Russia's Gazprom is a government monopoly that can set prices however it desires, with preferences going to customers that are the friendliest to Moscow (Belarus).
By cutting off supply, Moscow is also violating its contractual obligations. In the summer of 2004, Russia and Ukraine agreed on the current pricing framework until 2009. But that deal was intended to boost the presidential aspirations of Ukraine's Viktor Yanukovych, Moscow's favored candidate, who lost to Mr. Yushchenko.
Mr. Putin's new gas squeeze could also damage Gazprom customers in the European Union. He is warning Ukraine not to siphon off gas destined for Europe, but if Europe's supplies are in danger, Russia is to blame. Ukraine says it is entitled to 15% of gas that goes through its pipelines in lieu of transit fees from Gazprom. And so far at least, Mr. Putin isn't getting much support in Europe. Germany's new government has blamed Moscow, and yesterday Russia reacted to that criticism by saying it would pump more gas through the pipeline to accommodate Europeans suffering an especially cold winter.
While this may end the immediate crisis, it doesn't end the larger problem that is Mr. Putin's policy arc both at home and abroad. The Russian President has concentrated political and economic power in the Kremlin by renationalizing the country's vast energy resources, and David Satter chronicles other anti-democratic trends nearby (See related editorial, WSJ Jan. 3, 2006).
Last week, the free-market economist Andrei Illarionov resigned as the Kremlin's economic adviser in protest at Mr. Putin's attack on Russian democracy, and he compared Russia's demands on Ukraine to Nazi and Soviet ultimatums on the eve of World War II. A year ago, Mr. Putin called the demise of the Soviet empire the "greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the century." He has since been acting as someone who wants to restore some version of that empire.
All of which makes Russia's assumption of the G-8 presidency this month both ironic and insulting to its fellow members. Moscow's inclusion has never been justified on economic grounds but was intended to promote democratic reform in a country that retains a huge nuclear arsenal. Perhaps the engineers of that G-8 policy, including President Bush, are now beginning to see that they made a mistake.

It didn't attract a lot of media fanfare, but two weeks ago the National Center for Health Statistics announced some spectacular news. The number of Americans dying from cancer fell for the first time in decades. This achievement against one of mankind's most dreaded diseases is the medical equivalent of putting a man on the moon.
Just a few years ago health officials warned of an epidemic of U.S. cancer deaths. One and a half million Americans will be diagnosed with the disease this year. And with a toll of half a million deaths a year, cancer is still one of the leading killers in America -- partly because death rates from infectious diseases have fallen precipitously over the past century. But the National Cancer Institute rightly hails the new data as "powerful evidence" that "we are on the right track to eliminating the death and suffering due to cancer."
For women, two of the most deadly forms of the disease -- lung and breast cancer -- are being successfully treated. For men, death from 11 of the 15 most common forms of cancer are on the decline, including prostate, colon, kidney, lung and leukemia. Perhaps the best news is that the National Institutes of Health reports that "childhood cancer showed some of the largest improvement in survival rates over the past 20 years."
Especially stunning is that fatalities are falling even though Americans are living longer. Cancer is a degenerative disease, meaning that the likelihood of contracting one of its multiple forms rises exponentially with age. So when statisticians age-adjust the death rate data -- and ask the question: What is the likelihood of an American dying from cancer at any given age? -- they find that cancer deaths have been falling by 1% per year since 1991. If that trend continues, our children will face a 25% lower risk of dying from cancer (at any given age) than we do today.
In the early 1960s, the five-year survival rate from cancer was about one in three. Today it is two in three -- and continuing to climb. Incidentally, although we hear a lot about the "health gap" among the races, the biggest gains in treating cancer have been for black Americans. Their cancer survival rate has doubled in 40 years (see nearby chart).
Why is cancer death falling? One leading reason has been the positive health effects from a decline in smoking. Tobacco use has tumbled by about half since the 1964 Surgeon General's report on the health hazards of smoking. The other major factors are early detection and better treatment. Both are the result of medical innovation funded by government, private donations, and profit-making bio-medical and pharmaceutical companies. Colonoscopies, mammograms and other tests are more widely publicized and utilized. And new drug therapies, less punishing and invasive than surgery or chemotherapy, have been developed thanks to the incentives of a private medical marketplace.
This is in marked contrast to the anti-cancer record of government-run health systems elsewhere in the world. As Michael Tanner, health-care expert at the Cato Institute, notes: "Because cancer is a slow moving and expensive disease to treat, it is not cost-effective under socialized medicine to treat the disease too aggressively. This saves governments money but at a high human cost."
The statistics bear out Mr. Tanner's point. Only about one in five men with prostate cancer in the U.S. will die from it. But, according to a study by the Commonwealth Fund, about 57% of British men, and nearly half of French and German men, will do so. In Britain only 40% of cancer patients are even permitted to see an oncologist to treat the disease. Two-thirds of Canadian provinces report sending their colon cancer patients to the U.S. for treatment. Government-run medical systems can be as cruel to cancer patients as the cancer itself.
One myth about cancer is that our industrial society is pumping poisons into the air and water that put us at ever greater risk of cancer. But studies indicate that about 2% of cancer diagnoses are a result of environmental pollutants. Air and water quality have dramatically improved over the past 30 years, and air pollution carcinogens are down by 54% nationwide, according to Environmental Protection Agency data. Only 4% of cancers are a result of occupational hazards, despite lawsuits from such things as exposure to asbestos. Economic growth and the freedom that produces it are reducing, rather than increasing, cancer risks.
We haven't yet won the race for a cure, but we are on the road to winning. Amid all of the criticism of the American medical system, this is progress to be savored by cancer survivors and their loved ones -- and understood by policy makers who want the progress to continue.

Here America's strategic interests are very much engaged, even if the actors in the fight range, morally speaking, from the unpalatable to the unacceptable.
Among the unpalatables is the increasingly autocratic Meles Zenawi, Ethiopia's prime minister of 15 years, who has deployed as many as 20,000 troops in neighboring Somalia and may soon control its capital, Mogadishu. Mr. Zenawi claims to be acting on behalf of Somalia's internationally recognized but weak Transitional Federal Government (TFG), which was barely holding on in the regional city of Baidoa until Ethiopia's intervention.
The TFG is led by Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, another strongman-in-waiting whose resume includes stints as president (first elected, later self-declared) of the breakaway northern Somali province of Puntland. Also in the anti-Islamist mix is the so-called Alliance for the Restoration of Peace and Counter-Terrorism, a coalition of Somali warlords reportedly backed by the CIA with suitcases of cash on the theory they were more likely to keep the Islamists at bay than were the TFG.
On the opposite side are the Islamists, a.k.a. the Islamic Courts Union (ICU). Since wresting control over Mogadishu from the warlords, the ICU has managed to pacify parts of the country, which some might say is a net plus for Somalis. But its methods are reminiscent of the Taliban, which also brought a sort of peace to Afghanistan. The ICU threatens to behead anyone who fails to pray five times a day.
Among the ICU's leaders is one Hassan Dahir Aweys, previously of the Saudi-funded, al Qaeda-connected al-Itihaad al-Islamiya terrorist group. Mr. Aweys was named a terrorist by the U.S. as far back as 2001, and his outfit is thought to be connected to the 1998 bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. The extent to which the Islamic Courts Union is assisting al Qaeda or its offshoots is a matter of dispute. But there's no doubt it is now recruiting jihadis from around the world to its cause.
Such are the opposing sides in this conflict, and it's clear that U.S. interests would be well-served by the ICU's collapse. Less clear is how to bring that about, how to do so without sparking a wider war, and how to bring some semblance of order to the country.
Eritrea, long at war with Ethiopia, has sent its own contingent of troops to aid the ICU, Saudi Arabia has pledged support, and al Qaeda bigwig Ayman al-Zawahiri has called Somalia "the southern garrison of Islam." While the ICU might easily be routed by Ethiopia in a conventional test of arms, it will be much more difficult to defeat as a guerrilla or terrorist force.
No outside powers are likely to risk a repeat of the disastrous U.N. mission to Somalia of the early 1990s. So probably the best the U.S. can do is give tacit support to Ethiopia's incursion while using its leverage with Mr. Zenawi to demand that he agree to the U.N. demarcated border with Eritrea. The U.S. provides Ethiopia with economic as well as substantial military assistance.
In return, the Eritreans might be persuaded to cease their support for the ICU. The U.S. could also condition material support for a future TFG government in Mogadishu on its recognition of the autonomy of Puntland and neighboring Somaliland, which adjoins U.S.-allied Djibouti and has been relatively free of ICU interference. As with the former Yugoslavia, addressing the problem that is Somalia might ultimately mean breaking up that large country into smaller bits.
There is a material limit to what the U.S. can do for East Africa, and expectations for what the region can and will do it for itself cannot be high. Still, the Ethiopian offensive against Islamic Courts is an act of regional hygiene that we can hope is able to contain radical Islam from spreading to a far larger swath of Africa.

</text>
