<text id="B16" category="" words="2010" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'The George Pataki Era' The New York Times, 31 December 2006, Pg. 9; 'Welcome Political Cover' The New York Times, 7 December 2006, Pg 38; 'An Assault on Local School Control' The New York Times, 4 December 2006, Pg 24; " Author="n/a; n/a; n/a; " PublicationDate=" 31 December 2006; 7 December 2006; 4 December 2006; " SampledFrom="All; All; All; " WebAddress="Factiva ">

Most politicians are fortunate if they're remembered for one good thing. In the case of Gov. George Pataki, that will almost surely be his work for the environment. Mr. Pataki has earned his badge as an environmental governor by protecting wilderness, adding riverside parks, creating coalitions for cleaner air and alternative fuels and, most recently, announcing the fulfillment of his pledge to add one million acres of land to the public estate. 

That is no small legacy. But beyond the environment, Mr. Pataki's dozen years in office have produced mixed results. In many critical areas, his best efforts bump up against disappointing failures. What follows is an attempt to catalog the Pataki record at the end of his three terms. It is an early assessment, one that is bound to change over time. 

Reform 

There is a reason so many candidates ran for office this year promising reform in Albany: under Mr. Pataki, reform was a talking point, not a doing point. He had co-conspirators in the State Legislature. But failure began at the top. When Mr. Pataki assumed command in January 1995, he promised a full-throated revolution in state government. Instead, Albany suffered little more than a hiccup. 

The year 2002 provided a disheartening example. Every decade, New York's governor has one golden opportunity to effect change in a major way. That is when he is called upon to give his approval to redistricting and decide whether state legislators should be forced to compete for their jobs or be allowed to create weirdly shaped districts whose only purpose is to protect incumbents. Mr. Pataki could have demanded a fairer system. Instead, he signed another incumbent-protection plan, guaranteeing 10 more years of governmental dysfunction. 

Mr. Pataki's preference for confining his reform impulses to the realm of oratory was perhaps most pronounced when it came to campaign finance reform. Every year, he demanded restrictions on the power of big-money special interests to buy favors at election time; every year, the effort fizzled. By 2005, public and media pressure had inspired a few, first step reforms. But even then, Mr. Pataki wound up lagging behind the outcry, not leading it. 

It's not easy to remember, but this was a governor who came into office promising a new day and an open door. He left a system so hard to penetrate that his quarters in the State Capitol were known as Fort Pataki. 

Health Care 

Here the record is better. Mr. Pataki expanded Child Health Plus and created Family Health Plus, important entitlement programs offering care for many who could not otherwise afford it. He also pushed for the deregulation of hospitals. 

While the governor did not have the power to reduce the size of an unwieldy health care system himself, he and others in Albany came up with a good end run, creating a commission whose recommendations would automatically become law unless the Legislature actively rejected the whole package. The result was a plan to close, merge and downsize hospitals and nursing homes. 

Crime 

Mr. Pataki puts crime-fighting at the top of his own bragging list. He pushed over 100 bills that toughened laws and lengthened prison sentences. New Yorkers will be arguing for years about whether these laws actually led to lower crime rates. New York's crime rate has dropped and New York City is now ranked as the safest big city in the country. At a minimum, Mr. Pataki will have to share the credit with others -- mainly New York City's mayors and police. 

Budget 

Mr. Pataki came into office vowing to cut taxes, and on this he delivered. But as we have seen in Washington, it is fairly easy to persuade legislative bodies to cut taxes as long as they are not forced to restrain spending, too. Mr. Pataki may have wished for such restraint but he had neither the skill nor political muscle to achieve it. New York State's budget has almost doubled on his watch, from about $62 billion in 1995 to over $114 billion this year. Long-term debt has almost doubled as well, soaring to $50 billion, and budget gaps of $3 billion to $4 billion a year could confront the next governor. 

Mr. Pataki has also allowed the state to commit a fiscal conservative's top mortal sin: borrowing to pay for continuing operating costs. These are the kinds of numbers that opponents will have a field day with if he moves into the presidential scrum. 

Consolidating Power 

Much of Mr. Pataki's tenure was spent in budget fights with state legislators of both parties who, despite partisan differences, were united in a common desire to lavish money on their own favorite causes. In the end, a frustrated Mr. Pataki used a court ruling to seize control over the budget -- and thus most of the state's business -- from the Legislature. Mr. Pataki and his staff have so whittled away the Legislature's budgetary powers that even those who approve of a strong governor have begun to recognize a case of overkill. 

Lower Manhattan 

The prime example of the strengths and weaknesses of Mr. Pataki's executive style is the rebuilding of Lower Manhattan after Sept. 11. 

The governor chose excellent leaders for the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation. But he did not feel compelled to follow their advice. When the decision came down to one of two first-rate master plans being considered for ground zero and the area around it, Mr. Pataki demanded Daniel Libeskind's and won the day. 

A second veto was less admirable. He melted in the face of criticism from a few vocal members of the victims' families and their supporters and killed off plans for an International Freedom Center, bowing to concerns that the center's mandate to encourage discussion might lead to debate about controversial ideas. Most troubling of all was the way Mr. Pataki's focus on the city's emotional rebuilding seemed to ebb and flow. He was not always there when he was needed. As criticism mounted, he would eventually appear and often do the right thing. But the lag times hurt. 

Towards the end, Mr. Pataki pushed for tangible evidence that he had made his mark on ground zero. On Dec. 19, 12 days before leaving office, he celebrated the first column of the Freedom Tower with an emotional declaration that the steel ''rises from the ashes of September 11.'' If there was a sigh of relief in the Pataki household that something was finally happening at the World Trade Center site, there must also have been a sigh outside as well. 

At moments when leadership was needed, this was a governor whose performance was always adequate. It is hardly the kind of summation that makes for a political legend, but New Yorkers are well aware that it is possible to do worse. ; 

When President Bush insisted that the Iraq Study Group would not provide cover for the White House to chart a ''graceful exit'' of American troops, he was missing the whole point. The much-anticipated report from the bipartisan panel is precisely about political cover. That is a good thing, if only Mr. Bush has the sense to embrace it. 

Iraq is so far gone that nobody expected the panel to come up with a breakthrough solution. As the co-chairmen -- former Secretary of State James Baker and former Representative Lee Hamilton -- began their letter accompanying yesterday's report, ''there is no magic formula to solve the problems of Iraq.'' And the study was never going to change the basic facts: there is no victory to be had in Iraq, and however American troops withdraw, they will leave behind a deadly mess. 

Its real mission was to avert the worst scenario, in which a stubborn George W. Bush spends the next two years blindly insisting he will accept nothing short of victory, while Iraq keeps spiraling out of control and the Iraqis get no closer to being able to contain the chaos after the Americans leave. 

That is a recipe for years more of savagery, a spillover of terrorism and instability across the Middle East, more sacrifice of American soldiers and more cynicism and division among the American people. Avoiding it is not the same as winning the war, but it is a way to cut one's losses. 

If Mr. Bush has the capacity to seriously reassess his Iraq strategy, he will need exactly the kind of political cover that the Baker-Hamilton group was meant to provide. The central point of the group's 79 unanimous recommendations is that Washington should focus far more aggressively on training Iraqi forces and prepare for a withdrawal of American troops. The report says all combat brigades could be out by early 2008, but that would still leave tens of thousands of soldiers behind to hold the Iraqi Army together. 

That is to be combined with a lot more pressure on the Iraqis to make political compromises and take responsibility for their own security (the report lays out clear milestones and says the United States should reduce its military and economic support if the Iraqis resist) and more aggressive regional diplomacy, including talks with Iran and Syria that Mr. Bush has ruled out. 

Make no mistake, the report is a stunning indictment of Mr. Bush's failure -- in Iraq and no less in Washington. But its recommendations are still couched in language vague enough to allow the president to pretend it is the ''new way forward'' his aides are now talking up, rather than a timetable for withdrawal, which is on Mr. Bush's no-go list. Predictably, the first reaction of Tony Snow, the White House spokesman, was to insist that ''there is nothing in here about pulling back militarily.'' 

The world has watched as Mr. Bush painted himself into a corner and then insisted it was a strategic decision. Even the Iraqis are trying to provide cover to for him to come tiptoeing back to the real world. Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki's call for a regional conference on Iraq would allow the administration to get past its refusal to talk to Tehran and Damascus, by saying that ban was never meant to include Iraqi initiatives. 

The Iraq report is a deeply diplomatic document, stuffed with ''coulds'' and ''mights.'' It is, all in all, exactly the kind of shades-of-gray thinking that Mr. Bush despises, and exactly what he needs to get the country out of the hole he has dug.; 

More than 50 years after the Supreme Court decided Brown v. Board of Education, the nation still has not abolished de facto segregation in public schools. But thanks to good will and enormous effort, some communities have made progress. Today the Supreme Court hears arguments in a pair of cases that could undo much of that work. 

Conservative activists are seeking to halt the completely voluntary, and laudable, efforts by Seattle and Louisville, Ky., to promote racially integrated education. Both cities have school assignment plans known as managed or open choice. Children are assigned to schools based on a variety of factors, one of which is the applicant's race. 

The plan that Jefferson County adopted for Louisville has a goal of having black enrollment in every school be no less than 15 percent and no more than 50 percent. Seattle assigns students to its 10 high schools based on a number of factors, including an ''integration tiebreaker.'' This tiebreaker, which is applied to students of all races, requires that an applicant's race be taken into account when a school departs by more than 15 percent from the district's overall racial breakdown. 

Parents in both districts sued, alleging that the consideration of race is unconstitutional. In each case, the court of appeals upheld the assignment plans. In the Seattle case, Judge Alex Kozinski, a Reagan appointee who is highly respected by legal conservatives, wrote that because the district's plan does not advantage or disadvantage any particular racial group -- its pro-integration formula applies equally to all -- it ''carries none of the baggage the Supreme Court has found objectionable'' in other cases involving race-based actions.;

</text>
