<text id="B24" category="" words="1999" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Ailing Hubble gains new life as manned missions sputter.' USA Today, 1 November 2006, A10; 'Saddam's death sentence brings justice, sends message.' USA Today, 6 November 2006, A12; 'Shop around the clock.' USA Today, 24 November 2006, A17; 'Rated 'O' for " Author="N/A" PublicationDate="1 November 2006; 6 November 2006; 24 November 2006; 4 December 2006; 18 December 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

No mission of NASA's shuttle has been more exciting or successful than the one in 1993, when astronauts repaired the Hubble Space Telescope. After 11 days in orbit and a record five spacewalks, the crew of Endeavour replaced flawed components that had rendered Hubble's pictures blurry.
In so doing they made the telescope all it was supposed to be: a spectacularly powerful window on the universe that could deliver crisp and breathtaking images of far-off galaxies.
Astronauts have been back to the Hubble three more times. But the most important trip since 1993 will likely come in 2008. On Tuesday, NASA Administrator Michael Griffin announced a final service call to Hubble, reversing a decision by his predecessor, Sean O'Keefe, who had opted to let the space telescope die within the next few years rather than approve a mission that was seen as particularly risky after the Columbia disaster. This new mission will upgrade key parts and extend Hubble's life to about 2013.
Griffin made the right call. This mission poses more risks than most, but preserving one of NASA's most successful programs warrants it. The shuttle, moreover, has no other major duties besides completing the International Space Station, a program that faces an iffy future.
The shuttle's relationship with Hubble underscores a powerful irony. The shuttle never succeeded in its mission of dramatically increasing the human presence in space. That is because human space flight was, is, and likely will remain extraordinarily expensive and dangerous. But the shuttle has done one thing fabulously well: nurture one of NASA's most popular robotic programs.
Robotic missions were once secondary to the more glamorous manned missions. Now programs such as Hubble, and the Spirit and Opportunity rovers exploring Mars, are the stars while human space flight is in a prolonged identity crisis.
The shuttle is slated to die in 2010, largely unloved. Griffin said last year in a meeting with USA TODAY's editorial board that it had been a mistake. The space station has failed to deliver much science or enthusiasm and has been orphaned by the Bush administration. The current plan, to send astronauts back to the moon and on to Mars, is based on the dubious premise that it can rekindle interest in human space flight by retracing small steps and giant leaps made more than 30 years ago.
If future Congresses or presidents pull the plug on this program, there may still be a role for astronauts -- as cosmic repairmen.

For all its flaws, the trial of Saddam Hussein was the first time in memory that a nation has tried and sentenced to death a dictator who terrorized its people. For all the messiness of the nearly three- year-long process, that is no small thing.
Sunday's verdict condemned Saddam to hang for the killing of 148 Iraqis after a 1982 assassination attempt on him. Its greatest impact should be to put other brutal tyrants on notice that they, too, might one day pay for their crimes, even a quarter-century later.
Too often in recent history, murderous dictators have escaped accountability. Adolf Hitler made his cowardly exit through suicide. Uganda's Idi Amin died in luxurious exile in Saudi Arabia. Chile's Augusto Pinochet has escaped justice with Houdini-like legal maneuvers.
Over the past decade, there has been a concerted international effort to correct such failings and bring to account the monsters who derive power from mass killings, genocide and torture, but the experience has proved frustrating.
When an international tribunal in The Hague, Netherlands, tried Serbia's Slobodan Milosevic, it became an example of how not to proceed. Milosevic's trial was carried out far from Serbia, with so many international judges and translators and with such vague rules that Milosevic, acting as his own lawyer, was able to turn it into a years-longcircus. The whole thing became moot when Milosevic died earlier this year.
Other international efforts have fared better. A special court, set up by the government of Sierra Leone and the United Nations, has sentenced several people for crimes against humanity. Former Liberian dictator Charles Taylor is on trial there. A permanent international criminal court shows promise, though the United States has refused to join it because it does not want Americans to fall under its jurisdiction.
The most effective court, though, has to have a firm national authority. That overriding aim only partly succeeded in Iraq. There was heavy U.S. pressure in the background. Saddam, 69, presented a pitiful yet defiant figure. At times, he disrupted the proceedings, declaring he was on a hunger strike, complaining about his conditions, trying to intimidate the judges or delivering political speeches.
But overall, the judges acquitted themselves admirably, even as the country was disintegrating all around them.
Like other major developments of the past three years, the verdict's impact on the broader Iraq war is likely to be limited. A dictator's grip is psychological. It slips once he is revealed as a mere human being. Although the verdict has fanned tensions -- Shiites and Kurds, whom Saddam repressed, have been cheering and dancing in the streets as his fellow Sunnis denounce it -- it is hard to imagine the sentence making the sectarian violence much worse than it already is. Certainly, any hope that Saddam's trial would promote national healing and reconciliation has long since evaporated.
Saddam won't be put to death immediately. He will appeal, and he is the defendant in another trial involving the gassing of Kurds in northern Iraq.
But in what mattered most, the trial has succeeded. It is, in fact, one of the few accomplishments of President Bush's misbegotten war of choice in Iraq. A brutal dictator has been brought to account, and more than a few others are sleeping less easily.
"I won't answer to this so-called court. ... Who are you? What are you?" Saddam asked at the trial's opening last year.
Sunday's outcome showed that, as any other human being, he did have to answer.


On Thursday, we gave thanks -- for the food on the table, for family and friends, for good health. We prayed for peace on earth and remembered the needy. We cooked and ate and enjoyed a day with loved ones.
Today we shop.
The drill is familiar to all by now: Get to the store early, run up lots of debt while "saving" on sale items. It's as much a part of the Thanksgiving weekend as stuffed turkey.
More even. At least that's the way some retailers see things. This year, some stores moved their Black Friday opening from 5a.m. to 12:01 a.m. Others, such asCompUSA and BJ's Wholesale Club, went a step further and opened on Thanksgiving Day itself, so shoppers could get a head start on the post-Thanksgiving madness. If the early birds get their way, this will become the latest big thing. And rushing off to the store today will be so very, very -- yesterday.
Sooner or later this was bound to happen. Thanksgiving, after all, does kind of get in the way of things. It's a day when millions of Americans stay home, dine in and keep their wallets in their pockets. If it weren't the quintessential American holiday, it would probably be deemed un-American.
It wasn't such a problem when the day after Thanksgiving actually marked the beginning of the Christmas shopping season, the day communities could, in good taste, hang plastic wreaths and red ribbons on street lamps to remind people of their shopping obligations.
But with the official start having been moved forward (to sometime around Valentine's Day, we believe) Thanksgiving is an inopportune timeout just as Christmas commerce is reaching a fever pitch. By opening on Thanksgiving, these retailers hope that hard- core shoppers will come to them first. If that happens, other retailers will feel pressure to open on the holiday, too.
Aside from depriving store employees the opportunity to spend a full day with their families, the "open on Thanksgiving" trend has ramifications well beyond the retail trade. In a sense, these retailers are putting the question to the American people of how important Thanksgiving is. Will they still want to spend time quietly with family and friends when they could be out and stalking the elusive PlayStation 3?
We hope that for most the answer is yes. That's the only way to keep Thanksgiving a very special day.

Twenty years ago, mounting evidence that secondhand smoke posed a threat to non-smokers prompted the National Academy of Sciences to call for a smoking ban on all domestic airline flights. The reasoning was pretty simple: The enclosed space and recycled air of an airplane cabin pose a particular danger. Nevertheless, the federal government's answer was an emphatic "No."
How remarkably times have changed.
Airliners are smoke-free, and a sea change in public attitudes about smoking is prompting restrictions of all sorts. Today, 18 states ban smoking in most workplaces. Ohio and Nevada join the list this week; two more states join next year. Bans on smoking in restaurants and other public spaces are proliferating. Further, smoking is in decline, from 26.5% of U.S. adults in 1986 to less than 21% last year. Smokers clearly are losing political clout. This is a remarkable success story, but some people seem intent on proving that there can be too much of a good thing.
The first signs of trouble were bans on smoking in places where secondhand smoke poses no threat to health. Last year, for instance, San Francisco banned smoking in public parks.
Now the battleground is the family car.
Earlier this year, Arkansas and Louisiana banned smoking in cars carrying young children. Similar proposals have been introduced in seven other states.
The benefits are dubious.
While children of smokers indisputably are the primary victims of secondhand smoke, cars aren't the biggest problem. Children are exposed to far more smoke at home. But with the home beyond the reach of regulation, anti-smoking advocates have struggled to find a way to protect them.
A public education campaign to persuade parents not to harm their kids might have helped, but instead, states used billions won in the late 1990s by suing the tobacco industry for unrelated spending. Most states, Arkansas and Louisiana included, spend less than the minimum recommended by the federal government on anti-smoking programs.
So their new laws, illogically, now burden police. With nearly 1,200 children younger than 10 killed in traffic accidents and 130,000 injured across the nation last year, shouldn't police focus on such violations as drunken driving, speeding or failing to buckle a child into a car seat or seatbelt?
Rep. Bob Mathis, the author of the Arkansas bill, doesn't even expect the law to function as written. He set the fine at $25, which can be suspended if a driver attends a smoking-cessation program. He says he doesn't want the law to "be punitive"; he wants to educate parents. If Mathis wants to educate, he should have sought state funds for a public advertising campaign.
When children are endangered, there certainly is reason for public attention and for government action. But not without limits and not for show.
If smokers are to be stopped from letting their habit jeopardize their children's health, then it will have to done not by fiat, but by persuasion.
That's not as easy as banning smoking on airplanes. But until the nation decides that parents no longer get to decide what's best for their kids, it's the only option that can work.

Some things are not meant to go together -- like the combination floor wax and dessert topping hawked in a mock advertisement on an early Saturday Night Live episode. Or this: religion and video-game carnage.
This latter combination of dubious merit is now available at stores ($59.99 for a collector's version that includes a Bible) under the name Left Behind: Eternal Forces.
The faith-based video game, based on the popular Left Behind series of apocalyptic novels by Tim LaHaye and Jerry Jenkins, takes place in post-Rapture New York City.

</text>
