<text id="C02" category="" words="1991" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="A poet laureate of the people / Newsom taps Jack Hirschman to 'challenge the status quo' The San Francisco Chronicle, 11 January 2006; 'This time around, violinist sounds a different tone' The San Francisco Chronicle, 10 January 2006; 'An ascent of El Cap" Author="Rachel Gordon; Joshua Kosman; David Lazarus" PublicationDate="11/01/2006; 10/01/2006; 01/01/2006" SampledFrom="All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

Two years ago, Jack Hirschman, a social activist and communist, backed Matt Gonzalez's run for San Francisco mayor. On Thursday, the business community's candidate and victor in that race, Mayor Gavin Newsom, will officially name him the city's new poet laureate.
Hirschman, who at 72 has been a prominent figure in American poetry with a half-century of published work, is scheduled to accept the post at noon at a City Hall ceremony. Four hours later, he plans to be reading poetry on the steps of the State Building in San Francisco at a demonstration against the death penalty.
That should surprise no one. For Hirschman has used his words and his body to protest injustice for decades.
What may be more surprising is that Newsom selected him to serve as San Francisco poet laureate.
Hirschman, who has been arrested numerous times in social protest, was a notable supporter of Gonzalez, the then-president of the Board of Supervisors and Green Party member who was Newsom's chief opponent in the 2003 mayor's race. Hirschman described his candidate as a political leader dedicated to transforming "the system of same-old machine politics and corruption.''
Despite comments like that, or maybe because of them, Newsom, a dedicated Democrat who came into office endorsed by the Chamber of Commerce and real estate developers, said Hirschman was the right person for the poet laureate post.
"I want that position to be more audacious, more exciting, to shake things up,'' Newsom told The Chronicle. "I want someone who will challenge the status quo.''
Hirschman's reaction: "That's excellent. I like statements like that.''
The San Francisco poet laureate program began under Mayor Willie Brown in 1998. Since then, three poets have held the title: Lawrence Ferlinghetti, Janice Mirikitani and devorah major. Hirschman is Newsom's first appointment to the non-paying post.
The mayor was presented with a list of three candidates selected by a search committee headed by City Librarian Luis Herrera that included poets Bob Booker and Jewelle Gomez, and Joyce Jenkins, editor of Poetry Flash, a poetry review focused on the West Coast. Newsom said he had reviewed the panel's recommendations, read the finalists' work and consulted with his father, retired state judge William Newsom, who holds a master's degree in English literature from Stanford.
"On the basis of all that I made my decision," Newsom said. "I know Jack Hirschman's obviously a charged pick, with all these layers of intrigue. But it's not like I'm appointing him planning commissioner.''
"That he chose me I find really admirable,'' Hirschman said of Newsom. "But then he's done some other things in office that, if not provocative, certainly got people's attention.''
Topping his list: Newsom's decision in 2004 to grant marriage licenses in San Francisco to same-sex couples. Hirschman praised Newsom's gay marriage stance, describing it as forward-thinking and bold, and also lauded the mayor's efforts to help some segments of the homeless population.
The role of San Francisco poet laureate comes with few guidelines. He or she must deliver an inaugural address on the state of poetry in San Francisco, read at Litquake -- an annual literary festival in the city -- and work on poetry programs in the community.
To be considered for the post, the person must be a San Francisco resident who has written at least one full-length book of poetry -- not self-published -- and has had at least 20 poems appear in well- established publications.
Hirschman, a North Beach resident who embodies the bohemian lifestyle that made the neighborhood famous, is prolific. Emerging as a poet during the Beat Generation, he has written more than 70 books -- his first was published in 1953. He has translated dozens more from Spanish, German, Greek, French, Hebrew, Russian and tongues not so common, such as Haitian Creole and Albanian. His work, as an editor and a poet, has been published in literary journals, magazines and newspapers.
Gonzalez said it didn't surprise him that Newsom had chosen Hirschman.
"It would be hard to pass over a writer like him,'' said Gonzalez, a friend of Hirschman's and his bibliographer. "It's sort of like conferring on him this title that people have already given him. He is the poet laureate.''
Nancy Peters, who runs City Lights Publishing and edited Hirschman's book "Lyripol" 30 years ago, agreed.
"Jack is someone who lives for poetry,'' said Peters, who co- owns the venerable City Lights bookstore in North Beach with Ferlinghetti. "He has a wonderful ability to combine social justice with a lyric voice.''
Hirschman believes the greatest poets are those who are provocative and prophetic and who, as Newsom says of him, challenge the status quo, he said.
Hirschman called his being selected San Francisco poet laureate an honor for him personally "and I think a very small victory for the people's movement, which has had very few victories recently in this chaotic world.''


When Julia Fischer played the Sibelius Violin Concerto with the San Francisco Symphony three years ago, her performance was graced by an irresistible combination of tonal polish, technical precision and interpretive zeal. But those qualities were in perilously short supply during the young violinist's clunky recital Sunday afternoon in Berkeley's Hertz Hall.
For a listener who recalled Fischer's earlier appearance with admiration and even awe, the difference between the two events was alarming. In place of the limpid string tone and unforced ease that had once characterized her playing, there was now a rough-hewn grittiness that often spilled over into out-of-tune passages and ungainly phrasing. If not for the evidence of the program, it would have been hard to believe that this was the same musician.
What could have happened in the intervening years? One possibility is that Sunday's recital, presented by Cal Performances, was simply an off day, the kind that might happen to any artist during the grueling rounds of international touring. Maybe the next audiences will hear something more persuasive.
Here's another theory, which I like better. Perhaps Fischer -- by all the evidence an intelligent and engaged artist -- has embarked on some kind of musical makeover that is still awkwardly in progress.
The serenity and tenderness of her Sibelius performance had been expunged so completely that it seemed deliberate. It was as though Fischer had decided to punch up her playing with a more aggressive and athletic edge, but hadn't yet figured out how to integrate that with the other virtues of her style.
The opening rendition of Schubert's A-Major Violin Sonata, D. 574, certainly supported this view. Together with pianist Oliver Schnyder, whose contributions tended toward the weighty and pedantic all afternoon, Fischer tore mercilessly through the composer's innocent melodies as if she had something to prove. And although the slow movement enjoyed a sense of respite, both musicians soon returned to pummeling and pushing the piece along.
Grieg's Sonata No. 3, with its expansive rhetoric and occasional harmonic weirdness, was at least more suited to the duo's take-no- prisoners style. But Fischer tended to supply power without finesse, making much of the sonata sound simply ferocious. And on her own, she struggled laboriously through the huge fugue in Bach's C-Major Sonata before finding refuge in an alluring account of the Largo that was -- for the first time -- strong without being strident.
Surprisingly, Fischer's new-found brand of big-boned lyricism paid off most handsomely in the final offering, Saint-Sans' Sonata No. 1, crowned by a torrential account of the perpetual-motion finale. Joseph Achron's "Hebrew Melody" made a lovely encore.


Mountain climbing would seem a natural for suspense novels, but few authors have managed to capture both the psychological and physical challenges of clinging to a vertical face thousands of feet above the ground.
Jeff Long makes you feel as if you're there in The Wall (Atria; 304 pages; $24), set almost entirely on Yosemite's towering (and terrifying) El Capitan.
Hugh Glass and his former climbing partner, Lewis Cole, reunite after many years for one last fling on El Cap. The ascent is supposed to be an easy few days on the face, one last go-round for a pair of aging wall jockeys.
But what transpires is anything but routine, beginning with another climber falling to her death and almost hitting Hugh as he carries supplies into position. A subsequent encounter with a deranged mountain man heightens Hugh's apprehension about what's to come.
He and Lewis begin well enough, and Long does a great job of describing the minutiae of a climb -- the gear, the moves, the sense of freedom. Readers can almost feel the rock as Hugh's fingers explore for holds.
Then things start going bad. First, Lewis has an accident that will prevent him from going for the top. Then Hugh is all but drafted into an ill-prepared effort to rescue two women who may or may not be alive higher up the rock.
Once Hugh joins a rescue specialist named Augustine, "The Wall" takes a sharp turn into "Deliverance" territory, with Hugh increasingly facing dark, mystical challenges that lead him to wonder if the climb was cursed from the outset.
The inevitable storm that comes near the climax both heightens the sense of dread overshadowing the rescue and serves as an apt (if unsubtle) metaphor for the hell that's broken loose in Hugh's life.
In the end, he reaches a very bad place, one that few would be able to climb out of.
If you've been wondering what it would be like if Carl Hiaasen took a crack at a John le Carre spy novel, wonder no more. Tom Gabbay's The Berlin Conspiracy (Morrow; 294 pages; $24.95) mixes the insouciant breeziness of Hiaasen with all the grim Cold War trappings of le Carre.
The result works surprisingly well.
It's 1963, and Jack Teller is an ex-CIA spook now kicking back on the Florida coast. He's bitter about the Bay of Pigs fiasco -- idealism is Teller's weak spot -- and basically wants nothing more to do with spying.
Then comes a summons from his old boss at the agency, who says Teller has been specifically requested to meet with a mysterious East German official in Berlin. Back in action, Teller learns from the source that a plot is being cooked up to assassinate President Kennedy during his forthcoming visit to West Berlin. Worse, it looks as if the Americans, not the Soviets, are behind the scheme.
Anyone who saw Oliver Stone's "JFK" knows what's coming. Teller learns that sinister forces within the U.S. government see Kennedy as a threat to their anti-communist designs, and in turn have decided to get rid of the president and make it look as if a lone gunman were responsible for the killing.
It won't be spoiling anything to say that Teller foils the plot (which, as we know, will be attempted again in Dallas not long afterward). The fun of "The Berlin Conspiracy," and it is fun, lies in Teller's transformation from wisecracking miscreant to reluctant hero, and in the colorful characters he encounters along the way.
Gabbay, a former TV exec writing his first novel, does a fine job of depicting Berlin in the throes of the Cold War and of making the well-seasoned stew of Kennedy conspiracy theories seem fresh and topical. As with Stone's movie, a plausible case is made for why assorted interests would feel threatened by the youthful president, and how a conspiracy would be pulled off.
It may not be any more believable now, but it still gets you thinking.
Dana Stabenow has carved out a successful niche as the author of two Alaska-set mystery series. She now tries her hand at a stand- alone thriller, Blindfold Game (St. Martin's; 272 pages; $23.95), which is so fully formed that readers may wonder if they've entered midway through yet another series.
While the Alaskan setting is clearly a star attraction of the new novel, its heart rests with Hugh Rincon and Sara Lange. They're married, albeit distantly.

</text>
