<text id="C04" category="" words="2000" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Keep in mind, it's a kid movie' St. Petersburg Times, 21 December 2006, p. 12; 'Why sing when you can siiiiiiiiiiiing?' St. Petersburg Times, 7 October 2006, p. 1; 'Pieces of the past.' St. Petersburg Times, 24 September 2006, p. 3; 'Viewers tuned in for" Author="Steve Persall; Josh Korr; Lennie Bennett; Eric Deggans" PublicationDate="21 December 2006; 7 October 2006; 24 September 2006; 7 September 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

Milan Trenc's children's book The Night at the Museum was 32 pages long, written and illustrated for ages 4 to 8. Of course, Hollywood took that and blew it out of proportion. 
Director Shawn Levy's movie version gets the demographic right. Children won't mind bad writing and big stars upstaged by has-beens as long as the T. Rex skeleton comes alive as it does in the TV ads. 
Bless their little indiscriminate hearts. The rest of us will watch Night at the Museum and wonder why we bothered. 
Trenc told a simple story about a night watchman searching for dinosaur bones that mysteriously disappear. Levy and two screenwriters make him into Ben Stiller with all the artificial humility and forced humor he brings. 
Stiller plays Larry Daley, divorced and unemployed after an invention failed. He devised the Snapper to switch on lights. Yes, there is already a Clapper. That's the cleverest writing the overlong setup offers. 
Larry's desperation to impress his son, Nick Jake Cherry, takes him to the Museum of Natural History where a security job is available. 
That's where the dinosaurs arrive. Not the T. Rex, but octogenarians Dick Van Dyke and Mickey Rooney, plus Bill Cobbs, 71, as security guards getting too old to deal with what happens at the museum at night. They're happy to be in a movie, or anywhere, and that adds a nice spark. 
After dark, all the exhibits become either computer-animated (the T. Rex, a woolly mammoth and an Easter Island idol) or actor-limited (Robin Williams going through the scattershot motions as Teddy Roosevelt). Owen Wilson declined a credit listing for his yahoo turn as a diorama cowboy, but we'd recognize that nose anywhere. Steve Coogan makes the most of a (literally) small role as a Roman general in a territory war with the diorama next door. 
Wee folks get the best jokes in Night at the Museum, as Larry's intrusion in their miniworlds become silly Lilliputian adventures. Larry's to-do list when the magic begins inspires a brisk sequence of pre-emptive strikes, and a mischievous monkey is a solid scampering joke. Night at the Museum pads its running time with Larry's paternal bonding, Williams' riffing and a curiously limited number of roaming exhibits for such a big place. 
Mostly, there's the distasteful notion of juicing a sweet children's book into blockbuster pulp. The folks behind Night at the Museum would have turned Curious George into the 1976 version of King Kong. 

How would you feel if every other word of this review were exteeeended a couple of eeeeextra syllables for impaaaact and eeeemphasiiiis? (Rhetorical question; I'll stop now.) 
That's what listening to Evanescence's new album, The Open Door, is like. 
Normal phrasing doesn't exist for frontwoman Amy Lee. She stretches words from measure to measure with a glottal pout that's the Goth-rock equivalent of a news anchor's Serious Voice. It's the sound of a foundering songwriter who knows only one way to convey the angst that made her famous. One veryyyy tedious waaaay. 
Evanescence rode the end of the nu-metal wave to multiplatinum success with 2003's Fallen. (The "nu" stands for "turn the distortion so high and riff on such low notes that the guitar becomes a guh-guh-guh beat instead of a source of chords and melody.) Lee showed on the smash Bring Me to Life that mixing Linkin Park and Tori Amos isn't nearly as horrible an idea as it sounds. 
The Open Door is a bigger, louder version of Fallen - minus the pop sense of former guitarist and co-writer Ben Moody. Lee almost succeeds in rewriting Bring Me to Life as the single Call Me When You're Sober. Otherwise there's not a three-chord chorus to be found, and the voice that occasionally went unadorned and without affectation is now an over-the-top diva's tool. 
The lugubrious singing wouldn't be so overwhelming if Lee had anything to say. But Open Door is full of lofty, vague sentiments that are hard to appreciate if you aren't a 16-year-old with charcoal-shaded eyes and a majority-black wardrobe. 
"Fear is only in our minds . . . and one sweet day/you're gonna drown in my lost pain," she sings on Sweet Sacrifice. Why is she hurting and afraid? Who knows. 
The Only One is no more specific: "Can't hold onto the fear that I'm lost without you." Goth code words abound - ashes, darkness, sacrifice, bleeding - but without a tether to reality they're nothing more than signifiers of an attitude. 
It's an attitude perfectly suited to that time in our lives when we're sure the world revolves around us. 
Lee writes for people who think some feelings are so huge they can only be conveyed through overblown cliches: "Shouldn't have let you/conquer me completely/now I can't let go of this dream/can't believe that I feel" (Good Enough). She serves up strident declarations of personal growth: "I won't be held down by who I used to be" (Weight of the World). She's a font of fortune cookie wisdom: "If you want to live, let live/if you want to go, let go" (Cloud Nine). 
She has stripped away all context and self-awareness from rock angst, turning it into pure teen melodrama. 


Thanks to disgraced writer James Frey, we all know how a memoir can explode into a million little fictional pieces. 
The visual artist has more wiggle room than a writer does in presenting the past. The assumption is that memory is interpretive, selective and manipulated by the artist's hand and vision. So it is with Virginia Beth Shields , whose installation at the Arts Center invokes her roots in South Carolina's Cherokee Foothills. Remnants is an homage to the women who worked as sharecroppers and in timber mills while living in grinding poverty, bearing and rearing children, cooking and cleaning while they eked out a below-subsistence living. 
Shields gives these women's lives dignity, even beauty, in her treatment. Three small houses are constructed as frames for large, backlit black-and-white photographs of interiors and exteriors of real houses that seem not much larger than these ersatz ones. Scattered around are mounds of seed cotton. Columns evoke plantation life, some wrapped with scraps of denim, calico and burlap. Nearby, an old iron bed is fitted with a mattress spilling straw, its smell a sensory element of the installation. On the nightstand, a book is stuffed with typed reminiscences of women's lives in the 1930s and 1940s, powerful testimonials to lives both simple and complicated. 
The mixed media work has a straightforward message without layers of metaphor. It's like those bronze statues honoring anonymous workers, soldiers and immigrants, cast in realistic poses. Much installation art can be so obscure, requiring codes to decipher it. Art should make us think and see in new ways, but it should not require a concordance. 
On the other hand, good art requires a certain level of technical competence and originality. The 14th annual All Florida Juried Exhibition, also at the Arts Center, is a disappointment. I don't know what Donald Kuspit , a distinguished critic and writer who juried the show, had to choose from, but this exhibition does not reflect the depth of talent working in Florida right now. It has the feel of a members' show in which everyone is guaranteed a place on the wall  -  an important and vital opportunity that the Arts Center should and does offer twice a year. This is billed as a more exclusive invitational. 
Kuspit makes clear in his juror's statement his bias toward representational art, which he believes is far more vital these days. He also endorses art that has, as he says, human interest. It's a good thing to recognize artists who paint a scene without irony or angst, to value sincerity rather than deride it as sentimentality. Seeing that philosophy validated and embodied is probably the best that can be said about this show overall. 
Bridging these two exhibitions, philosophically and physically, is "Tomorrow's Drawing Today," an eccentric, eclectic and gratifying show curated by Sandy Besser , a well-known collector who lives in Santa Fe, N.M. 
Like Kuspit, Besser is drawn to the figurative (excuse the pun). He pushes the definition of drawing beyond the conventional idea of graphite or chalk on paper, used in the past to create studies for finished work in paint or stone. 
Some of the drawings have the look of a study, though, such as Bart Johnson's  Tiepolo Honey, with its seemingly unrelated, bizarre figures, such as Bosch encountering Dr. Seuss. And there are other examples of fantastical characters from other artists, part of a movement in contemporary drawing that combines whimsy with nightmare. 
Also represented is another continuing trend, born in the 20th century, of art that is deliberately crude technically, a rejection of slickness, such as Richard Kurtz's  boxers drawn on NRA target practice paper and Lauren Ari's  Time for Tigers Timbre, which uses a dictionary page as a canvas, and clay figures to punctuate the drawings. 
Works such as these will probably elicit the inevitable comment from some viewers about their "looking like something my grandchildren would do." Well, okay, but consider what the artist is trying to convey with this purposefully simple style, used tongue-in-cheek, even cynically. 
Traditionalists will find easy-on-the-eyes beauty here, too, in Tamie Beldue's  contemplative nude and Alice Leora Briggs'  Annunciation II, a drawing incised on a clay tablet like an etching. 
There are other fine examples of drawing and all its possibilities, but the standout is Craig Atteberry's  exquisite, minute head of a man centered on a large sheet of handmade paper. It's precious and extravagant. 


Katie Couric's debut Tuesday anchoring the CBS Evening News was a record-setting affair, drawing more than 13.5-million viewers, twice as many as watched the newscasts on NBC and ABC, and the largest audience for an evening newscast on the Tiffany Network since its coverage of the Winter Olympics in 1998. 
But that was no surprise to Sherry Sacino, a St. Petersburg resident who participated in the town hall meeting Couric held in July at the offices of local affiliate WTSP-Ch. 10. 
"They have created a different type of broadcast as truly demanded by those who came to speak, like me," Sacino, president of the Youth Empowerment Alliance nonprofit and wife of Sacino's Formalwear CEO Ron Sacino, wrote in an e-mail to the St. Petersburg Times. "CBS heard what we have to say and implemented it." 
Sacino joined about 100 other people in speaking with Couric over two hours about TV news. They talked about hating explicit details or bloody footage and wanting to see more than the usual pundits featured on cable; more fresh, down-to-earth voices; and more in-depth reporting instead of superficial news roundups. 
Sacino praised the newscast's opening stories - a report by correspondent Lara Logan from Afghanistan, a report on President Bush's speech Tuesday about terrorism and a short interview with New York Times Middle East columnist Thomas Friedman - as a three-part dissection of the war on terrorism. 
She also hailed the show's "Free Speech" commentary segment featuring Super Size Me director Morgan Spurlock and a lengthy feature story by correspondent Steve Hartman about a Midwesterner building sympathy for orphans in the Third World by getting high school artists in America to paint their portraits. 
Tampa Bay area viewers may have agreed with her; more than 218,000 local households watched Couric's debut, or about 22 percent of those watching TV, according to figures provided by WTSP. CBS's newscast won the time period in this market, with NBC drawing 12 percent of those watching TV, ABC 5 percent and the local newscast on Fox station WTVT-Ch. 13 nearly 6 percent, a WTSP spokesman said. 
It's difficult to know how many viewers were drawn by curiosity, and the nation's TV critics delivered a more mixed verdict. According to an analysis of 43 commentaries by the Project for Excellence in Journalism, 79 percent delivered either mixed or mostly negative reviews (the St. Petersburg Times review, which was mixed, was included).

</text>
