<text id="C05" category="" words="1988" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Flags' flies high under Eastwood's mastery' USA Today, 20 October 2006, Page E1; 'Not exactly a 'Perfect Day' ; Christmas movie is doomed by script, characters' USA Today, 18 December 2006, Page D2; 'Cartoonist Addams remains an enigma' USA Today, 9 Nove" Author="Claudia Puig; Robert Bianco; Bob Minzesheimer; Richard Willing" PublicationDate="20 October 2006; 18 December 2006; 9 November 2006; 11 May 2006" SampledFrom="All; All; All; Beginning" WebAddress="Factiva">

Clint Eastwood just keeps getting better. At 76, his skill for directing films that mine the human experience for truth and emotion continues to astound.
He seemed at the top of his game in 2003 when he made Mystic River, then reached a new peak the following year with the emotionally wrenching Million Dollar Baby. Who would have thought he could best himself with an epic and unflinching film about World War II, especially after so many noteworthy war movies already have been made?
But with Flags of Our Fathers, we undeniably pledge our audience allegiance. When it seemed that everything had already been said about the Greatest Generation, along comes Eastwood with a compelling and eloquent examination of the nature of heroism. It is one of the year's best films and perhaps the finest modern filmabout World War II.
The story built around the battle of Iwo Jima and the political fallout from that epic clash between the USA and Japan is fascinating and morally complex. It's hard to imagine audiences failing to be riveted by the unrelenting combat sequences. The battle scenes are graphically depicted but never gratuitous. At the same time, the story looks at life during wartime, from several angles.
Flags starts with the iconic image of the famous photo in which six exhausted servicemen hoist the American flag five days into a battle on Iwo Jima that raged on for more than a month. The story built around this seminal photo is eloquently written by Paul Haggis (Crash) and Bill Broyles Jr. (Cast Away).
The focus is on the three surviving soldiers of the six -- played with sensitivity and intelligence by Ryan Phillippe, Jesse Bradford and Ryan Beach -- tapped by military and government officials and trotted around on a nationwide tour as the ultimate symbols of courageous warriors. The intent behind honoring this trio was to inspire patriotic fervor and persuade Americans to buy war bonds. Each man copes differently with the dawning reality that he is being manipulated. Beach is brilliant as a Native American soldier who laid his life on the line but still must endure racism. His character's arc from proud fighter to lost soul is heartbreaking.
The story is told, years later, to Phillippe's adult son (Tom McCarthy) by photographer Joe Rosenthal (Ned Eisenberg), who took the Pulitzer Prize-winning image. The lives of all three men are marked by their experience. The glimpse we get of the relationship between Phillippe's character as an older man and his son is achingly poignant.
The film is patriotic in the truest sense: honoring those who risked their lives in battle and questioning the motives of those in power who sought to use the soldiers as political pawns.
Though the film respects the heroes it depicts, it also takes a cynical look at the selling of war to the American people. Flags of Our Fathers is the rare action film that is superbly acted, hauntingly powerful and deeply insightful.


Blah humbug.
The more dully formulaic Christmas movies that TV produces, the more you wish the medium would adopt a very literal reading of Silent Night. If straining-to-be-inspirational, card-shop stocking fillers such as A Perfect Day are the best TV can do, then really, leave us to contemplate the meaning of the season in peace.
As if convinced the holiday abhors originality, TV builds most of its Christmas movies around two popular themes, told in a thousand variants. Year after year, we either get mean guys who don't realize how bad it is to be mean (A Christmas Carol), or nice guys who don't realize how good it is to be nice (It's a Wonderful Life).
For this sanctimonious follow-up to his The Christmas Box, writer Richard Paul Evans blends the two. Over two teeth-ache-inducing hours, a nice-guy-gone-suddenly-bad is reformed by a fallen angel who warns him the end is near.
Yeah, well not near enough.
Would that Perfect Day were perfectly awful. Movies like that, at least, tend to have some energy, even if it is of the camp/comic variety. This artificially sweetened fruitcake just lies there, as unappetizing and unwelcome as its inedible equivalent.
As the movie plods its way toward its totally nonsensical final twist, the main emotion it provokes is one of pity for star Rob Lowe as a short-sighted best-selling author. True, Lowe isn't exactly working at his best, but it couldn't have been easy to play a character whose only interesting trait is his certainty that he's about to die.
Worse than its treatment of Lowe, however, is the way the movie deadens one of TV's liveliest actors, Paget Brewster. She has elevated bad material before, but even Brewster can't rescue a role that asks her to instantly, inexplicably segue from grating, perky support to shrewish attack.
Bad enough she has to tell her just-fired husband "when one door closes another one opens," but to have to follow that groaner with "this whole thing could be a blessing in disguise" is really adding insult to actor injury.
But then, the entire script is one huge sugar-cube collection of bad lines and unconvincing characters, from Frances Conroy's all- knowing, all-loving agent to Christopher Lloyd's harbinger of doom.
And why exactly is Lowe's writer doomed, by the way? For momentarily taking too much pleasure in success? For spending a few weeks away from home working? For longing to see his book turned into a feature film rather than a TV movie? If those were crimes punishable by death, we'd have no authors left.
The real crime, of course, is television's insistence on turning Christmas into the season of sap.
It is possible, after all, to do a holiday movie that is heartfelt and even sentimental without making people feel as if they've entered some alternate, goo-filled universe.
We've seen better before (think The Gathering or Truman Capote's A Christmas Memory), and surely we'll see better someday again.
That day can't come too soon.


Charles Addams, the great creepy cartoonist and creator of the lovably fiendish Addams Family, was once asked by a reporter, "Are people disappointed when they meet you?"
"I suppose they are," Addams replied. "Aren't you?
To a biographer taking on a popular artist whose art may be more intriguing than his life, that's both a warning and challenge.
To his famous friends, who included Alfred Hitchcock and James Thurber, Addams was anything but disappointing. Charming, witty, but in public, shy.
Charles Addams: A Cartoonist's Life by Linda H. Davis will delight those interested in literary gossip and intrigue at The New Yorker. But the book has a tough act to follow: Addams' own cartoons (38 are included in the book).
Ultimately, what's of lasting interest are the cartoons, more than the cartoonist, who died in 1988.
Davis writes with flair, has done extensive, footnoted research and had the cooperation of Addams' third wife and widow who insisted that the biographer "put every wart in the book and ... not worry about her feelings."
In detail, Davis documents Addams' affairs, financial and romantic, including a second wife who he believed tried to kill him.
But Davis is less sure of how much of the cartoonist's life -- his fascination with cemeteries, crossbows and freak shows -- was legitimate and how much was a show for his fans.
The book details how much Addams loved women, and they loved him. What Davis calls Addams' "harem" included Jackie Kennedy, Greta Garbo, Joan Fontaine and Megan Marshack, who's more famous for being in the company of an undressed Nelson Rockefeller when he died.
Among the stories Davis tells is a small dinner party Addams threw to introduce Garbo and Kennedy. With vodka flowing freely, Garbo was over-served.
"Mister Addams," she kept saying in her formal way. "I must leave. I am intoxicated."
"Is she kind of stewed?" Kennedy asked Addams in her whisper.
Later, Addams told a friend, "Well, she was, and so she left before dinner."
He also told a friend, without elaborating, that Kennedy had told him how she felt during the assassination of her husband. Davis reports he told another friend, "Do you know she had his brains in her lap?"
The book describes how Addams slowly and, not easily, developed his cartoon family at the suggestion of The New Yorker's founder Harold Ross, "who thought there should be more characters in the delicious house."
Some names were invented for a line of dolls and the 1964 TV show. Addams came up with Morticia while looking in the telephone book for morticians. Young Pugsley was named for a stream in the Bronx. Addams' first choice, Pubert, was rejected by the dollmaker because it sounded dirty.
On television, The Addams Family, a softer version of the cartoons, lasted only two years but lived on in reruns. It made Addams more famous and richer than ever, but it strained his relationship with the magazine that had nurtured him.
The New Yorker's legendary editor William Shawn thought that "vulgar Hollywood had compromised Addams' evils," and stopped printing his drawings of Morticia, Gomez and the kids.
Only after Shawn's death did the magazine lift its ban, but by then, Davis writes, Addams' heart was no longer in it.
Addams once said of Jackie Kennedy: "One minute she is very sweet and tender, and the next minute she is an iceberg. She may be the moodiest woman I've ever met. Don't ask me what the real Jackie Kennedy is like because I really haven't the faintest idea."
Despite Davis' valiant efforts, the real Charles Addams may remain unknowable -- unlike his cartoons.
Excerpt
Though Jackie (Kennedy) was clearly fond of Addams, she never regarded him as husband material. "Well, I couldn't get married to you," she told him. "What would we talk about at the end of the day - - cartoons?" The putdown, which Addams repeated...crushed him. And when Addams referred to the late president as "Jack," she corrected him. "Don't call him 'Jack.' Call him 'the President.'"


Iranian students and others, some of whom we would now call "Islamo-fascists," took 66 American Embassy personnel hostage and held most of them for a terrifying 444 days. All were released, no occupying armies were deployed and no IEDs were detonated.

But for contemporary historian Mark Bowden, the standoff is indeed an object that is larger than it at first appears. It's a tale, argues the author of Black Hawk Down and Killing Pablo, of fear, cruelty, heroism and something more:
"The first battle in America's war against militant Islam, a conflict that would eventually engage the entire world."
Guests of the Ayatollah is at heart a thriller. Students, some of them fundamentalist Muslim and others left-wing and secular, occupy the American Embassy on Nov. 4, 1979. What was planned as a sit-in to call attention to Iran's supposed grievances -- the deposed shah had recently been admitted to the USA for medical treatment, for example -- spirals out of control.
Americans are beaten, in some cases tortured, and led to believe they would be executed. The most appealing characters are Americans who keep their cool and get in a few licks of their own.
The chapters on an aborted attempt to rescue the hostages by helicopters, and the behind-the-scenes machinations by the Carter administration to make it happen, are among the most compelling. The mission was scuttled because of sandstorms and equipment failure, and eight soldiers died in a fiery collision as the rescue team fled its Iranian staging area.
The details speak volumes. When he learns of the failure, White House chief of staff Hamilton Jordan rushes into the president's private bathroom and becomes ill.
But Bowden's big-picture analysis comes up short. The "glorious Islamist revolution in Iran," he assures readers, will wind up as "little more than a footnote," a "despised, corrupt and ineffectual religious dictatorship." Religious "terrorism," he is certain, is "in its death throes" in Iran.
Really?

</text>
