<text id="C07" category="" words="2018" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'The Tough-Talking Godmother of Downtown Art' The New York Times, 26 December 2006, Page 11; 'Apocalypse Now, but in the Wasteland a Child Is Given' The New York Times, 25 December 2006, Page 1." Author="Roberta Smith; MANOHLA DARGIS" PublicationDate="26 December 2006; 25 December 2006" SampledFrom="End; All" WebAddress="Factiva">

She is not among the 20 figures in Florine Stettheimer's acidic and well-populated 1942-44 group portrait, ''The Cathedrals of Art,'' which includes the grand wizard Alfred Stieglitz and Juliana Force, who oversaw the Whitney Studio Club -- an early version of the Whitney Museum -- where many of the artists Mrs. Halpert would represent got their first exposure. (One wonders if the combination of Mrs. Halpert's being female and Jewish was a factor in her absence.) Mrs. Halpert and her artists were largely swept aside by the rise of Abstract Expressionism and Pop. Her name rarely comes up in interviews with dealers like Betty Parsons, who opened galleries in the '40s but were often the same age as Mrs. Halpert.
Over the course of her career Mrs. Halpert exhibited and sold the work of Davis, Sheeler, Yasuo Kuniyoshi, Max Weber, William and Marguerite Zorach, Peggy Bacon, Niles Spencer, Ben Shahn and Jack Levine. She had fingers in numerous other American art pies: the rise of American folk art, the interior design of Radio City Music Hall (she introduced Donald Deskey to the Rockefellers through her loyal client Abby Aldrich Rockefeller), the rediscovery of the 19th-century still life painter William Harnett, the founding of the Museum of Modern Art.
Mrs. Pollock portrays her as indefatigable, always on the lookout for a new angle when it came to exhibiting, promoting or selling art. After Alain Locke's book ''The Negro in Art'' came out in 1940, Mrs. Halpert proposed organizing a show based on it. ''American Negro Art,'' which opened late in 1941, included Jacob Lawrence's landmark ''Migration Series,'' 60 small terse paintings about the exodus of black labor to the North.
She browbeat the Museum of Modern Art and the Washington collector Duncan Phillips into each buying half of the work (for $1,000 each). It was immediately sent on a national tour, and Mrs. Halpert represented Lawrence for the next 20 years.
Mrs. Halpert's obscurity may reflect that she discovered very few artists, and none with the implicit glamour of a Georgia O'Keeffe or a Jackson Pollock. Those who didn't come from the Whitney Club were inherited from Stieglitz, at one point or another, including Sheeler, Marsden Hartley (briefly), O'Keeffe (briefly and tempestuously), John Marin and Arthur Dove.
Another factor in Mrs. Halpert's obscurity may be her nearly exclusive concentration on American art, specifically to the politicized American Scene variety that went quickly out of fashion after 1950. With a fervor that can sometimes seem opportunistic, she argued that if American artists got more respect (and sales), they wouldn't be tempted to adopt European-isms. Conveniently she overlooked Davis's fruitful and prolonged assimilation of Cubism.
In the retelling of Mrs. Halpert's story, Ms. Pollock relies heavily on the dealer's 813-page oral history in the Archive of American Art and her gallery's extensive files (but doesn't include a chronology of exhibitions, which would have been fascinating to read and helpful to scholars). This creates some gullible-sounding paraphrases: ''Edith would always believe art was for everyone, whether rich or poor, educated or not.'' Or: ''Edith refused to be discouraged. She kept fighting and believing in the American art cause.''
The narrative contains too many blow-by-blow accounts of sales, exhibition organizing and tussles with collectors, artists and museum curators. Still, it also provides vivid doses of the relentless day-to-day will to self-creation that is essential to having an interesting art gallery, even in flush times like the present.
Ms. Pollock makes passing mention of Mrs. Halpert's stubbornness and need for control, but it is only at the end of the book, when she can rely on a perceptive interview with Charles Alan, who joined the gallery in the late 1940s, that her subject's difficult personality comes into sharp focus. Mr. Alan, who took the job with the understanding that Mrs. Halpert would retire in 1950, lived in an apartment above hers (and above the gallery) on 51st Street and sometimes served as an escort. In 1952 he left to form his own gallery, taking with him the sculptor William King, the last of Mrs. Halpert's rare discoveries.
An exhibition of Mr. King's early work now at the Alexandre Gallery on East 57th Street includes a wonderful portrait bust of Mrs. Halpert in ceramic, her hair and features delineated in blue atop off-white glaze. A sketchy form of Delftware, the piece dates from 1959. It shows her looking beautiful, blousy and slightly inebriated, but imperious just the same.



The end is nigh in ''Children of Men,'' the superbly directed political thriller by Alfonso Cuaron about a nervously plausible future. It's 2027, and the human race is approaching the terminus of its long goodbye. Cities across the globe are in flames, and the ''siege of Seattle'' has entered Day 1,000. In a permanent war zone called Britain, smoke pours into the air as illegal immigrants are swept into detainment camps. It's apocalypse right here, right now -- the end of the world as we knew and loved it, if not nearly enough.
Based in broad outline on the 1992 dystopian novel by P. D. James about a world suffering from global infertility -- and written with a nod to Orwell by Mr. Cuaron and his writing partner Timothy J. Sexton along with David Arata, Mark Fergus and Hawk Ostby -- ''Children of Men'' pictures a world that looks a lot like our own, but darker, grimmer and more frighteningly, violently precarious. It imagines a world drained of hope and defined by terror in which bombs regularly explode in cafes crowded with men and women on their way to work. It imagines the unthinkable: What if instead of containing Iraq, the world has become Iraq, a universal battleground of military control, security zones, refugee camps and warring tribal identities?
Merry Christmas! Seriously. ''Children of Men'' may be something of a bummer, but it's the kind of glorious bummer that lifts you to the rafters, transporting you with the greatness of its filmmaking. Like Clint Eastwood's ''Letters From Iwo Jima,'' another new film that holds up a mirror to these times, Mr. Cuaron's speculative fiction is a gratifying sign that big studios are still occasionally in the business of making ambitious, intelligent work that speaks to adults. And much like Mr. Eastwood's most recent war movie, much like the best genre films of Hollywood history, ''Children of Men'' doesn't announce its themes from a bully pulpit, with a megaphone in hand and Oscar in mind, but through the beauty of its form.
It may seem strange, even misplaced to talk of beauty given the horror of the film's explosive opening. For Theo, the emotionally, physically enervated employee of the Ministry of Energy played without a shred of actorly egotism by Clive Owen, the day begins with a cup of coffee, an ear-shattering explosion and a screaming woman holding her severed arm. The Mexican-born Mr. Cuaron, whose previous credits include the children's films ''A Little Princess'' (1995) and ''Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban'' (2004), as well as the supremely sexy road movie ''Y Tu Mama Tambien'' (2001), has always had a dark streak. But nothing in his resume prepares you for the shocking realism of this explosion, which proves all the more terrible because here it is also so very commonplace.
Britain, it emerges, is in permanent lockdown. As the specter of humanity's end looms, the world has been torn apart by sectarian violence. Britain has closed its borders (the Chunnel too), turning illegal aliens into Public Enemy No. 1. Theo and the other gray men and women adrift in London don't seem to notice much.
Everywhere there are signs and warnings, surveillance cameras and security patrols. ''The world has collapsed,'' a public service announcement trumpets, ''only Britain soldiers on.'' The verb choice is horribly apt, since heavily armed soldiers are ubiquitous. They flank the streets and train platforms, guarding the pervasive metal cages crammed with a veritable Babel of humanity, illegal immigrants who have fled to Britain from hot spots, becoming refugees or ''fugees'' for short.
Among the fugees is Kee (Clare-Hope Ashitey), the linchpin of the story and its defiantly hopeful heart because she's pregnant, the first woman on earth to carry a child after 18 barren years. Theo meets Kee through his former lover, Julian (Julianne Moore), the leader of an underground cadre, the Fishes (Chiwetel Ejiofior and Charlie Hunnam, among others), who, having renounced violence if not their heavy guns or lugubrious rhetoric, are fighting for immigrant rights.
Avowedly apolitical, Theo agrees to help the Fishes deliver Kee into the ministering care of a shadowy, perhaps apocryphal utopian group, the Human Project. En route, though, the plan goes violently awry, forcing Theo, Kee and a Fish member and former midwife, Miriam (Pam Ferris), to go on the run, first by car and then by foot.
Where they eventually land is in a hell that looks chillingly similar to the Iraqi combat areas of newspaper reportage, television news and mostly uncensored documentaries. There are several heart-gripping set pieces before then, including a hugely unsettling ambush scene shot almost entirely from inside a car crammed with passengers.
The action is swift, ferocious, spectacularly choreographed, with bodies careening wildly amid a fusillade of bullets and flying glass. Yet what lingers isn't the technical virtuosity; it's that after the car screeches off, Mr. Cuaron's camera quietly lingers behind to show us two dead policemen, murdered in the name of an ideal and left like road kill. He forces us to look at the unspeakable and in doing so opens up a window onto the film's moral landscape.
''Children of Men'' has none of the hectoring qualities that tend to accompany good intentions in Hollywood. Most of the people doing the preaching turn out to be dreadfully, catastrophically misguided; everyone else seems to be holding on, like Theo's friend Jasper (Michael Caine, wonderful), a former political cartoonist who bides his time with laughter and a lot of homegrown weed while listening to Beatles covers and rap. Still others, like Theo's wealthy cousin, Nigel (Danny Huston, equally fine), who's stashing away masterpieces like Michelangelo's ''David'' for safekeeping in his private museum while Rome, New York and probably Guernica burn, can only smile as they swill another glass of wine. Hope isn't the only thing that floats, as a song on the soundtrack reminds us.
The writer Kurt Andersen observed not long ago that we Americans are in an apocalyptic frame of mind. Mr. Andersen thinks that the latest in apocalypticism partly owes something to the aging baby boomers confronting their own impending doom, Sept. 11 and global warming notwithstanding. That's one way to look at it, though the recent elections suggest that more than a few of those boomers are looking past their own reflection out at the world. Working with his cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki, Mr. Cuaron manufactures war zones of extraordinary plausibility in this film, but equally amazing is how, through a carbon-blue palette, handheld camerawork and the sag of a man's shoulders, he conjures the hopelessness and the despair that I imagine many of us feel when we wake up to news of another fatal car bombing in Iraq.
There are, Mr. Cuaron suggests in ''Children of Men,'' different ways of waking up. You can either wake up and close your ears and eyes, or like Theo you can wake up until all your senses are roaring. Early in the film Theo and the restlessly moving camera seem very much apart, as Mr. Cuaron keeps a distance from the characters.
Every so often the camera pointedly drifts away from Theo, as it does with the dead policemen, to show us a weeping old woman locked in a cage or animals burning on pyres. In time, though, the camera comes closer to Theo as he opens his eyes -- to a kitten crawling up his leg, to trees rustling in the wind -- until, in one of the most astonishing scenes of battle I've ever seen on film, it is running alongside him,trying to keep pace with a man who has finally found a reason to keep going.

</text>
