<text id="D03" category="" words="2003" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Contemplative Science: Where Buddhism and Neuroscience Converge. New York: Columbia University Press" Author="Alan Wallace " PublicationDate="2007" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.alanwallace.org/Taboo%20of%20Subjectivity%201.pdf">

The closure principle has proved to be a useful hypothesis for the investigation
of a wide range of interactions among physical phenomena;but if
there are any nonphysical influences on physical events, unquestioning acceptance
of this belief will ensure that those influences will not be recognized.
Some scientific materialists have misleadingly argued that the closure
principle must be a universal truth because scientific research has found no
evidence of any nonphysical influences in the natural world. The distinguished
biologist Edward O. Wilson, for instance, declares that the religious
belief in a God who directs organic evolution and intervenes in human
affairs ''is increasingly contravened by biology and the brain sciences.''
Natural philosophy, as it was envisioned by Descartes and other participants
in the Scientific Revolution, had only the physical world as its proper
domain, and this has been largely true of science ever since. Moreover, never
in the history of modern science have instruments or methods been devised
to detect the presence of nonphysical influences of any kind. Research in
modern biology and the brain sciences is conducted with the assumption,
hardly ever questioned, that there are no nonphysical influences in organic
evolution or in human affairs. So the fact that scientists have not discovered
any such influences should hardly come as a surprise. And at this point in
history, it is certainly premature to declare that scientific knowledge of
organic evolution and brain activity is so complete that nonphysical influences
can be absolutely ruled out on purely empirical grounds.
Particularly with regard to the human mind, the closure principle seems
to be incompatible with experience, for our conscious mental processes,
which have not been demonstrated to be composed of configurations of
mass and energy, certainly do appear to influence human behavior. Advocates
of the closure principle assume that the apparent influence of our
desires, beliefs, and intentions on our behavior is actually an illusion - all
behavior is in fact determined solely by the interaction of the nervous system
with the rest of the body and the physical environment. However, contemporary
neuroscience does not even remotely possess sufficient understanding
of the brain to verify this assumption on the grounds of empirical evidence.
If for no other reason, the fact that modern science does not know how or
why consciousness first appeared in terms of the evolution of life on our
planet or in the development of a human embryo should make it abundantly
clear that the closure principle is a metaphysical belief and not a
scientific fact.

Physicalism. With the widespread adoption of reductionism and the closure
principle in the nineteenth century, due in part to the widespread acceptance
of the principle of the conservation of energy, scientific materialism abandoned
its Judeo-Christian origins. No longer could this metaphysical dogma
conform to the Judeo-Christian belief in a nonphysical, personal God who
intervenes in the course of nature and human history and who responds to
the prayers of individuals. By the nineteenth century, the only religion with
which scientific materialism remained compatible was Deism, a religion
contrived in part by the proponents of scientific materialism itself.
Albert Einstein was among the most eminent scientists educated in the
nineteenth century to declare that the concept of a personal God is utterly
incompatible with science and that it is the major source of conflict between
religion and science. This theological stance, however, did not prevent him
from believing in a universal Superior Mind that reveals itself in the world
of experience. This Deist view retains the Christian belief that God possesses
an absolute perspective on reality, but it denies that God influences natural
events in any way. In other words, God is conceived of as an ideal scientist,
a purely objective observer who sees reality as it is without any personal,
subjective intervention.
Twentieth-century scientific materialism abandoned belief in any form of
theism by adopting the principle of physicalism, which states that in reality
only physical objects and processes exist. In other words, only configurations
of space and of mass/energy and its functions, properties, and emergent
epiphenomena are real. A closely related principle maintains that everything
that exists is quantifiable, including the individual elements of physical reality,
as well as the laws that govern their interactions. At this point scientific
materialism becomes compatible only with some of the more primitive
nature religions. The ''God's-eye view'' of reality that was the earlier
ideal of scientific materialism has been replaced by the ideal of the ''view
from nowhere.'' That is, the ideal of pure objectivity has been retained,
but it has been divorced from the theological underpinnings that originally
gave it credibility, meaning, and value. Thus, the quasimystical quest of
earlier scientists to view God's creation from God's own perspective has
been replaced by the ideal of viewing a mindless, meaningless universe from
a nonhuman, purely objective perspective.

There are many scientists and philosophers, of course, who deny that
physicalism is simply a metaphysical principle. Philosopher Patricia Churchland,
for instance, claims that the rejection of consciousness (or any other
''spooky stuff '' such as a soul or spirit) existing apart from the brain ''is a
highly probable hypothesis, based on the evidence currently available from
physics, chemistry, neuroscience and evolutionary biology.'' She declares
that the assertion of physicalism is an empirical matter, not a question of
conceptual analysis, a priori insight, or religious faith. Philosopher Gu¨ ven
Gu¨ zeldere asserts in a similar vein that ''. . . contemporary science tells us
that the world is made up of nothing over and above 'physical' elements,
whatever their nature (waves, particles, etc.).''

Let us assume for the moment that these physicalists are right in asserting
that scientists have empirically demonstrated that only physical things and
events exist. This would imply that this assertion belongs together with a
wide range of other scientific facts - such as the convertibility of mass and
energy, the atomic weight of hydrogen, and the nature of photosynthesis - 
about which there is a very high degree of consensus among the scientific
community. Churchland acknowledges that not all philosophers agree with
her physicalist belief, but it must also be acknowledged that a very sizable
proportion of the scientific community doesn't either. Given that 40 percent
of American scientists today believe in a personal God to whom they can
pray and that this figure has not changed significantly over the past century,
it would seem that if the physicalist hypothesis has been proven empirically
during the twentieth century, virtually half of the scientific community in
the United States still refuses to acknowledge it. If this is the case, are they
prevented from seeing this empirical truth as a result of their commitment
to a theistic ideology? If so, this raises a profound qualm about the reliability
of the scientific community as a whole to distinguish empirical facts
from ideological commitments. One might just as well ask the same question
of those scientists who believe that the empirical evidence does confirm
the hypothesis of physicalism: Are they overinterpreting scientific evidence
to make it conform to their metaphysical beliefs? If we are to trust the
scientific community to give unbiased reports of its research, then physicalism
must be regarded as a matter of conceptual analysis, a priori insight,
or religious faith. For there is clearly no scientific consensus on this matter,
or even a historical convergence toward such a consensus among scientists.

The Marginalization of the Mind

While the nineteenth-century adoption of the closure principle denied
causal efficacy to anything that is nonphysical, the twentieth-century version
of physicalism denies that anything nonphysical even exists in reality. This
shift has major implications for the relation between the mind and the
physical universe. It is noteworthy that, while physical science was well
established by the late seventeenth century, a science of the mind was not
initiated until a full two centuries later. And even then, particularly in the
Anglo-American world, the focus of academic psychology swiftly shifted
away from the mind and toward behavior, and then to neuroscience. Only
in the latter half of the twentieth century did cognitive psychology, for
example, begin to reconsider the functions of the mind as it is experienced
firsthand. In the historical development of modern science, the study of the
mind occurs only as an afterthought, subsequent to the elaborate development
of physics, chemistry, and biology;so it is no coincidence that in the
world as conceived by science, the role of the mind in nature has been
marginalized. According to this view, the universe is conceived as a giant
computer, and the emergence of consciousness during the course of cosmic
evolution is attributed solely to the laws of physics, which over the immensity
of time give rise to a nearly infinite complexity that is purportedly
sufficient to give rise to consciousness. This ''explanation'' places an enormously
heavy explanatory burden on the term ''complexity,'' which in fact
explains nothing.

Since the Scientific Revolution, subjectively experienced mental events
have gradually lost their status as real entities. Advocates of scientific materialism
now variously regard them as mere epiphenomena, as propensities
for behavior, as being equivalent to brain activity, or as bearing no existence
whatsoever. As one indicator of this phenomenon, it is worth noting the
types of discoveries for which Nobel awards have been granted in the fields
of physiology and medicine. While it is well known that many mental
phenomena - including hope and fear, happiness and depression, trust and
suspicion, and belief and disbelief - have profound influences on the human
body and state of health, since Nobel awards were first granted in 1901 for
discoveries in physiology or medicine, not a single one has been given for
discoveries about the nature of the mind. One could rationalize this fact by
claiming that research into the nature of the mind and its possible influences
on the body is not included in the domain of ''hard science'' and is therefore
unworthy of such a distinguished award. But ''hard science'' in this context
means nothing more than science that rigidly conforms to the metaphysical
dictates of scientific materialism, even at the cost of ignoring significant
aspects of health and disease.

How did the mind, which exerts such a powerful influence in our daily
lives and which makes science possible, become so marginalized? In his
classic work The Principles of Psychology, the American psychologist and
philosopher William James (1842 - 1910) presents a thesis that sheds brilliant
light on this issue:

The subjects adhered to become real subjects, attributes adhered to real
attributes, the existence adhered to real existence;whilst the subjects disregarded
become imaginary subjects, the attributes disregarded erroneous
attributes, and the existence disregarded an existence in no man's land, in
the limbo ''where footless fancies dwell.'' . . . Habitually and practically we
do not count these disregarded things as existents at all . . . they are not
even treated as appearances;they are treated as if they were mere waste,
equivalent to nothing at all.

James sums up this idea with the assertion that ''our belief and attention
are the same fact. For the moment, what we attend to is reality ... '' A historical
illustration of this theme is to be found in the history of behaviorism.
In 1913, the American behaviorist John B. Watson wrote that ''the time
has come when psychology must discard all reference to consciousness,''
and he attributed belief in the existence of consciousness to ancient superstitions
and magic. Fifteen years later, he expanded this principle by declaring
that behaviorists must exclude from their scientific vocabulary ''all
subjective terms such as sensation, perception, image, desire, purpose, and
even thinking and emotion as they are subjectively defined.''Behaviorism
duly followed this dictum, with the result that in 1953, B. F. Skinner concluded
that mind and ideas are nonexistent entities ''invented for the sole
purpose of providing spurious explanations. . . . Since mental or psychic
events are asserted to lack the dimensions of physical science, we have an
additional reason for rejecting them.''2Assertions concerning subjective experience
were similarly denied by certain philosophers of the same period
who argued against the very existence of subjective statements.

</text>
