<text id="D06" category="" words="1994" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Christian Century  Vol. 123 Issue 23: Influential Dozen to help Democrats Bridge 'God Gap' ; 15-16 Protestant left has 'potential' impact, says scholar, 16;  Court says gay couples have equal rights, 17; Peace Prize winner among pioneers in microf" Author="Christian Century" PublicationDate="11/14/2006" SampledFrom="Multi" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=10&sid=22e6650b-b2db-4324-88a3-6448b77b70d4%40sessionmgr15&bquery=(JN+%22Christian+Century%22+AND+DT+20061114)&bdata=JmRiPWE5aCZ0eXBlPTEmc2l0ZT1laG9zdC1saXZl">

Influential Dozen to help Democrats Bridge 'God Gap'
At a meeting of the House Democrats' Faith Working Group, a perplexed member of Congress turned to his colleagues for pastoral guidance. How could he counter a local preacher who argued that all Jesus' moral teachings were about the world to come, not the here and now?
Representative David Price (D., N.C.) stood amid the sympathetic sighs and "you can't convert everyone" comments to offer a new spin on an old parable:
Walking down a road, the Good Samaritan encounters and cares for a stranger who has been beaten and robbed, Price said. The next day, on the same road, another person is beaten and robbed. So it goes for another week--more robberies, more victims.
"How long is it going to take before the Samaritan says, 'Hey, maybe we ought to patrol this road,'" Price said. In other words, he argued, there are some problems that individuals can't solve on their own. They require the resources of a morally responsible government.
As Democrats seek to reframe America's debate over moral values and close their lamented "God gap" with religious communities, conversations such as these are taking place throughout party circles.
Gone are the days when "faith outreach" meant visiting African-American churches two weeks before an election, party leaders say. Instead, Democrats are seeking--and getting--regular meetings with megachurch pastors such as T. D. Jakes, Joel Osteen and Rick Warren.
Rather than cede red states to Republicans, the party is buying airtime on Christian radio stations, with the message that Democrats are indeed a party with deep moral convictions.
No longer leaning on 1960s-era preachers to guide progressive politics, Democrats are also turning to young voices like strategist Mara Vanderslice, 31, and writer Amy Sullivan, 33, who offer new perspectives and fresh ideas.
After interviews with dozens of politicians, strategists, the think-tank set and a Noah's ark--full of faith leaders, Religion News Service has identified the 12 most influential voices in helping Democrats reach people of faith. Those on the list are writing the party's new testament, whispering in the ears of the powerful, and playing matchmaker between religious and political pacesetters.
They are:
--The Theologian: Shaun Casey, an ethicist at Washington's Wesley Theological Seminary, who provides a moral and historical framework for progressive faith-based politics.
--The House Trinity: Representatives James Clyburn, Rosa DeLauro and David Price, who lead the effort on Capitol Hill to frame legislative debates in moral terms.
--The Preacher: Leah Daughtry, chief of staff at the Democratic National Committee, who champions faith outreach at party headquarters.
--The Model: Tim Kaine, governor of Virginia, who showed Democrats how a faith-infused campaign can turn a red state blue.
--The Insider: Mike McCurry, former White House press secretary, who coaxes Washington Democrats into sharing their spiritual sides.
--The "Blessed" One: Barack Obama, the junior senator from Illinois, who challenges his party to make room for religion in the public square.
--The Prophet: Rabbi David Saperstein, head of the Religious Action Center of Reform Judaism, who is Washington's most articulate voice in progressive politics.
--The Matchmaker: Burns Strider, a staffer who shepherds the House Democratic Faith Working Group and corrals Congress into meetings with the religious community.
--The Agitator: Amy Sullivan, an independent but opinionated journalist who pens passionate pleas for Democrats to "get religion."
--The Strategist: Mara Vanderslice of the consulting firm Common Good Strategies, who works the campaign trail, helping candidates to build relationships with diverse religious communities.
In some ways, these 12 "apostles" reflect the diversity on which Democrats pride themselves. They include a former Churches of Christ minister, a Pentecostal preacher, two Catholics, a Methodist Sunday school teacher, an Episcopalian, a progressive evangelical and a rabbi.
Some at Democratic Party headquarters are taking an under-the-radar approach to faith outreach and are reluctant to divulge all the party's plans and advisers.
"Our focus is not in putting someone behind a pulpit," said Leslie Brown, the DNC's "Faith in Action" coordinator. But after conducting polls, meeting with state party chairs and undertaking an "internal education," Democrats are building a "message-driven machine," Brown said.
"We want to talk about things in ways we can relate to the faith community," said Clyburn (D., S.C.), who heads the Faith Working Group. "I don't talk about the environment just as keeping things green, I talk about it in terms of stewardship."
But while recent polls suggest that some evangelicals may be growing disillusioned with Republicans, many are still reluctant to pull the lever for Democratic candidates, said Richard Cizik, vice president of the National Association of Evangelicals.
"Simply using 'faith language' won't redound to the benefit of any candidate, Republican or Democrat, without some authenticity there," Cizik said. "When evangelicals think about the reputation of the Republican Party, which isn't too good right now, at least it does have a record of reaching out to those voters, and it does have a record on Capitol Hill of at least trying to carry water for their issues."
Still, there are issues such as the environment, poverty, war and health care on which Democratic positions dovetail with those of many religious Americans, party leaders say. "It's not always pretty," Casey says of Democrats' fledgling efforts to reach these voters. "But the good news is everybody realizes the party has to do a better job."


Protestant left has 'potential' impact, says scholar.
The Protestant left "has the potential to become a key constituency of the Democratic Party," says a political scientist studying the growing number of faith-related progressive groups in the U.S.
Though socially liberal Protestants have been outpaced by conservative religious movements since the 1980s, Laura R. Olson of Clemson University told an annual conference of sociologists of religion before this month's mid-term elections that "times always change."
Despite their difficulties of coordination and mobilization, which might force "religio-political progressives to remain as they are now--working behind the scenes," Olson said history shows that new opportunities arise with cultural and political shifts.
"I submit that the religious left has more potential energy now than it has since the Vietnam War era," she said October 21 in Portland, Oregon, in a presentation to the Society for the Scientific Study of Religion, which met with the Religious Research Association.
According to Olson, the 2004 re-election of President George W. Bush gave rise to "elite-level progressive Protestant mobilization as measured by the sheer number of new religious left organizations that have been founded and the volume of ink that has been spilled in new books challenging the religious right."
Olson, who is researching a book on the subject, listed nearly 60 organizations--old and new, national and regional--that she said make up the Protestant and ecumenical left.
Among the movement's weaknesses, she said, are its broad political agenda "so that no one priority can ever get the focus it needs," and the knowledge that most mainline congregations are too diverse politically to provide unified support.
"Organizing progressive Protestants online, however, seems to be a particularly clever strategy," especially since many potential recruits are well educated and technologically savvy, Olson said.
Court says gay couples have equal rights.
The New Jersey Supreme Court has ruled that the state's constitution requires that marriage rights be available to same-sex couples on an equal basis with heterosexuals. But the court left it to state legislators to decide whether to refer to the unions by the term marriage or a different one.
The October 25 decision leaves New Jersey in a situation akin to Vermont's, where legislators in 2000 created the nation's first law legalizing civil unions for same-sex couples. Vermont's civil unions, which followed a similar court decision, offer the same rights and benefits as marriage without being called that.
All seven New Jersey justices agreed that the state's constitution requires it to extend to gay couples the same rights as married couples. However, only three justices said those rights include equal use of the term marriage, while the four-justice majority said use of the term is not guaranteed.
"The state has not articulated any legitimate public need for depriving same-sex couples of the host of benefits and privileges" that married couples enjoy, wrote Justice Barry Albin, who authored the majority's opinion. "There is no rational basis for, on the one hand, giving gays and lesbians full civil rights in their status as individuals and, on the other, giving them an incomplete set of rights when they follow the inclination of their sexual orientation and enter into committed same-sex relationships."
Vermont and Connecticut have civil-union laws that provide identical benefits to same-sex couples as married heterosexual couples. Massachusetts, following a decision by its highest court, legalized same-sex marriage in 2004.
Peace Prize winner among pioneers in microfinance loans.
This year's selection of the Nobel Peace Prize winner has thrown the spotlight on Christian-supported microfinance and banking institutions that make small loans to help poor people build a future.
The Norwegian Peace Prize committee announced that this year's award will go jointly to Bangladesh economist Muhammad Yunus and his Grameen Bank as one of the pioneer groups helping to overcome poverty, especially in developing nations.
Opportunity International, a Christian ministry based in Oak Brook, Illinois, congratulated the winners for their role in helping to make microfinance "a proven, long-term solution to poverty." The U.S. group was founded in 1971, five years before Grameen Bank was started by Yunus.
Christopher A. Crane, president and CEO of Opportunity International, said his organization recently announced a $1 billion, seven-year plan to help 100 million people work their way out of poverty by 2015. "The appeal of microfinance is that it gives a hand up, not a handout," Crane said in a statement.
Peace Prize winner Yunus, 66, has been nicknamed a "banker to the poor" for setting up his Grameen Bank to extend small loans, known as microcredit, to the very poorest in Bangladesh, particularly women, enabling them to start up small businesses.
Since then, the bank has been a source of ideas and models for the many institutions in the field of microcredit that have sprung up around the world, the Norwegian Nobel Committee noted in announcing the award October 13. "Lasting peace cannot be achieved unless large population groups find ways in which to break out of poverty. Microcredit is one such means," it stated.
Oikocredit, another church-backed institution, also sent congratulations to Yunus. An international financier based in the Netherlands, Oikocredit said it has approved more than 100 million euro worth of credits in the first 10 months of 2006.
"Muhammad Yunus has given a new perspective on life to the 1.1 billion people who live on less than a dollar a day," said a statement from Oikocredit, which received support in the mid-1970s from the World Council of Churches.
New York court says insurance says cover contraception.
Catholic Charities and other religious organizations must provide insurance that pays for prescription contraception, New York's highest court has ruled.
The decision by the state Court of Appeals upholds a January ruling by the appellate division of the state Supreme Court. The judges rejected religious groups' arguments that the 2002 Women's Health and Wellness Act violates religious freedom.
Ten religious organizations sued the state in December 2002, claiming that the law requiring health insurers to provide coverage for obstetric and gynecologic care should include a religious exemption for organizations that do not support birth control. The ten groups were seeking to broaden a "religious employer" exemption to include church-related schools and social-service organizations.
The New York State Catholic Conference expressed disappointment with the decision. "Any religious organization must have the right in American society to uphold its own teachings," the conference said. It contended that the October 19 ruling opens the way for legislation that would force Catholic entities to pay for employees' abortions.
The ruling reinforces the intention of the women's health legislation, said Betty DeFazio, speaking for Planned Parenthood of the Rochester/Syracuse Region. "Birth control for women is basic health care."

</text>
