<text id="E08" category="" words="1994" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="2006: Mazda Kabura Concept, Volkswagen GTI, Buick Lucerne, Cadillac DTS, Chevrolet HHR" Author="Automobile Magazine " PublicationDate="2005-2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.automobilemag.com/auto_shows/2006_detroit/0602_2006_mazda_kabura_concept/index.html  http://www.automobilemag.com/auto_shows/2006_detroit/0602_2006_volkswagen_gti/index.html  http://www.automobilemag.com/auto_shows/2005_chicago/0503_buick_lucer">

2006 Mazda Kabura Concept

While American manufacturers are looking more backward than forward for inspiration for their products--look at the Ford GT and Mustang and the Dodge Challenger concept for confirmation--Japanese automakers are much more focused on moving ahead.
Among the evidence is the Mazda Kabura, this stunning little coupe designed at the company's West Coast studio in Irvine, California, under the watch of Franz von Holzhausen, the director of design at Mazda North American Operations. "It seems like the Americans are reaching out for the good old days and good old times," says the thirty-seven-year-old von Holzhausen--who was previously responsible for the Pontiac Solstice and the Saturn Sky at General Motors--"whereas the Japanese don't necessarily have this history to draw on or can even relate to it. So instead of falling back, we want to design cars that fit the future."
The concept's aggressive proportions are highlighted by monster nineteen-inch front and twenty-inch rear wheels, but perhaps the most interesting aspect of the Kabura is its interior packaging, which features three-plus-one seating.
Looking at the car, it's hard to believe that the Kabura has room for any more than two people, but by utilizing the space normally taken up by the glove box and a conventional dashboard, Mazda designers were able to move the passenger seat forward, leaving room for a full-size chair behind it. With this offset seating arrangement, there's space behind the driver for a jump seat. Only children need apply for this pew, however, since it is large enough only for a fiftieth-percentile adult.
Gee-whiz concept-car features include a two-piece glass hatch and an extra door on the right-hand side of the car that glides, much like the Kaiser-Darrin's did, straight back into the wheel-arch area.
This three-plus-one layout makes sense, according to von Holzhausen, because "Mazda research has shown that younger buyers feel that their cars are very personal to them and that they don't generally carry people around. If they do, the maximum number of people they carry is three, and then, most of the time, that won't be for long-distance traveling--just to get to the airport, for instance." Mazda doesn't have an inexpensive entry in the coupe market, which is emerging (again), so it made sense to explore this area. "We actually clinicked the concept, trying to feel out the marketplace. It is still very much a concept, but one for which we have done our homework."
The Kabura--named for a Japanese word meaning "first arrow launched into battle"--is based on MX-5 running gear and powered by a 190-hp version of the 2.0-liter DOHC in-line four-cylinder MZR engine. Mazda is at pains to point out that the underpinnings were chosen to ensure that the vehicle moves under its own power, not for any production purposes. As such, the Kabura is about one inch longer than the MX-5, which is only 157.3 inches long.
Of course, the question is, will Mazda build it if everyone loves it? Moray Callum, Mazda's worldwide design director, is adamant that you will see elements from all three of its latest concept cars in the future, but not the cars themselves. We suspect, though, that Mazda is looking very carefully at the small-coupe market, partly because we know that there are people inside the company who would love to re-create the vibe around the original 1972 rotary-engined RX-3 coupe.
The problem for Mazda is whether it can produce a low-cost coupe using its current front-engine, rear-wheel-drive architecture, as exists for the MX-5 and the RX-8. In a way, there's little point in Mazda basing such a coupe on an existing front-wheel-drive platform, such as the 3, because the company would just be coming late to the Honda Civic Si party, even if the resulting car turned out to be superior. Do we think there's a market for something this good looking, that offers MX-5-style driving thrills, and that would be affordable? Absolutely. But, then, we don't have to make a business case for it.


2006 Volkswagen GTI

When we first drove the new GTI more than a year ago (December 2004), it impressed us with its torquey, direct-injection turbo four-cylinder and solid chassis. It felt like a return to the formula that made the original 1983 GTI a cult icon for car nerds: a combination of sports-car handling and station-wagon versatility with the price of a workaday sedan. But that drive was in the European-market GTI, not a U.S.-spec car. Haughty German engineers often decontent and soften the cars they send us to suit their preconceptions of Homer Simpson-like American tastes, but now that we've driven the U.S.-spec GTI, we're happy to report that Volkswagen engineers left our car plenty sharp.
In fact, not much changed for the GTI's journey across the Atlantic. To better survive collisions with trucks and SUVs, the U.S. car rides 0.6 inch higher (the same height as the Golf), but that makes it more prone to body roll, if less likely to crash into its bump stops. Like the Euro GTI, our version can be throttle-steered; if your arc into a corner is too wide, back off the gas, and the front tucks in as if it's reading your mind. The U.S. GTI isn't as stiffly sprung as a Mitsubishi Evo, so it will make a more livable conveyance in the frost-beaten Rust Belt. This fifth-generation GTI feels utterly responsive but never punishing. The steering is precise and nicely weighted, and torque steer never snatches at the wheel, which is quite a feat given the prodigious off-the-line grunt.
Buyers can choose between the standard six-speed manual or VW's superb dual-clutch sequential-manual DSG transmission, which operates smoothly when you're inching along yet is lightning quick to downshift. The DSG will include a launch-control program later in 2006 (when we also get the Q-ship four-door GTI and the regular Golf), but for anything short of a smoky burnout, the current setup is nearly ideal.
The GTI is slated to cost only about $23,000 including destination fees, a CD changer, xenon lights, seventeen-inch wheels, stability control, six air bags, and retro-chic plaid upholstery. More money will buy leather-clad seats, a cumbersome navigation system, and a sunroof, but all the froufrou pushes the price close to $30,000. The only extras we'd consider are hollow-cast eighteen-inch wheels and the DSG ($750 apiece), because then we'd have a refined, capable, well-equipped, and truly fun hot hatch for less than $25,000.
VW's top dog, Bernd Pischetsrieder, called the previous GTI a "joke" while the car was still on sale here. This wasn't humility, it was a promise to the VW faithful that the new GTI would be worth waiting for. VW has kept that promise: the new GTI is not just better than the car it replaces; it's good enough to be on any smart enthusiast's short shopping list.
2006 Buick Lucerne

The 2006 Buick Lucerne puts a new face on a well-known GM formula: a front-drive sedan with a 3.8-liter, pushrod V-6. This engine is nearly as legendary for longevity as the Chevrolet 350, and just about as ancient, too. If you feel that pushrods are a bit outdated, you can also choose a 275-hp, 4.6-liter, DOHC V-8, making the Lucerne the first V-8-powered Buick sedan in over a decade.
Under those engines is another old piece of metal, a GM front-wheel-drive chassis that has seen more than its share of duty since beginning life in 1995 under Oldsmobile Aurora and Buick Riviera bodywork. But here it can be had with Magnetic Ride Control straight from the Cadillac parts bin, as well as StabiliTrak stability control.
Inside, you will find an interior much improved over the outgoing LeSabre, with more elegant wood, more civilized styling, and a set of new treats, including DVD navigation, heated and cooled seats, a Harmon Kardon audio system, and rain-sensing windshield wipers. The most notable interior feature, though, has to be GM's new dual-depth air bags, which are a step above current dual-stage bags. Those use one size bag with different pressures, while the new GM system found in the Lucerne uses two different sized bags in addition to different air pressures. The system uses seat position, safety belt usage, and crash severity to calculate the proper bag and pressure, and is claimed to be the safest frontal air-bag system yet.
Styling is a step above recent Buicks (especially the cheaper LaCrosse) and a glance at the side even evokes a bit of the lovely Infiniti G35. Traditional Buick fender portholes make a stylish comeback here after a half-hearted attempt on recent Park Avenues. Some Buick traditionalists will object when they see four portholes adorning the side of a mid-level Buick, but on closer inspection one will discover three portholes denotes a V-6 model, while four represent a V-8 Lucerne. Makes sense to us.
Cadillac DTS
The 2006 Cadillac DTS marks the end of the five-decade-old DeVille nameplate and the completion of Cadillac's quest to boil all its cars into an alphabet soup of CTS (entry-level luxury sport sedan), STS (luxury sport sedan), SRX (sport crossover wagon), XLR (two-seat convertible), and now DTS (full-size luxury sedan). But don't let the new nomenclature fool you; the DTS is fundamentally unchanged from the DeVille. While the front and rear styling is revamped to match Cadillac's current "art and science" angular look, the DTS's midsection belies its DeVille roots; the doors lack the prominent character line that ties together other Cadillac cars. Obligatory larger wheels and engine mount updates round out functional changes, but front-wheel drive and the same 4.6-liter Northstar V-8 remain.
The redone interior finally joins the twenty-first century with panel fits more befitting a car in this price range, and new features include GM's new dual-depth air bags (see the Buick Lucerne for more information) and an MP3 player so grandma can listen to her downloaded music with ease. These updates will make this a nicer premium rental car, but they're not enough to make us forget about the luxury and performance of the rear-wheel-drive, V-8 Chrysler 300C, which costs thousands of dollars less.
2006 Chevrolet HHR

No, it isn't at the Detroit show this year, but it was shown in Los Angeles and it's coming later this year, so we thought we'd tell you about it. Chevrolet aims to blend the styling of the original 1949 Suburban with their sporty SSR roadster pickup in this PT Cruiser knock-off. The problem? Chrysler released the PT ages ago, and the craze has since died out. So GM is just a teensy bit late with this one.
The HHR rounds out Chevrolet's attack on the small car market, which began last year with the Aveo and continued recently with the Cobalt, on which the HHR is based. This small wagon is packed with clever storage features and uses a choice of Ecotec 4-cylinder engines. A 2.2-liter making 140 hp is standard, while a sportier model uses a 2.4-liter pushing out 170 hp.
Obviously trying to steal a bit of Scion thunder, the Chevy will offer youthful options such as a Pioneer sound system, XM satellite radio, 17-inch wheels, and remote start. Also, the wagon's massive 16.2 gallon fuel tank is said to give the HHR a range of over 400 miles per tank. Chevrolet plans to have the HHR reach dealerships in the second half of 2005.

2006 Dodge Charger
To the surprise of no one, Dodge is adding a sedan variant to its popular Magnum wagon, the long-roofed counterpart to the red-hot Chrysler 300. What may surprise you is that Dodge's sedan gets into own distinct sheetmetal rather than borrowing the 300's cubist design. Nor is the Charger's slightly forward-canted front end lifted from the Magnum. Seen in profile, the Charger's sloping windowline and kicked-up rear fender recall the iconic, late '60s Chargers. But while muscle-car era Chargers were always coupes, the new one is a four-door only-something that has fans of the early Chargers crying foul on the internet.

</text>
