<text id="E18" category="" words="2014" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="American Prospect: Beyond Repair; Bush vs Constitution; The Limits of Limits " Author="Melissa Harris Lacwell; Paul Starr; Mark Schmitt" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="All;All;Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.prospect.org/cs/articles?article=beyond_repair  http://www.prospect.org/cs/articles?article=bush_vs_constitution  http://www.prospect.org/cs/articles?article=the_limits_of_limits">

Beyond Repair
I am struggling with a moral and intellectual dilemma. I am a progressive, African American academic committed to battling racial inequality and I do not want my public voice deployed against struggling communities. So I have been reluctant to admit that I am ambivalent about racialized demands to rebuild New Orleans. Displaced black citizens are insisting on return -- they want their city rebuilt as it was before Katrina -- because they reasonably fear the loss of all they have invested. But simultaneous and complete urban reconstruction is impossible. I finally choose to speak because I fear that if we focus exclusively on rebuilding we will miss an opportunity to demand another and arguably more just option: restoration. 
I want New Orleans back. I am not a native of the city, but I am grieving the enormity of its loss. We witnessed the devastation of one of the most artistically innovative, linguistically complicated, and culturally rich black communities on earth. Black people built the city's culture, staffed its hotels, harvested its resources, and developed its neighborhoods. But the investment they made was never reciprocated. Local and national governments allowed black citizens to live in segregated, vulnerable communities. When decades of government neglect and incompetence led to the catastrophic levee breaches this summer, the government allowed black people to starve in American streets while the world watched on television. 
I went to New Orleans in November and talked with dozens of survivors as they demanded justice. They were trying to carve out a new life in the devastated city because, even in ruins, New Orleans felt like home. But many also recognized that the city for which they sighed was irretrievably lost. When they told me they wanted to go home, they were really saying that they wished this had never happened. 
Our country's history is littered with the black bodies of citizens victimized by institutional racism and broken promises that went by the names "states rights," "Southern custom," "separate but equal," "selective sterilization," "meritocracy," "urban redevelopment," "war on drugs," and "welfare to work." National surveys show that Katrina tapped into this history and fueled deep racial distrust. In September I conducted a national survey with two colleagues. We found that more than 80 percent of black Americans believe the federal government's response would have been faster if most victims had been white; by contrast, only 20 percent of whites believe that. And nearly 90 percent of African Americans believe the disaster revealed continuing racial inequality, while only 38 percent of whites agree. A wide perceptual gulf separates black and white Americans on each of these issues and leaves many African Americans feeling that there is no safe place for them in America. 
I believe these respondents are correct: There is no justice in the simple right to return because the waters will rise again. Future hurricanes may increase in frequency and intensity. The natural barriers against the storms are eroding annually. The political barriers against destruction eroded long ago. There is no national will to provide adequate protection. Just a third of white Americans believe that we should spend whatever is necessary to rebuild the New Orleans. There will be no category-five levees. 
But there is another route to more certain, if less complete, justice. The citizens of New Orleans can be restored. What would restoration look like? The federal government would pay homeowners the pre-Katrina, fair-market value of their homes and land. The federal government would provide educational grants and living assistance for two full years to all Katrina survivors. The federal government would underwrite the full cost of physical and mental health care for all survivors for two full years. Rather than haphazard redevelopment of the eastern parts of New Orleans, the city should designate substantial portions of remaining, safer neighborhoods for low-income housing. All Katrina survivors would be immediately re-enfranchised and given the choice of registering as New Orleans voters for the next two years or of registering in their new communities. 
Americans are suffering because their government failed to protect them from Katrina. They deserve to be restored. Black people have sustained the loss of our motherland, our names, our histories, our languages, our freedom, and our children. In the midst of our losses we have always taken fragments of our homes with us into terrifying, forced Diasporas and with these fragments we enriched every land we touched. We made new communities. We must do it again, but this time we should be compensated for the losses we suffered. 

Bush vs. Constitution
 	
President Bush's conception of his own powers is even more dangerous than his specific abuses.	

Repeatedly through our history, the liberties guaranteed by the Constitution have been threatened in war by an overreacting government and then reaffirmed in peace by calmer leadership. The Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798, Lincoln's suspension of habeas corpus, the suppression of free speech during and after World War I, the internment of Japanese Americans during World War II, McCarthyism, and the wiretapping of Vietnam-era dissenters -- all of these came to be seen, once fears subsided, as violations of our freedoms and embarrassments to our heritage. 
George W. Bush's presidency is another era of overreaction at the expense of constitutional rights, but the prospects for a quick correction are not auspicious. Nothing has helped end earlier bouts of repression so much as the fact that the wars themselves came to a close, and nothing has so exposed our liberties to indefinite jeopardy as the conception of a "war on terrorism" with no end. 
The president claims an inherent power to imprison American citizens whom he has determined to be this country's enemies without obtaining a warrant, letting them hear the charges against them, or following other safeguards against wrongful punishment guaranteed by the Bill of Rights. Under his administration, the government has engaged in inhumane treatment of prisoners that amounts to torture, and when Congress passed legislation to ban such treatment, he declared he would simply interpret the law his own way. Although the Constitution says treaties are the "supreme law of the land," the president has abrogated them on his own. And, we now know, he ordered a secret program of electronic surveillance of Americans without court warrants. 
But there is something more dangerous than any of these specific abuses and usurpations, and that is the theory of inherent powers that Bush invokes to justify most of these actions and the possibility of its being effectively institutionalized by a meek Congress and, worst of all, by a deferential Supreme Court. 
My concern is analogous to the one that Justice Robert H. Jackson articulated when he dissented from the majority in Korematsu, the infamous Supreme Court decision in the midst of war (1944) upholding the constitutionality of the military order to intern Japanese Americans. A judicial construction sustaining the program, he wrote, "is a far more subtle blow to liberty than the promulgation of the order itself." For by rationalizing the order, "the Court for all time has validated the principle of racial discrimination in criminal procedure and of transplanting American citizens. The principle then lies about like a loaded weapon ready for the hand of any authority that can bring forward a plausible claim of an urgent need." 
The real danger today is the loaded weapon that Bush and his defenders are willing to put in the hands of all future presidents. Even members of his own party ought to be able to see that danger, and act to stop it. 
Americans have been slow to react to Bush's actions because the great majority of them no more identify with the Arabs who are the chief targets of the "war on terrorism" than the majority in the 1940s identified with their fellow citizens of Japanese descent. But the principles that Bush is undermining protect us all. Our Constitution divides the president's authority with Congress and the courts so as to create a system of mandatory consultations. That requirement does not make injustice and misuse of power impossible, but it makes them less likely. To survive, the system chiefly requires that if those in power cannot remember our traditions, they can at least imagine themselves out of power in the future. 
Not long ago, the Supreme Court could have been counted on to restore the checks that Bush has thrust aside. But the confirmation of the president's two nominees to the Court may now tilt it in his direction. The common element in the background of the new justices is not merely their political conservatism, but their history of support for a broad construction of executive powers. 
The combined effect of a changed court and a putative state of perpetual war could radically distort our whole constitutional framework. An increasing number of congressional Republicans have recently expressed doubts about the legality of Bush's surveillance program. The real battle, however, is about general principles applied across a wide range of policies. Of course, if the voters elect a Democratic president in 2008, perhaps even the Court's new justices may discover constitutional reasons to limit the president's inherent powers. I am not saying this is the only hope. But in a democracy, those who cannot imagine being out of power deserve another experience of being without it. 
The Limits of Limits
Instead of limiting incumbents' dollars, why not increase the amounts available to challengers?
Our long national nightmare has just begun. There is now little doubt that the next three years will bring one revelation after another about the magnitude of congressional corruption. Democrats will relish this prospect, and "reform" will be an inevitable theme of the next two election cycles. But some political scandals lead to change, while others dominate the headlines for a year and leave no trace. Why? Some of it has to do with managing the media, but it also involves offering credible solutions. Scandals without solutions simply stoke public cynicism. And it is in just such cynical soil that the seed of corrupt big-government "conservatism" was planted. 
The challenge, then, is to define the solution. The first bid, from some Republicans and from overly literal Democrats, will be "lobbying reform." Keeping lobbyists at arm's length should be a matter of personal responsibility on the part of elected officials, reinforced by clear rules. But the idea that the large-scale wrongdoing we've witnessed recently could have been prevented by banning lobbyists from paying for lunch or trips is laughable. 
The problem isn't who pays for lunch. It's who pays for politics. Elected officials with enough integrity can skip the meals and trips. But none of them can avoid the lobbyists who control, directly or indirectly, much of the money that pays for elections. 
The more far-reaching proposals for reform acknowledge this fact and call for limits on contributions from lobbyists, limits on fund-raisers hosted by lobbyists, and limits on independent political committees. Some of these provisions are wise, some unconstitutional, others easily evaded. And what they have in common is: They are all based on limits. 
But limits have reached their own limits. Almost four years after passage of the McCain-Feingold law, its modest limits on soft money and certain issue ads are still contested, or, in the case of political use of the Internet, seem to have spun down a regulatory rabbit hole. Unless the Supreme Court this year decides to uphold a Vermont law imposing mandatory limits on spending -- which would be a surprise -- limits on contributions will coexist with unlimited spending, which inevitably creates further pressure and incentive to find ways around the existing limits. As long as we have a Constitution and capitalism, there will be ways. 
Limits address only one side of the relationship between political money and corruption. There's another dimension where there isn't enough money in politics. And that's where the connection to the current scandals is strongest and where real solutions are possible. 
* * * 
Let's walk this scandal back: as George W. Bush says, there is only one "accountability moment" for an elected official -- Election Day.

</text>
