<text id="E30" category="" words="1999" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Finding the ROI In Wellness.' Business Finance. Loveland: Dec 2006. Vol. 12, Iss. 12; pg. 36, 4 pgs" Author="Joanne Sammer" PublicationDate="December 2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://proquest.umi.com.ezproxy.lancs.ac.uk/pqdlink?index=11&did=1197333871&SrchMode=3&sid=2&Fmt=3&VInst=PROD&VType=PQD&RQT=309&VName=PQD&TS=1295238895&clientId=14829&aid=1">

CONCERNED ABOUT THE REAL ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF THE continued growth in health-care spending, more and more companies are trying to control these costs as much as they can through programs that emphasize the prevention of medical troubles. However, businesses are not content to simply throw money at the problem; they want to measure the financial return from their wellness programs. The challenge is finding the best way to do so. * Corporate wellness programs are nothing new. Companies have been trying for decades to steer employees toward healthier lifestyles in order to rein in health-care costs. Now, however, they're using new tools such as health risk assessments and incentives to identify the best programs for their particular workforce.
The evolving area of corporate wellness also has a new emphasis on measuring the financial return from these initiatives. And one of the most important requirements for achieving that goal is patience.
"ROI takes a number of years to materialize," says Jeff Dobro, M.D., a senior consultant with Towers Perrin in Parsippany, N.J. "In fact, the ROI during the first year is likely to be negative by at least 10 percent." However, Dobro suggests that companies that stay the course can generate a financial return that is one-and-a-half to two times the cost of these programs.
A study conducted by Oswald Companies, a risk management and insurance broker based in Cleveland, found that organizations engaged in wellness activities had health insurance premiums that were $1,030 per employee lower than those of a group of companies that had similar benefit plans and demographics but were not engaged in health initiatives. In terms of strategy, the study found that the companies with wellness programs were successful for four primary reasons:
* They had stronger and more pervasive communication, especially from senior executives, about the importance of wellness and its financial impact.
* They provided on-site health screenings, health risk appraisals, lunchtime seminars, exercise and nutrition programs, health-care consumerism training, one-onone coaching, and other programs.
* They provided meaningful but generally inexpensive incentives to encourage and reward employee participation.
* They achieved significant employee involvement in health promotion activities.
Developing a Wellness Strategy
Effective wellness programs don't just happen. Practitioners emphasize the need for a comprehensive wellness strategy. "It is important to have a defined plan based on a needs assessment and formal planning rather than handling wellness on an ad hoc basis," says Cathy Baase, M.D., global director of health services for the science, technology and agricultural products giant The Dow Chemical Co. in Midland, Mich. Baase says that the company identifies these priorities based on a wealth of data, including health risk assessments and year-to-year trends in health claims.
Dow's wellness programs have support at the highest levels of the organization. A few years ago, the executive leadership unanimously approved a corporate health strategy, recognizing that employee health is a significant economic issue for the company. Overall, the approach focuses on prevention, health-care quality and effectiveness, and purchasing.
The prevailing wisdom in the healthcare debate is that about 20 percent of employees incur close to 80 percent of health-care costs. Therefore, the key to an effective wellness strategy is to identify the individuals most at-risk for being part of that 20 percent, develop programs to help them avoid or manage health problems, and establish incentives to encourage employees to participate in the programs.
"Our goal is to make sure the relatively small percentage of employees who are driving costs are getting the right services and the right treatment," says George Murphy, executive director of compensation and benefits for pharmaceutical company AstraZeneca in Wilmington, Del. "But we also want to prevent healthy employees from migrating to that group by keeping them focused on healthy lifestyles." To better achieve those objectives, the company provides first-dollar coverage for prevention so that there is no cost barrier for employees. It also provides on-site programs to promote good health, including mammograms, fitness centers, and disease management programs. "These will pay dividends over the long term," he says.
Rewards for Healthy Behavior
Understanding workforce demographics and needs is paramount when developing effective wellness programs. Basking Ridge, N.J.-based Verizon Wireless's workforce has an average age of 34.5 and is 50 percent female. Because many of its female workers are in their childbearing years, the company has developed wellness programs aimed at ensuring healthy pregnancies and babies.
"Over the past three years, we have seen the length of pregnancy extended by two to two-and-a-half weeks," says Martha Delehanty, Verizon Wireless's vice president of human resources. "That is a real indication of success because research has shown that a longer pregnancy leads to a healthier delivery and a healthy baby." For the company, this result means that its prenatal wellness efforts may be helping its employees avoid giving birth prematurely. And if the organization can avoid even one premature birth, it could save millions of dollars. "That is huge when you have self-insured medical plans," she notes.
Verizon Wireless also strives to design wellness programs that mesh with its culture. The enterprise offers on-site Weight Watchers meetings to encourage employees to lose weight. But rather than granting discounts on the program or reimbursing individuals for the fees, it sticks to its pay-for-performance policy by giving monetary rewards to employees who reach their goal weight. "We didn't want to provide a discount because we wanted the reward to be tied to performance," explains Delehanty.
Companies can also provide incentives for employees who participate in wellness programs. For example, some organizations provide direct monetary motivation, while others offer discounts on health-care premiums or contributions to a health savings account. These enticements do not have to be large to be worthwhile. The general consensus seems to be that these discounts, contributions or promotions should be worth around $100 to be effective.
Who Is at Risk?
Some companies divide employees into risk-based categories. For example, a low-risk group would include employees with few or no health concerns, such as nonsmokers and those without a family history of ill health. This group would likely be helped by general health promotion programs, as well as offerings targeted to any specific risk factors they might face; expectant parents might benefit from prenatal education, for example.
A medium-risk category might include employees with several health risks or a chronic health condition like diabetes or epilepsy. This population could benefit from programs focused on disease management, education, and drug or treatment compliance improvement.
A high-risk category would include employees who exhibit several health risk factors and may even have had a catastrophic health event like a heart attack or cancer. This group would be the focus of case management efforts to make sure that these individuals receive the best and most efficient care. They may also benefit from some of the other programs typically offered to lower-risk populations, such as weight loss and smoking cessation programs.
Dow adopted a targeted, riskbased approach and focused on developing wellness programs designed to address the three health risk factors that were most prevalent in its employee population - obesity, lack of physical activity and mental-health issues. As a result, the company has been able to reduce the number of workers with those three health risk indicators by 10 percent, while also reducing the number of employees in the highrisk group by 10 percent and increasing the number of employees in the low-risk group by 2 percent.
Assessing Health Risks, Guarding Privacy
To gather this type of health risk information, companies are asking employees to complete health risk assessment questionnaires. With this data, businesses can identify areas where wellness programs are likely to have the most impact. For example, if a large number of employees are overweight or are smokers, the company can focus its wellness programs on weight reduction and smoking cessation. "We look for programs that will have the highest impact and the lowest cost to deliver," says Delehanty.
AstraZeneca uses health risk assessment data to target its wellness efforts. The company offers counseling and coaching to every employee shown to have two or more risk factors.
Because health risk assessment data is becoming so important to wellness programs, companies need to find ways to encourage employees to fill out the paperwork. For example, many organizations offer a reduction in health-care premiums. On the other hand, AstraZeneca increases health-care premiums for employees who do not take the health risk assessment by $50 per month or $600 a year. "It is important to create consequences around the choice of taking the health risk assessment," says Murphy. Other companies make a contribution to employees' health savings accounts if they complete the forms.
No matter how pure their motives, companies will need to anticipate resistance and take steps to reassure employees that the information they provide to the company will remain private. For example, The Raymond Corp., a Greene, N.Y.-based industrial manufacturer, uses a third-party vendor to tabulate health risk assessment data; the company receives the details only in aggregate and cannot access individual employees' responses.
What Is the Impact?
When measuring the financial impact of wellness programs, companies should look at multiple metrics, including overall health-care costs, absenteeism, disability, workers' compensation, productivity and retention. In fact, generating a clear understanding of these measures can help a company determine how much of an investment in wellness it should make. For example, companies in sectors with historically high turnover - food services or retail, for example - may find that investments in wellness programs do not pay for themselves because few employees stay long enough to benefit from them.
Dow keeps its U.S. benefit cost hikes at the lower end of projected increases to gain an advantage over industry and geographic competitors in the search for talent.
The Raymond Corp. uses its healthcare cost increases as the baseline for measuring the impact of its wellness programs. The company's year-over-year health insurance increase rate has slowed from 20 percent in 2004 to a projected 3 percent for 2007. Using this metric, the company has determined that its wellness efforts earn $8.00 to $8.50 for every dollar invested in the program. Over the long term, the organization's goal is to keep its health-care costs 25 percent below the national average, according to Kim Parker, human resources strategy and program manager.
To calculate the financial return on its wellness investments, AstraZeneca relies on its data warehouse of healthcare information. "We conduct a rigorous analysis of the past three years of claims, health risk assessment data, pharmaceutical benefit usage, longterm disability claims and so on," says Murphy. "This way, we can track changes over time. But we are not only making sure we have an ROI on these programs, we also want to see how they are affecting employees' health," he explains.
Although AstraZeneca is still perfecting its overall financial ROI calculations, the company finds other ways to gauge the fiscal impact of these programs. For example, the organization is measuring the success of its asthma program by looking at the number and frequency of participants' emergency room visits before and after participating in the plan. "We want to see if we are getting behavior modification," says Murphy.
Like other companies, AstraZeneca has an overall goal of keeping its healthcare outlays two percentage points below the national trend. "When you have health-care costs of $100 million, that can add up over time," says Murphy.
Getting Started On the Road to Wellness
With increases in health-care costs showing no signs of subsiding, companies would be wellserved by giving targeted wellness programs a chance. Baase suggests that businesses start out small on the road to wellness, based on identified priorities, then gradually add more activities over time until they achieve their goals. "Companies are spending money on health already, and that has an economic impact whether or not it is fully acknowledged," she says. By encouraging employees to become more actively engaged in their own health, wellness programs enable companies to turn that money into an investment rather than just a cost.

</text>
