<text id="E35" category="" words="2000" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Jennifer Post: A modernist designer with a penchant for light and white interiors.' Architectural Digest, April 2006. 'Paul Vincent Wiseman: The San Francisco designer embraces his lifelong love of art and architecture.' Architectural Digest, February 20" Author="Nicholas von Hoffman" PublicationDate="April 2006, February 2006" SampledFrom="All, Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.architecturaldigest.com/architects/100/jennifer_post/post_article_042006?currentPage=1, http://www.architecturaldigest.com/architects/100/paul_wiseman/wiseman_article_022006?currentPage=1">

Jennifer Post seasons her speech with the words that describe her life and her work. "I'm a purist. Some people don't like what I do. That's fine. There are enough people who do. I want to do something that's completely unconditional and unique for people who appreciate light and space, who want one very fluid, purist scale when they're at home."
White would seem to be the designer's only color: She uses it everywhere. "I literally have four white towels in my closet. That's it. White walls are very warm, and white cashmere is just as warm as brown cashmere."

Post grew up in Hamilton, Ohio, near Cincinnati. Her father was a chemical company executive who liked to take one of his children along on business trips. Post's siblings were not keen on airports and hotels, so she was delighted to have the chance to explore the major cities of the United States. "I had this incredible urge to travel," she says. "That's probably why I'm single, probably why I don't have any children and all I do is work. I love what I do so much that I can't wait to get up in the morning."
On those trips with her father, however, she never shopped and never went into stores. "All I wanted to do was walk the streets of San Francisco and Atlanta, Chicago, Boston, St. Louis." And as she walked, she absorbed architecture and design. In Chicago, she recalls "going all the way down and then turning and going back up Lake Shore Drive and doing it again because I loved to see if I could name all the buildings. I do the same thing in New York. I love walking down Park Avenue. I can name all the buildings and all the architects of the buildings."
At the University of Cincinnati, where she was already designing her fellow undergraduates' rooms gratis, Post decided that she would be a set designer and filmmaker, but this turned out to be an ambition that even such a willful and gifted young woman was not able to realize. Arriving in Los Angeles, she took her 16-millimeter film and tried to get into UCLA's film school. "I was number one in my class in Cincinnati, but they only take 12 students, so I didn't get accepted." She stayed on in Los Angeles and worked for actor Michael Moriarty and producer Norman Lear. "I did gofering work. I was on sets and saw how the world rolled, making movies. I thought my whole world had collapsed because I was not going to be a set designer."

Her parents nudged her toward Michigan State University, where she earned a master's degree in art. Then it was on to the University of London and elsewhere in Europe, where she learned about the art and architecture. "Like everyone else, I decided I'd start a career in New York. I wasn't going to Chicago - I knew Chicago like the palm of my hand."
In the following years she held a number of jobs, and as she learned and saved her money, Post prepared for the flowering of her career. "I was an art director," she says of that period in her life. "I tried to do film work; I worked under a couple of designers. I knew that somehow I had to get into architecture and design, and, through God's blessing, I did some styling for some stores, I did some window design, I did store displays."

At 30 she made her move. "I decided to open my own design studio. And I did it out in the Hamptons, on a little country road in a huge old barn." It was an entrepreneurial gamble that more experienced businesspeople would probably have told her could not succeed. Her working capital came from her savings and a small bank loan.
"Nobody wanted the barn," she remembers. "It was on Southampton's North Sea Road - it wasn't even on Main Street. I paid $500 rent." The designer did much of the fixup work herself, traveling by bicycle because her driver's license had lapsed. "I took the barn floors and made them white lacquer. I took oil-based paint and put it on the barn walls, so you walked into this very hallowed, angelic space."
As her shop was off in the boonies, Post made plywood sandwich boards that read "North Sea House Antiques &amp; Design," with a huge arrow. "That's how people found me."
The arrow pointed the way for a man who helped launch her career. "It was in the '90s," she recalls, "when banking was really big. He pulls up in his Range Rover, and he jumps out with his golden retriever. He's obviously an investment banker, the protégé of one of the big guys. He comes in wearing his swim trunks and says, 'Your sense of style is incredible.' "
He had just bought a place on Manhattan's Gramercy Park and wanted to buy out her inventory, a combination of Biedermeier and modern pieces, which she had brought from Europe and displayed with the simplicity that has become her hallmark. A check for $100,000 sealed the deal, with an agreement that Post would design his apartment.

Even so, the opening of her New York office took some doing. "I was poor. I lived on cucumbers. I remember it was more important for me to buy stationery with my name on it than to eat well. Finally, I had my own stationery, my own business cards. I don't think I went out to dinner for three years, but I was determined, and my father never gave me a cent."
As it has turned out, there have been clients aplenty for what Jennifer Post calls "my look and my dialogue." It is the antithesis of clutter. "I hate drapes," she will tell you, "I hate fluffy fabrics. I can't stand Martha Stewart. I can't stand anything that's fluffy and pretty.
"I'm a modernist," she continues, "but I don't like it when people say that modern has to be cold. I'm for those people who want volume and light and space and elegance. Elegance! Elegance! Elegance! Elegance doesn't have to be brocades and heavy material. I'm for the confident person who wants life to be easier. When you have less, life is less complicated."
In addition to having an office in New York, Post, with her staff of five, is also working out of Palm Beach and Los Angeles. A self-described perfectionist, she so involves herself in each project that she rejects the notion of expansion or developing product sidelines. As she puts it, "I never wanted to have my name on towels. I never wanted to do a book. And I don't care about becoming rich. I'm 42. I've got the next 20, 30 years to refine and become better and better."

Paul Vincent Wiseman is one of those people who, like the Apostle Paul, discovered his life's work in a single moment. In St. Paul's case, it was a voice from on high; in Wiseman's, it was a friend's. "He said to me, 'Why are you studying political science? All you ever do is talk about art and history. Why don't you do something with art history and architecture?'" With that, Wiseman says, "everything just started falling into place."
The designer grew up on a California pear farm. "The nice part," he explains, "was that we were close to the capital, Sacramento, and close to San Francisco. So it was like growing up in a very rural area with a lot of sophistication. It's an unusual place; it looks kind of like the Mississippi Delta, except there are no snakes or alligators. We all live on islands connected by drawbridges. I am," he declares, "the only decorator in San Francisco who can drive a tractor and a 10-wheel truck."
Wiseman grew up on a California pear farm. "I am," he declares, "the only decorator in San Francisco who can drive a tractor and a 10-wheel truck."
Wiseman's grandparents were Southern California orange growers, but there was nothing isolated or provincial in his background. "The day after I graduated from high school, I went to Europe for three months while all the other kids were buying stereos and cars." After saving up for the trip, he went everywhere he could possibly go. "I put 12,000 miles on a car in England, France, Germany, Italy, Greece, Turkey, Romania, Bulgaria. I've never been shy about travel. I think that's probably been the most influential thing in my career - travel and looking at art and architecture."
Wiseman attended the University of California at both its Berkeley and Davis campuses, studying political science in preparation for becoming a lawyer. He spent his junior year in Australia at the University of Tasmania. This was the trip that changed his life. "Two of my friends came, and we worked in the pear orchards outside Melbourne for a month, and then we took six months off, coming home through Asia. That," he recalls, "is when I started really shifting. I'd always been very interested in architecture, art and history, but I hadn't really 'fessed up to it. I went back to Berkeley and hated it."
He began investigating design schools, but when he told his parents, they said, "Darling, we just spent all this money on your education. Why don't you go get a job in the industry and see if you really like it, and then we'll talk."
That's exactly what he did. In short order, he got a job with an office furniture company, then he was at Hexter Fabrics, then on to work for Winfield Windsor, the antiques dealer to whom Wiseman says he is indebted for guidance and training. After that he worked with Robert Hering, who did both antiques and interior design. "I loved it," Wiseman says. "But when I started selling so much, they fired me because I was making too much money. I was so upset that I decided I'd move to France, work on château restoration and suffer for the rest of my life. Meanwhile, my friend Sue Fisher King [a well-known San Francisco dealer] said, 'While you're suffering, why don't you come help me with windows?' " He did and was discovered there by two of his former employer's clients, who asked him to help them.

"So," Wiseman continues, "with $600 to my name, I bought an electric typewriter, got my resale number, got some stationery made and started my business in 1980."
A man with a rollicking, self-deprecating sense of humor who is serious about his work but not about himself, he says, "It's in my horoscope. I'm a Cancer on the cusp of Leo. You know, Cancers are very domestic, and Leos are very aggressive. So what do you do with aggressive housewives? You make them decorators!"
Wiseman the decorator has pronounced ideas about what he does: "I always try to explain to my clients that it's their house, not mine. If it looks like my house, I've failed. You can buy the right car, the right clothes, the right address, but when it comes to the decoration of your home, it's a very personal reflection. Some people are frightened of that, so they hire a look. That's not what I do.
"I try to teach my young designers that you have to listen on so many levels, because what's being said is often not what's meant." In addition to being "very intuitive," Wiseman has a disability that, he believes, helps him understand his clients. "I'm actually quite deaf. I have a 35 percent hearing loss in both ears, so I've always had to listen a little harder. I think that's been very useful in that I have to listen to undercurrents of emotion in order to pick up the whole story."
Even so, some projects are more satisfying than others. As he puts it, "There are three criteria that make the perfect job: money, taste and time.

</text>
