<text id="F04" category="" words="2005" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Prevention Exercise May Be Key to Breast Cancer Survival Sept. 22, 2006  U.S. Cancer Death Rates Continue to Drop Sep 19 2006 How Short Walks Lower Your Blood Pressure Sept. 26, 2006 New Device May Ease Migraine Pain June 22, 2006Women Run Greater Risk of" Author="Unknown" PublicationDate="July-September 2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.prevention.com/health/health/conditions-treatments/exercise-may-be-key-to-breast-cancer-survival/article/8f7450d1fa803110VgnVCM10000013281eac____  http://www.prevention.com/health/health/conditions-treatments/u-s-cancer-death-rates-continue-to-">

Exercise May Be Key to Breast Cancer Survival
Study shows women who are regularly physically active may fight disease better

There's yet another reason for women to exercise: It may help them beat breast cancer. 
 
That's because research shows that women who are physically active in the year before getting breast cancer are more likely to survive the disease. 
 
"We found a beneficial effect on survival for exercise undertaken in the year before diagnosis, particularly among women who were overweight or obese near the time they were diagnosed with breast cancer," said Page Abrahamson, a postdoctoral researcher at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle. 
 
Abrahamson's study is in the Oct. 15, 2006 issue of Cancer. 
 
Her team analyzed data on nearly 1,300 women ages 20-to-54 who were diagnosed with invasive breast cancer between 1990 and 1992. The women were asked how frequent and how vigorous their level of physical activity was at ages 13, 20 and during the year before their diagnosis. 
 
Overall, women who ranked in the top 25% in terms of their level of activity were 21% more likely to survive than those rated in the bottom quarter. Activity in the teen years or early adulthood did not affect survival rates. 
 
While research has suggested that regular exercise reduces the risk of getting breast and other cancers, less is known about what effect activity has on a woman's prognosis once she gets the disease. 
U.S. Cancer Death Rates Continue to Drop
Lifestyle shifts and medical advancements improve odds of cancer prevention and survival. 

-- America has officially made a dent in the war on cancer. 
 
"We're making progress because of a reduction in tobacco consumption, improved treatment, and improved detection," said Ahmedin Jemal, program director of cancer occurrence at the American Cancer Society. Jemal is co-author of this year's Annual Report to the Nation on the Status of Cancer, 1975-2003, which is being published in the Oct. 15, 2006 issue of Cancer. 
 
The drop in death rates continues a trend first reported in 1998. This has been the first sustained decline in cancer death rates in the United States since the 1930s. Men experienced greater declines (1.6% per year from 1993 through 2003) than women (0.8% per year from 1992 through 2003). 
 
This year's report also includes the first comprehensive compilation of cancer information for U.S. Latinos. Overall, Latino immigrants have lower rates of cancer than whites or blacks, although they are more susceptible to certain cancers. "They have a higher rate of cancers related to infection like stomach, liver and cervical cancers," Jemal said. "They are also more likely to be diagnosed at advanced stages of the disease for some of the more common cancers, such as breast and lung." 
 
Among the report's other findings: 
 
• Mortality rates dropped for 11 of the 15 most common cancers in men and for 10 of the 15 most common cancers in women. 
 
• Overall cancer incidence rates were stable for men from 1995 through 2003, while rates for women increased from 1979 through 2003. Overall, however, the rates were stable from 1992 through 2003. 
 
• The incidence rate for female breast cancer stabilized from 2001 through 2003, ending a period of increases that had begun in the 1980s. Female lung cancer incidence rates experienced a small rise from 1991 through 2003, a slower rate of increase than in the past. 
 
• Incidence rates among women decreased for colon and rectum, uterus, ovarian, stomach, cervical and oral cancers. 
 
• Among men, incidence rates have decreased for colon, rectum, stomach, lung and oral cancers. They increased for prostate cancer, myeloma, leukemia, and cancers of the liver, kidney and esophagus. 
 
The report is a joint effort from the American Cancer Society, the U.S. CDC, the U.S. National Cancer Institute, and the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries.
How Short Walks Lower Your Blood Pressure
Finding the time for small amounts of activity can have big payoffs

-- Forget that long hike. Four 10-minute strolls will do more to lower your blood pressure than a 40-minute walk. 
 
That's what Indiana University researchers report in the September 2006 issue of the Journal of Hypertension. They compared the effects of the four short walks to one long walk in reducing blood pressure in 20 people with a condition known as prehypertension. 
 
A person with prehypertension would be "135 over 90." This elevated blood pressure level usually progresses to high blood pressure, which is often associated with heart attack, heart failure, kidney failure, stroke and blindness. 
 
The researchers found that while the short walks and the long walk decreased the participants' blood pressure by the same amount, the effect lasted for 11 hours after the short walks, compared to seven hours after the long walk. 
 
The findings may be just the motivation for people who can't seem to fit long bouts of activity in their schedule or are daunted at the prospect of walking for 40 minutes. 
 
"The biggest problem for most people is that they don't have time," said Janet Wallace, professor in the Department of Kinesiology at the Indiana University School of Health, Physical Education and Recreation. "You might think, 'I don't have the time to go to the gym or work out for 40 minutes, but I might have the time to do 10 minutes here, 10 minutes here and another 10 minutes here." 

New Device May Ease Migraine Pain
By tapping into nerve cells, scientists may be able to stop migraines
-- A machine no larger than a hair dryer may be able to bring relief to migraine headache sufferers if they use it early enough. 
 
It's called a transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) device, and it is able to interrupt the development of migraines, according to its maker, who introduced it to data presented at the American Headache Society's annual meeting on June 21, 2006 in Los Angeles. 
 
The TMS device used in this study has been approved by the FDA as an investigational device. It sends an electric current through a metal coil, creating a magnetic field that activates nerve cells in the brain. 
 
Scientists believe that migraine attacks start because of nerve cell hyper-excitability, which is followed by fatigue and malfunction of the nerve cells, or neurons. These phases seem to correlate with aura (changes in vision before the actual pain begins), which is experienced by about 20% of the 28 million Americans who suffer migraine headaches. The study was designed to measure this correlation. 
 
The study, involving 43 people who had migraines with aura, was designed to see if TMS had any effect. Participants were told to give themselves two pulses to the back of the head at the first sign of an aura. 
 
The results were definitive. Seventy-four percent of people in the TMS group said they had no or only a mild headache two hours after using the device, compared with 45% in the control group. Participants also reported a reduction in noise and light sensitivity: 74% of people in the TMS group experienced a reduction in light sensitivity while 75% experienced less noise sensitivity. In the placebo group, only 20% or so experienced such reductions. 
 
A larger study of TMS involving nine medical centers and 200 patients will begin in July 2006, according to Dr. Yousef Mohammad, principal investigator of the study and an assistant professor of neurology at Ohio State University Medical Center. "If we can interrupt this with two pulses of magnetic stimulation, we can abort the headache," he added.

Women Run Greater Risk of Lung Cancer
Study tries to find an improved early detection method
-- Female smokers are more likely to develop lung cancer than their male counterparts, but they're less likely to die of the disease, new research in the July 12, 2006 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association says. 
 
The study was conducted to determine whether helical CT (a test in which a CT scanner revolves around the patient) can improve survival rates for lung cancer victims. Dr. Claudia I. Henschke of Cornell University studied 7,498 women and 9,427 men aged 40 and older who had a history of cigarette smoking. All participants were screened for lung cancer between 1993 and 2005. 
 
Lung cancer was diagnosed in 2.1% of the women and 1.2% of the men. And while women were roughly twice as likely to have lung cancer, they were only 48% as likely to die of the disease. The results remained consistent even after the researchers compensated for factors such as years of smoking, disease stage, and tumor cell type. 
 
The study points out the need to direct more aggressive anti-smoking efforts at women and girls, and possibly to screen women who are smokers at an earlier stage. 
 
Lung cancer remains the leading cancer killer of both men and women in the United States, according to the American Cancer Society. An estimated 73,000 women and 90,500 men will die of the disease in 2006. Among women, lung cancer is responsible for more deaths than breast and colon cancer combined. 
 
Right now there's no sure way to detect lung cancer early, with most discoveries coming during other medical exams. "Lung cancers get detected every which way," says Dr. Norman Edelman, chief medical officer of the American Lung Association. 
 
Sometimes symptoms, which indicate advanced disease, are the tip-off. Other times, X-rays taken for other reasons point out lung cancer, he says. Spiral CT screening, a procedure similar to the helical CT screening used in the study, is a promising technology on the horizon but is not yet proven. 
 
Can Fruit Control Your Sweet Tooth?
Cornell researchers find some good news for sweet-snack lovers

-- That sugar craving that leads you to reach for a cinnamon bun can be put to good use as you try to improve your eating habits. 
 
People who are drawn to ice cream, candy bars and other sugary sweet snacks also eat more fruit each day than those whose food cravings lead them to salt, new research suggests. 
 
"The take-home message here is that if you are a self-identified sweet lover, try to replace a few sugary snacks with more healthful sweet snacks that are packed with nutrients, not just sugar and calories," said Lona Sandon, a spokeswoman for the American Dietetic Association. 
 
Researchers at Cornell University's Food and Brand Lab analyzed data from an ongoing U.S. Department of Agriculture consumer survey. They found that folks whose foods cravings lean towards sweet snacks also eat more fruits each day than salty-snack lovers do. Even accounting for total snack consumption of all kinds, sweet snacks consumption had more than twice the impact on fruit consumption than did salty-snack intake. 
 
The findings appear in the August 2006 issue of the journal Appetite. 
 
Parents can use their child's sweet/salt preferences as a way to nudge them toward healthier food cravings. And adults can use this information to help improve their own eating habits, the researchers said. 
 
For example, try replacing strawberry ice cream with a smaller serving of vanilla with fresh berries. 
 
When it comes to veggies, aim for the sweeter ones such as red peppers, sweet potatoes, sweet corn and sugar snap peas.
A Good Night's Sleep Improves Memory
Improve your recollection by getting enough Zzzs
-- New research shows sleep is critical in building and maintaining memories, particularly the kind dealing with facts and events. The report is published in the July 11, 2006 issue of Current Biology. 
 
This kind of memory is known as "declarative" memory, which differs from non-declarative memories, or "how to" memories. Sleep has already been shown to help those. 
 
This new finding may be particularly important for people with mentally demanding lifestyles, such as doctors, medical residents and college students, who often do not get enough sleep, the researchers say. 
 
"We sought to explore whether sleep has any impact on memory consolidation," says lead researcher Dr. Jeffrey M. Ellenbogen, a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard Medical School's Center for Sleep and Cognition. "Specifically, the type of memory for facts and events in time."

</text>
