<text id="F15" category="" words="1990" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Nylon magazine: MILES TO GO; BONDE DO ROLE; HEIMA: A FILM BY SIGUR RóS; MIAMI INK; MUM'S THE WORD; BEIRUT" Author="Various" PublicationDate="2007" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.nylonmag.com/?section=article&parid=443  http://www.nylonmag.com/?section=article&parid=549  http://www.nylonmag.com/?section=article&parid=564  http://www.nylonmag.com/?section=article&parid=752  http://www.nylonmag.com/?section=article&parid=">

MILES TO GO
Ra Ra Riot maps out the remainder of '07.
Wesley Miles teeters on the edge of a Brooklyn stage with an outstretched arm and a pair of eyes stolen from a repentant stained-glass saint. His vocal is warm and wistful, and his fellow Ra Ra Riot bandmates - Milo Bonacci, Rebecca Zeller, Alexandra Lawn, Mathieu Santos and a friend on drums - support him with a mesh of melodic strings, deep and driving guitar and bass, and rapid-fire beats. Sincerity, not crass apathy, coats each song, and the style translates to the group's shared attitude toward making music together - as long as it's fun. 
    Since forming at Syracuse University in January 2006, Miles, 23, and the Rioters have received the approving nod from bloggers and fans, released a self-titled EP, endured the tragic loss of their friend and drummer, John Pike, toured with Tokyo Police Club, and transitioned from college band to professional musicians. But before Miles became the bashful, hair-whipping frontman, he was a physics major who used to play in his high school marching band. Miles credits his band days in Glen Ridge, N.J., with two fortunate outcomes: He improved his music reading, and he met his close friend Ezra Koenig, lead singer of the Brooklyn-based Vampire Weekend.
    The band will squeeze a lot into the next four months, including tour dates with Editors and a music video for the E.E. Cummings-inspired "Dying Is Fine" with filmmaker and fellow Syracuse alum Albert Birney (who's also worked with the Spinto Band and the Capitol Years). "I saw his senior film sort of accidentally, and I just became obsessed," Miles says of Birney. "I can't wait to work with him." The group will also find itself in Seattle this winter to record its first LP. Some of their strongest live pieces include the dark-hued "Ghost Under Rocks," "Each Year", and Pike's "St. Peter's Day Festival," but the LP track list has yet to be finalized. Ra Ra Riot has also begun playing a rousing live cover of Kate Bush's "Suspended in Gaffa." Miles, a long-time fan of the '80s songstress, says he was unsure of how the band felt about the quirky track - until he caught them playing it. "I wasn't even there!" Miles says, "But when I came into the space where we were rehearsing, they were almost already done [learning it]." Will it make the LP? "I'd say it's 50/50," answers Miles with a wink.         

BONDE DO ROLE
Serving up some Brazilian funky freshness.
Combine one part wild and bouncing misfit songstress with two parts man-powered MC and D.J. Add a splash of baile funk rhythms, a twist of popular samples, and garnish with loads of raunchy lyrics in Portuguese that get a "say what?" from English-speakers. Rather than being the instructions for a bizarro tequila sunrise, this is the recipe for the punchy Brazilian concoction known as Bonde do Rolê -  a band whose high-energy shows are guaranteed to give you the spins.         
    MC Marina Ribatski, 22, met the members of the three-piece, fellow MC Pedro D'Eyrot and MC/DJ Rodrigo Gorky, in her hometown of Curitiba in southern Brazil. Ribatski had toyed with the idea of getting into music professionally as a teenager, but she never had high hopes for the ambition. "In Brazil, if you want a music career, you have a 0.00001 percent chance." After meeting up with D'Eyrot and Gorky, Ribatski says they started Bonde do Rolê in 2005 as a joke. "[The rehearsals] were like drinking and writing stupid lyrics we thought were funny," she says. "We never expected to be a proper band."
    The trio decided to put some of its songs on MySpace, and to the band's surprise, the songs started to spread. After playing only four gigs in small Brazilian clubs, Bonde do Rolê was called on to tour Europe with Wes Prentz, a known Brazilian music fan who goes by the moniker Diplo. Diplo promoted the band through his Mad Decent label before the group officially signed with Domino in 2006. That year the group also had what Ribatski calls "the best tour" the band ever did, when Bonde do Rolê hit the road with Diplo and fellow Brazilians Cansei de Ser Sexy. "It was a real low budget, partying, rock 'n' roll tour," Ribatski says. "It was like Wes [Diplo] and 10 crazy Brazilians. We drove him crazy." At the tour's Chicago stop at the Pitchfork Festival, Ribatski managed to break her arm while stage diving. When the band stopped in Chicago on this year's tour to promote the debut album, With Lazers, Ribatski she felt it necessary to force herself to stage dive in order to put her past Chicago mishap behind her. She almost psyched herself out of it, "but then I did it, and I just threw the microphone and was like, 'Yeah, let's cheer because I didn't break anything in Chicago!'" 
CHRISTINE WERTHMAN
HEIMA: A FILM BY SIGUR RóS
A documentary that juxtaposes the beauty of Iceland with the band's oneiric music.
In the summer of 2006, after a well-received world tour, Sigur Rós offered a series of free, unannounced shows throughout their native Iceland. Heima, literally "at home," chronicles these extraordinary performances, which included an open-air concert to thousands in Reykjavík; a candlelit, acoustic show in an intimate coffeeshop; a handmade marimba played in a darkened cave. Director Dean DeBlois juxtaposes the tactile beauty of Iceland in high-definition close-ups of rocks, fjords, and abandoned farmhouses with the equally cinematic hushed atonality of the band's oneiric music. The images, like the music, hide as much as they reveal; there is an undercurrent swelling below every note, every nuance, and when it crests, the result is nothing short of magical. The DVD, accompanied by a double CD, Hvarf/Heim, reaffirms the soundtrack-ready quality of Sigur Rós, which is already evident in the number of films and television shows that have used their tunes as a backdrop. But as internationally successful as they've become, these performances show that, for Sigur Rós, there's no place like home.
REBECCA RODRIGUEZ

MIAMI INK
Bienvenido a Art Basel. Here are our Top Ten shows to see and parties to hit! 
For the past six years, Art Basel has proved there is more to Miami than trance beats and bilingual eye candy, culling 200 galleries and more than 2,000 artists from around the globe. Iconic Basquiats will be juxtaposed against Futura's graffiti murals, Erwin Wurm's spontaneous sculptures, Luiz Zerbini's multi-media masterpieces, Nathalie Djurberg's claymation narratives, and Philippe Perrot's pen and ink abstractions. Takashi Murakami is hosting the first-ever Geisai Art Fair; bands from clashing genres like Iggy Pop and the Stooges and Deerhoof are performing; not to mention, with KAWS, Yves Behar, and others designing special edition tattoos of their art, you now have more, er, investment options. Here, our Top Ten shows to see and parties to hit!

1. AS LONG AS IT LASTS
what: Wear your art on your sleeve, literally. Tobias Wong, Josée Lepage and Aric Chen have organized "As Long A It Lasts" a pop-up tattoo parlor featuring tattoos designed by Vito Acconci, Hella Jongerius, 5.5 Designers, KAWS, Yves Behar, Lawrence Weiner, Jurgen Mayer H, and Tord Boontje &amp; Andrew Allenson, to let you leave Miami with a permanent souvenir. 
where: The Loft Building, 3841 NE 2nd Ave.
when: Dec. 6-9.  
designmiami.com

2. GEISAI ART FAIR
what: That Takashi Murakami is hosting the opening night for the first annual Geisai Art Fair should be enough of a draw, but Eric Doeringer's unabashed bootlegs of Richard Prince works should seal the deal.
where: Prive, 136 Collins Avenue.
when: Opens Dec. 4 (11 pm) 
geisai.us

3. F.A.M.E. COLLECTIVE POP UP GALLERY
what: Busta Rhymes and D.J. Samantha Ronson know how to throw a party. The F.A.M.E. Collective - which includes Futura, MARS 1, Shawn Barber, Jeremy Fish, and Ron English - has enlisted the two to host the opening for their Pop Up Gallery, where they will also debut a pair of limited edition JB Classics kicks.
where: Mansion 1235 Washington Ave.
when: Dec. 7 (11pm)
fame-collective.com

4. ART IN MOTION
what: Y-3 &amp; EAI present Art in Motion, an outdoor and indoor video installation featuring compilations of multiple video artists and the work of Dara Birnbaum. 
where: Y-3 Miami, 150 NE 40th St., Design District.
when: Dec. 5-8 (outdoor installation 12noon  -  11pm / indoor installation 11am  -  7pm) 
eai.org

5. BERLIN SCREENING
what: Rub shoulders with the art world elite in celebration of Julian Schnabel's indie film, Berlin, which documents Lou Reed's five-night performance in 2006 of the 1973 concept album Berlin. The party will be hosted by Schnabel's daughter, Lola. 
where: Set, 320 Lincoln Rd.
when:  Dec. 8 (11pm)
setmiami.com





MUM'S THE WORD
If the word "ethereal" can be embodied, the Icelandic group Múm and its transportive music do just that. In Manhattan for the inventive and industrious Wordless Music Festival - a series of concerts that pairs electronic and indie bands with classical acts - Múm played St. Paul the Apostle church before heading off for a European tour. Hipster kids infiltrated, overflowing from pews, plopping cross-legged on the floor, and sitting side-stage in choir chairs. Fronting the show were fair-haired Nords mr.Silla (who, despite her masculine moniker, appears angelic with stage lights shining on her cooing baby-face), Hildur Gudnadottir (a Juliette Binoche deadringer who smiles as if she's on happy drugs), and Eiríkur Orri Olafsson (who resembles a scary surgeon from a bad horror flick, particularly when blowing his melodica tube). Now on FatCat Records with Animal Collective and equally atmospheric compatriot Sigur Rós, the band has persisted for almost a decade. Late September 2007 brought a new CD, Go Go Smear the Poison Ivy, showcasing the band's characteristic melodies despite its rotating cast (piercing-voiced Kristín Anna Valtýsdóttir left in 2006; five others join founding members Gunnar Örn Tynes and Örvar Þóreyjarson Smárason for recording and touring). Fresh from Reykjavik's world-class Iceland Airwaves Music Festival - which also featured Bonde de Role, of Montreal, and Bloc Party last month - Múm's set at St. Paul's was as spiritual as its setting, and sensual, too - with mr.Silla coddling her ukulele, classically trained Hildur happiest when straddling her cello, and floppy-mohawked Eiríkur crouching before his moog. Heavenly, symphonic, and ascendant, this is music for fans of the movie Science of Sleep, for people who think glitches are good, for people who wish the Northern Lights rose with a soundtrack. CAROLINE KINNEBERG

BEIRUT
Gypsy music" seemed the best way to categorize the sounds of Zach Condon's Beirut after the 2006 release, Gulag Orkestar. It was a fitting, albeit vague, categorization that considered the Eastern European/Balkan/Romanian influence in Beirut's sound. That album brought with it jangled percussive flourishes, accordion, bloated brass, sweetly melodic mandolin and strings, and Condon's rich warble. But on their second full-length, The Flying Club Cup (Ba Da Bing), Beirut has added the flavors of a new location to its sound: France. The album wears many of Gulag Orkestar's pieces of flair, but it claims more finesse and sounds tidier, sharper, and more focused than its successor. On "Cliquot", Beirut's Owen Pallett reveals a smooth tenor hiding beneath his shaky moan. Condon's quaky vibrato on "Nantes" sounds well placed and now moves similarly to that of Antony from Antony &amp; The Johnsons. The Flying Club Cup maintains Beirut's communal vibe with all players contributing a little something to each track, but the instruments do not bleed into each other quite as much as they did on Gulag; instead, they have room to breath and be heard. Whether the cleaner sound was a conscious choice or not, it shows Beirut's music choices maturing. Condon takes his time with this album, sprinkling it with piano-driven compositions like "Un Dernier Verre (Pour La Route)" and lighter romps like "The Penalty." Gulag might have indicated that Condon, now 21, left his sophomore album with some big shoes to fill, but as The Flying Club Cup indicates, the boy and his music are growing into them just fine.

</text>
