<text id="F23" category="" words="2015" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The National Review: Macaca Business : The Washington Post vs. George Allen ; Pelosi Ahead ; Spacing Out" Author="Stephen Spruiell  ; William F. Buckley Jr ; The Editors " PublicationDate="October 24th 2006 " SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.nationalreview.com/articles/219032/macaca-business/stephen-spruiell http://www.nationalreview.com/articles/219038/pelosi-ahead-william-f-buckley-jr http://www.nationalreview.com/articles/219034/spacing-out/editors">

By now it's an all-too-familiar story. On August 11, at a campaign rally in Breaks, Virginia, Allen pointed to a Webb campaign volunteer who was filming the event and shouted, "Let's give a welcome to macaca here. Welcome to America, and the real world of Virginia." It was a significant gaffe. The volunteer  -  a college student of Indian descent who was born and raised in northern Virginia  -  put his video on the web, and after a few days of circulating on the liberal blogs, it was on washingtonpost.com. On August 15, the Post ran a story on page A01 titled, "Allen Quip Provokes Outrage, Apology; Name Insults Webb Volunteer." 
The incident certainly merited coverage, but nothing like what was to follow. The Post followed up Tuesday's story (and accompanying editorial) with another front-page story on Wednesday. On Thursday, three stories in the Post were about the "macaca" incident, including one purporting to debunk Allen's excuse that "macaca" was a nickname referring to the volunteer's mohawk-style haircut. Style-section reporter Libby Copeland reported that the hairstyle in question was not a mohawk at all, but rather "a hybrid of the mullet and the 'faux-hawk,' a hipster look that peaks at the top of the head, reminiscent of the cartoon character Tintin."
As the Post continued to hammer away at the story, the Allen campaign exhumed an allegation that Webb had distributed anti-Semitic flyers during his primary campaign. The flyers, which Webb had approved, featured a caricature of his Jewish opponent with a big cigar and his pockets stuffed with cash. "Allen's campaign has responded to the incident by accusing Webb of tolerating anti-Semitism," Post reporters Tim Craig and Michael D. Shear wrote in an article the following Saturday titled "Allen Flap May Give A Boost To Webb; Reenergized Va. Democrats Gain Support."
As the campaign got dirtier, the Post exhausted every conceivable angle in order to keep the "macaca" story in the paper. First, it sought out the professional grievance groups ("For One Group, 'Macaca' Recalls Slurs After 9/11"). Then, it compared Allen's woes to those of other (Republican) politicians ("Comments Haunt Another Senator; Montana's Burns Joked About Latinos"). Finally  -  two weeks after the incident  -  the Post profiled Macaca himself ("Fairfax Native Says Allen's Words Stung").
Allen responded to the Post's "macaca" drumbeat with more allegations that Webb had made un-PC remarks of his own. This time, Allen seized upon an essay Webb had written in 1979 titled "Women Can't Fight" in which Webb expressed his strong opposition to women in combat. The Washington Post gave this story the headline, "Va. Senate Race Goes Negative on 1979 Essay"  -  as if the Webb campaign hadn't already gone negative by milking the "macaca" incident for weeks.
What came next made all that preceded it look like high-minded debate. On September 24, the liberal web magazine Salon.com reported that, according to several of Allen's college football teammates, he used the "N-word" in college. The Post picked up the story two days later, and two days after that it covered allegations that Webb had also used the "N-word" in college. Allen's accusers were admitted Democratic partisans, and Webb's accuser a Republican, but none of this stopped the Post or other mainstream media outlets from following them down into a gutter of unsubstantiated rumors.
After the "N-word" debacle, the Post took an even weirder swipe at Allen. After weeks of portraying him as a racist redneck, it published a 1,302-word article about how his "cowboy" image was nothing more than a "shtick" ("Will Sen. Allen's Cowboy Boots Fit Virginia Voters? Detractors Call Cowboy Image a Shtick").  As National Review's Byron York noted at the time, "Webb's senior advisor is the only detractor quoted in Shear's article, which features positive quotes from two present and former Allen staffers, plus one Allen fan."
Not content merely to portray Allen as a phony, the Post also tried to sell Webb as genuine and modest. Last week the Post published an article about Webb titled "Webb is Reluctant to Advertise Duty," in which Shear and Craig wrote that Webb is "uncomfortable talking about his personal story even if doing so could help him unseat Republican Sen. George Allen." NRO's John J. Miller pointed out that Shear and Craig must have missed the numerous photos and stories about Webb's service in Vietnam adorning his campaign website.
But perhaps the most bizarre instance of biased reporting came in the form of a soft profile of Webb in the Post's Style section. Webb told reporter Libby Copeland that he was displeased with the fact that "Towel-heads and rednecks became the easy villains in so many movies out there." Two things made this comment strange. First, as NRO's Greg Pollowitz has noted, Middle Easterners  -  "towel-heads," if you will  -  were the villains in a 2000 movie written by Webb called Rules of Engagement. Second, the Post let the matter pass without any kind of sanctimonious outcry. Based on its "macaca" coverage, one can only imagine the Post's reaction if George Allen had said something like this.
At first, the race between Allen and Webb looked like the kind of race policy wonks dream about. As governor of Virginia during the 1990s, Allen pulled off a trifecta of conservative reforms  -  abolishing parole, overhauling welfare, and establishing testing and standards in education  -  all while bringing billions of dollars of high-tech investment to the state. Jim Webb, Allen's Democratic challenger, is a decorated Vietnam veteran, former Reagan appointee and best-selling novelist. Each offered starkly different views of the war in Iraq, and the race initially held out the promise of lively debate on the most important issues facing the Senate.
Instead, it has degenerated into a disgraceful mud-slinging contest  -  a race to the bottom aided in no small part by the Washington Post.
Pelosi Ahead 

Everybody is predicting big gains for the Democrats in November. If they succeed in taking the House of Representatives, that means that Nancy Pelosi is in our future. There is a lot about her that is distinctive, notably that she would be the first woman serving as Speaker of the House, which incidentally would put her second, after the vice president, in line for the presidency. Exit Bush and Cheney simultaneously, enter President Nancy Pelosi, oh my God.
It's true, as she has several times said, that "people" don't know a great deal about her. Among other things, she serves the San Francisco constituency, which is happily unique. But her background is thoroughly political. Her father, Thomas D'Alesandro, was for many years the mayor of Baltimore, and one of her brothers also, though more briefly, served as mayor. The brief glimpses of Pelosi given on television recently show us one tough lady, but it pays for critics to remind themselves that she was overwhelmingly chosen as minority leader only four years ago. It is good fun to think that colleagues who'd have preferred someone else chose her for fear that otherwise she would train her unsparing eyes on them and hound them to death. 
 
Her directness of speech was a subject Lesley Stahl of CBS's 60 Minutes elected last week to emphasize, asking just how did she intend to achieve her goal of bringing civility back to Washington given the language she tends to use about Republicans. Pelosi, viewers were reminded, has called her Republican colleagues "immoral" and "corrupt," suggesting that they were backing a criminal enterprise. Stahl said: "I mean, you're one of the reasons we have to restore civility in the first place."
 
Pelosi raised her eyes in unconcern. "Well actually, when I called them those names I was being gentle. There are much worse things I could have said about them."
 
Now that is a cute forensic technique. It has two effects. The first is to diminish the seriousness of the charges already leveled. The second is to awaken interest in the charges being held back in deference to civility. What are the Republicans actually conspiring to accomplish that is more grievous than the immorality and corruption they are already, according to Ms. Pelosi, bringing in through their criminal enterprise?
 
Ms. Stahl didn't ask the Democratic leader what exactly were the graver crimes she might have imputed to the Republicans. She turned instead to the problems raised by the need to associate with criminals:  "If you're Speaker, I'm wondering how you'll work with [President Bush]." Pelosi had charged that Bush was "an incompetent leader."  Stahl remarks that the mere "sound" of such words is disruptive: "It even stings to hear it now. I mean, obviously, the two of you are bound to get along just great."
 
Pelosi gave a fine answer. "You know, we're professionals."  She repeated herself.  "We're professionals. You could go through a long list of things his [Bush's] surrogates have said about me. I know they have to do what they have to do, and they know I have to do what I have to do. And what I have to do is make a distinction in the public that's between the Democrats and the Republicans in order to win. This isn't personal." 
 
"It sounds personal."
 
"This isn't personal."
 
"[You say] he's incompetent - "
 
"Well, I think he is."
 
"Well that's personal."
 
"Well, I'm sorry, that's his problem."
 
"How does this raise the level of civility?"  Stahl is yielding to despair on the point.
 
"Well, we're in a political debate here. We didn't come here to have a tea party together, and toss a coin to see who would win on an issue.  I have very thick skin. I don't care what they say about me."
 
*    *   *
 
That is a very grand thing  -  to announce that the woman who may be the next Speaker of the House really doesn't care what is said about her. People who enter politics have to expect that there will be rough language ahead, used at their expense.  It is so, also, for (most) writers and other public figures. But Pelosi is advertising an indifference to necessary elements of democratic life, and this takes her one step further than giving evidence that her skin is thick. It moves the public concern to the meaning of words. If we are trained to attach no meaning to words used by Democrats about Republicans, and the other way around, we debase not merely language, but ideals. If Republicans in Congress are engaged in immoral and corrupt practices, then they should be replaced. Or  -  things they do should be given other names.
 
Speaker Pelosi will be heir to an important tradition, exercising an important role.  She should not begin with this profession of utter indifference to the language used to describe what she does, and indeed to describe her.
Spacing Out 

Almost 20 years to the day after the U.S.-Soviet summit in Reykjavik, where Mikhail Gorbachev desperately but unsuccessfully tried to persuade Ronald Reagan to abandon the Strategic Defense Initiative, the Bush administration released a revised National Space Policy (NSP). The document, whose unclassified portion was made public on October 6, commits the United States "to the exploration and use of outer space by all nations for peaceful purposes." It also promises to "deny, if necessary, adversaries the use of space capabilities hostile to U.S. national interests." Because America relies so heavily on satellites for national security, economic activity, and scientific research, these are important priorities.
Yet a domestic coalition of liberals and peaceniks that has consistently opposed ballistic-missile defense since the early days of SDI is trying to make the NSP controversial. The Center for Defense Information, whose board of advisers includes such military experts as Ben Cohen of Ben &amp; Jerry's and the actor Paul Newman, has condemned the new document for its "tonality." 
They must resort to such trivialities because the substance of the latest NSP isn't much different from the version issued by the Clinton administration in 1996. This earlier document called for "assuring that hostile forces cannot prevent our own use of space" and "countering, if necessary, space-systems and services used for hostile purposes."

</text>
