<text id="F28" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The New England Quarterly, Vol. 79, No. 4 :  The Writs of Assistance and Public Memory: John Adams and the Legacy of James Otis " Author="James M. Farrell " PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://academia.edu.documents.s3.amazonaws.com/1619936/Otis___Writs_of_Assistance_NEQ.pdf">

And yet the lasting fame of Otis's speech was by no means assured. No court stenographer made a record of the proceedings, nor did Otis ever write out the address he had presented before a small professional audience. It was John Adams, awed by the implications of the forensic drama he witnessed in the Superior Court that day, who, from a few notes he took during the hearing, crafted an abstract of Otis's address. But Adams's abstract gathered dust for more than a decade before it first appeared in print, and not until after the American Revolution, amidst the earliest efforts to chronicle and document the great struggle for Independence, did Adams take up the cause of James Otis in earnest and launch his campaign to transform an impassioned forensic argument of local interest into a revered oration of national and historical significance. The fascinating story of Adams's efforts tells us a great deal about the way in which past events enter the collective memory and are pre served, popularized, and transmitted to later generations.
The controversy that inspired Otis's memorable display of eloquence concerned legal documents that gave royal customs officials the right to enlist the "assistance" of a local sheriff or constable in the pursuit of smuggled goods. Such writs had been part of the legal culture in Massachusetts since at least 1696, when Parliament passed the "Act for preventing Frauds and regulating Abuses in the Plantation Trade," which ex tended the search powers used in England to the American colonies. Functioning like a general warrant, the writ allowed a customs agent to initiate a search without first appearing before a magistrate to establish probable cause; nor after a search had been conducted was he obligated to account for the use of the writ. Designed to ensure the payment of duties on goods imported into the colonies, the writs were valuable tools in England's enforcement of trade and navigation laws. In 1760 a group of Boston merchants objected to the issuance of a writ to customs agent James Cockle. Before the Massachusetts Superior Court could hear the case, however, George II died. A 1702 law required that all writs issued in the name of a de ceased sovereign be renewed under the authority of his successor within six months. As a result, the coming trial on Cockle's application would take on added significance. Any decision by the Superior Court in that case would, by extension, apply to the legality of all the newly issued writs in the colony and, therefore, could affect all trade enforcement and revenue collection in Massachusetts So that he might argue on behalf of the Boston merchants, James Otis resigned as acting advocate general of the province. At the February 1761 hearing, he opposed the writs on constitutional grounds, maintaining that all general writs violated the British constitution and thus endangered American liberty. According to a right understanding of the constitution, he argued, only special warrants were legal. Almost immediately John Adams recognized the significance of Otis's argument. Otis had proposed a radical legal theory, suggesting that the court had the obligation to declare null and void any act of Parliamentary legislation it deemed unconstitutional. "An act against the constitution is void," said Otis. Moreover, after examining the use of writs in the enforcement of British trade laws, Otis had concluded that they aided the taxation of the American colonies. Insofar as they facilitated the collection of revenue, he maintained, the writs were instruments of slavery and villainy. This early instance of colonial challenge to British taxation is perhaps why John Adams, as well as later historians, considered the writs of assistance case to have been "the first scene of the first act of opposition to the arbitrary claims of Great Britain."'1 Who Will Write the History? Writing in his Autobiography in 18o2, Adams reflected back on his experience of observing Otis's masterful performance. Otis, "the most able, manly and commanding Character of his Age at the Bar," Adams declared, spoke "in Opposition to the Writ," the unconstitutionality of which he analyzed "with great Acuteness and all the learning which could be connected with the Subject." Adams recalled that at that moment when Otis delivered his argument, "A Contest appeared to me to be opened, to which I could foresee no End, and which would render my Life a Burden and Property, Industry and every Thing insecure.""' A few years later, Adams wrote as an "injured friend" to Otis's sister, Mercy Otis Warren, to comment on the distortions and omissions he detected in her history of the Revolution. To be sure, Adams was mainly concerned with how he himself would appear to Warren's readers "both in present and future times.' He was determined to remind her that he had been present at the birth of the Revolution. The writs of assistance case, he wrote had "opened to my view a nearer prospect of a revolution than I had ever seen before," and as early as 1761, he had "concluded [that] the controversy would be long continued, productive in time of a civil war, and actually terminate in a separation of the Colonies from the mother country."' Warren had told the story of the 1761 trial, and of the famous address in which her brother "opposed with peculiar energy and strength of argument" the writs of assistance, but she had omitted Adams's small part in the episode. She had described James Otis as the "first champion of American freedom"; "by the exertion of his talents and the sacrifice of interest," he had shown himself to be a patriot who "may justly claim the honor of laying the foundation of a revolution, which has been productive of the happiest effects to the civil and political interests of mankind." Yet she had quoted only very brief passages from Otis's remarks and done so without mentioning Adams's contributions to the surviving speech. In his letter, Adams asked Warren to recall that "I heard your brother James Otis, and Mr. Thacher, in the Council Chamber before the Superior Court in February, 1761, against the legality of these writs"; indeed, Adams had been the one who "took minutes of the argument, made a short sketch of a report of it, which was afterwards surreptitiously printed, though garbled, and has got into Judge Minot's History. " As time passed, the neglect of his own services, and those of his deceased friend, tormented Adams. He considered such a collective disregard for history to be symptomatic of a political decline that ultimately would doom the republican experiment. On 31 August 1813, he wrote to Thomas McKean, fellow signer of the Declaration of Independence. "Can you account for the apathy, the antipathy of this nation to their own history? Is there not a repugnance to the thought of looking back? While thousands of frivolous novels are read with eagerness and got by heart, the history of our own native country is not only neglected, but despised and abhorred."' Glorious accounts about Washington, Franklin, and Jefferson, Adams was convinced, were eclipsing the patriotic contributions of many other worthy men. "When you apply to me to assist you in writing history," he wrote to Jedidiah Morse on 4 March 1815, "I know not whether I ought to laugh or cry. I have little faith in history." Adams went on: Our American history for the last fifty years is already as much corrupted as any half century of ecclesiastical history, from the Council of Nice to the restoration of the Inquisition in 1814. If I were to write a history of the last sixty years, as the facts rest in my memory, and according to my judgment, and under the oath of "proveritate historiarum mearum Deum ipsum obtestor [For the truth of my history, I call to witness God Himself," a hundred writers in America, France, England, and Holland would immediately appear, and call me, to myself, and before the world, a gross liar and a perjured villain.... If you desire it, I may hereafter give you two or three samples of such a his tory as I should write; anecdotes of no kind of consequence now, un less they should serve to show how many thousand facts are wholly concealed and unknown to posterity; facts, which mark characters, and might materially influence great events.18 A few months later, Adams communicated again with McKean. 'Who shall write the history of the American Revolution? Who can write it? Who will ever be able to write it?"h e asked.' As Adams pursued his often futile efforts to set the record straight about his own career, he also took on the task of de fending the character and abilities of James Otis, the man he credited with sparking the Revolution. The correspondence with McKean and Morse gave Adams the opportunity to ad dress his historical concerns. He reminisced with McKean about events and personalities from the revolutionary period, and together the two men sketched out the essential character istics of an adequate history of the conflict. "General Wilkinson may have written the military history of the war that followed the Revolution," Adams explained, but "this will by no means be a history of the American Revolution. The revolution was in the minds of the people, and in the union of the colonies, both of which were accomplished before hostilities commenced."In the chronology Adams constructed," this revolution and union were gradually forming from the year 1760 to 1775." Therefore, all "the pamphlets, newspapers, and handbills of both parties" would need to be consulted "before a correct history can be written of the American Revolution." More important than his letters to McKean was Adams's correspondence with Jedidiah Morse, a noted geographer who was preparing a history of the Revolution. Morse had solicited Adams's assistance in assembling material for his project, and the request presented Adams with an occasion to influence the shape of his legacy as well as of Otis's. On 29 November i815, Adams wrote to Morse, repeating what he had told McKean. "The revolution was in the minds and hearts of the people, and in the union of the colonies. Both of which were substantially effected before hostilities commenced." As he reflected on that "great intellectual, moral, and political change," he focused on "the month of February, 1761," wherein occurred "the great cause of writs of assistance."" The Wedge of Providence In Adams's view, the change in the "minds and hearts" of Americans originated at the writs of assistance trial, when Otis, an embodiment of the classical orator-hero, "argued before the supreme judicature of the province." Convinced that the Revolution had commenced with the writs of assistance case in 1761, Adams launched an active campaign to bring James Otis before the American public. To Morse, Adams insisted that Otis's performance was the ideal of patriotic eloquence. Mr. Otis displayed so comprehensive a knowledge of the subject, showed not only the illegality of the writ, its insidious and mischievous tendency, but he laid open the views and designs of Great Britain, in taxing us, of destroying our charters and assuming the powers of our government, legislative, executive, and judicial, external and internal, civil and ecclesiastical, temporal and spiritual; and all this was per formed with such a profusion of learning, such convincing argument, and such a torrent of sublime and pathetic eloquence, that a great crowd of spectators and auditors went away absolutely electrified.22 Writing to Morse on Revolutionary subjects six more times over the next two months, Adams set out what he considered to be the proper chronology of the Revolution. "From 1761 to 1764, he wrote, "America was all alive with jealousies and apprehensions of the designs of the British ministry and their own governors and their adherents." During this phase, said Adams, "Providence was now raising up in the person of Mr. Otis a genius, equally bold and daring, equally well tempered and qualified, as a wedge to split the knotty Lignum vitae block of parliamentary usurpation over the colonies."

</text>
