<text id="F34" category="" words="1994" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Landscape Management: Worn out synthetic fields to become fuel; Texas puts turf through extended drought tests; Gamecock trainers get tough on staph; Celebration Bermuda gaining favor on southern fields; Ted Williams' high school field reborn " Author="Landscape Management " PublicationDate="November 2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://www.landscapemanagement.net/athletic-turf-content/news/worn-out-synthetic-fields-become-fuel-7399  http://www.landscapemanagement.net/athletic-turf-content/news/texas-puts-turf-through-extended-drought-tests-7423  http://www.landscapemanagement.net">

Worn out synthetic fields to become fuel

Target Technologies International Inc. (TTII), a material and logistics outsourcer to the synthetic turf industry, reports it has a solution to the safe and efficient disposal of old artificial turf sports field systems.
Utilizing its own proprietary technology -- in combination with TTII's supply chain network -- Lafarge/Systech will convert obsolete artificial turf sports fields into an efficient, alternate energy source to power its cement kilns. "This project diverts non-recyclable fuel-bearing material from landfills as it replaces fossil fuels," said Shawn McMullen, VP Business Development, Systech Environmental Corp. "It helps to conserve natural resources like coal and sand that is normally used in the cement making process."
With typical field life spans of only eight to 12 years, municipalities and school boards are finding it necessary to plan not only for their new field's installation, but also for its eventual demise. With modern synthetic turf fields containing combinations of turf fibers and Infill materials (crumb rubber granules and/or silica sand); once removed, most old fields have ended up in landfills.
Initially, Systech will accept recyclable field materials at the Lafarge plants in Whitehall,PA, Harleyville SC, and Calera AL.
Propelled by a steadily increasing population, all-weather 24-7 playability, and growing concerns over the high water requirements of natural turf fields, the requirement for new and replacement fields will keep the synthetic turf industry growth rate at phenomenal levels for many years to come, says the release from TTII.
Texas puts turf through extended drought tests
SAN ANTONIO  -  Tests with a new drought simulator in southern San Antonio will help determine the toughest turfgrass in Texas. The 5,000-sq.-ft. simulator built by the Texas A&amp;M University System's Irrigation Technology Center will help test turfgrass' ability to survive and recuperate from drought. 
After the structure was completed in July, a 60-day "drought" began on 25 varieties of turfgrass, said Dr. Guy Fipps, Texas Cooperative Extension irrigation specialist. 
Research plots are located on either end of the structure, and a galvanized metal roof is positioned in the middle. When rain falls, the roof automatically moves to shield the plots being tested under drought conditions. Thirty minutes after the rain stops, the roof moves back, Fipps said. 
This type of information is badly needed, Fipps said, because the state frequently goes without rain for six to eight weeks in the summer. Also, landscapes account for an average of 40% of the municipal water usage, he said. Agriculture uses more than 60% of all the water used in the state. 
"Texas does not have enough water to meet future needs," he said. "Irrigation is the biggest user." 
The simulator is one of only two in Texas, he said. The other is used by U.S. Department of Agriculture researchers at the Bushland Agricultural Research Service center to test crop water needs. Only a few drought simulators are in operation in the U.S., Fipps said. 
But the San Antonio version has some unique features, he said. The simulator takes only two minutes to cover the plots and is one of the fastest in the nation. And Irrigation Technology Center personnel are working to cut that time to 30 seconds. 
The simulator also has a low profile - 4 feet off of the ground - to give it stability in windstorms, he said. 
Besides, Fipps said, "I think it's the coolest-looking," The others (in the United States) are basically a metal building on rails. This is one of the largest and fastest." 
Wayne LaPor, professor emeritus in the department of agricultural and biological engineering at Texas A&amp;M University, designed the drive and pulley system of the simulator. Dr. Chris Braden, Irrigation Technology Center associate, was in charge of construction. 
The trials are under the direction of Fipps and Dr. David Chalmers, Texas Cooperative Extension turfgrass specialist. 
Common warm-season grasses such as Bermuda, zoysia and St. Augustine are being tested in 200 plots, each 4 ft. X 4 ft., and being compared to buffalo grass. 
When the simulated drought was completed, the grasses went into a recovery phase. In that phase, the plots received rainfall and were irrigated according to TexasET data. The TexasET (evapotranspiration) network and Web site (http://TexasET.tamu.edu ) helps users determine the irrigation needs of landscapes and crops. A second set of plots was planted in October and will be put under drought conditions next summer. 
The results from the first year of the 2-year drought study will be available in a couple of months, Fipps said. 
The San Antonio Water System and the Rio Grande Basin Initiative provided funding to construct the simulator. The San Antonio Water System and the Turfgrass Producers Association sponsor the turfgrass study. 
The simulator "is the first of which we hope the Irrigation Technology Center will have to address irrigation water needs in Texas," Fipps said. 

Gamecock trainers get tough on staph
The University of South Carolina, Columbia, instituted a multi-pronged approach to reduce the risk of staph infections among student athletes. 
In addition to using the anti-microbial SportsAide system to fight the spread of bacterial infections throughout its athletic complex, it has instituted other policies such as banning the sharing of towels, replacing bar soup with liquid soap and being especially careful to cover wounds. SportsAide, provided by SportCoatings, Rochester Hills, MI, is a micro technology that creates a durable anti-microbial bond on sports surfaces and controls the growth of a wide array of bacteria, mold, fungi and algae.
 "The University of South Carolina is very concerned about the health and well-being of our student-athletes," said Athletics Director Eric Hyman. "While we can't completely eradicate the risk of staph infections in contact sports, we've adopted a policy to use the most advanced technology available to provide the safest environment possible for our student athletes."
Staph infections like methicillin resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA) have recently benched Paul Pierce and Delonte West of the Boston Celtics and three starting players for Stanford University football. This community-acquired antibiotic-resistant strand of staph has become a common, insidious visitor in sports teams, being passed person to person and via contaminated athletic equipment, facilities and fabrics.
 "The spread of MRSA is something we, as an athletics training staff, are very cognizant of and concerned about," said Dr. Rod Walters, USC Director of Sports Medicine. "If not caught soon enough and treated properly, MRSA can lead to some serious consequences. By applying this product, we are making an investment in the continued good health of our student-athletes." 
Since 2003 there have been two fatal cases of staph in college football.  In most cases the source of transmission is person-to-person contact.
"It happens very innocently, an infected player  - who at the time probably believes he simply has a spider bite  -  uses a towel, treadmill, training table or whirlpool. The staph gets transferred onto the surface where the next athlete to use that piece of equipment picks it up  -  entering the body through a shaving nick, bruise or scrape," said Walters.
Later this year, USC will treat its synthetic turf fields with TurfAide, which provides antimicrobial protection to the fibers and infill of synthetic turf systems, claimed a news release from General Sports Venue.
Celebration Bermuda gaining favor on southern fields
Celebration, which is gaining favor for sports fields in the South, is a patented, proprietary Bermudagrass developed by Sod Solutions of Mt. Pleasant, SC. 
The turfgrass is licensed in Florida only to qualified members of the Florida Sod Growers Cooperative, a trade association of more than 70 independent turfgrass producers in the state. Elsewhere, it is available through a network of licensed producers across the southern half of the U.S.  
At the University of Arkansas, a multiyear study of 48 Bermudagrass cultivars found that Celebration had the fastest recovery from divot injury among all vegetatively propagated Bermudagrasses.  A 2005 study at North Carolina State showed similar results noting, "From zero cover, Celebration achieved the greatest recovery at 86% after four weeks." The next best were two cultivars each with 70% recovery after four weeks.
 "It's really, really, really good for athletic fields," says Dave Dymond, general manager of H&amp;H Sod Farm in Kenansville and president of the FSGC. "If anybody asks me if we've got anything better than [the popular cultivars] for athletic fields, I get excited about Celebration. Its recovery is far and above what you normally see and that's usually what [the buyers] want. It makes a rapid recovery from any wear. It's an aggressive grower and will fill in those divots and stuff very rapidly."
Dymond continues, "Sometimes they have low-maintenance scenarios and [Celebration] seems to hang in there fairly well under those conditions.
You could say it tolerates a high school or municipal budget, too. That's a perfect way to describe it."
Mike Pope, sales manager of Bethel Farms in Arcadia agrees.  "The nice thing about Celebration, it's so aggressive and its growth habit is so tight that it actually squeezes out competing weeds, even common Bermudas. When sports facilities renovate their fields, one of the big issues is that you seem to get a lot of weed pressure a year or two after the renovation and the grass is hard to maintain after the renovation."
 "Celebration pretty much takes care of any competing weeds. Your herbicide application rates are much lower and it actually gets you playing on that field a whole lot quicker after installation," says Pope.
As for softness, other findings from North Carolina State University confirmed that "Celebration exhibited the lowest surface hardness" of any cultivar tested noting that, "Excessive surface hardness has been directly correlated to an increase in player injury on athletic fields."
In addition to softness and durability, Celebration has been hailed as an extremely drought tolerant turfgrass. Midway through a 5-year study at the University of Arkansas, Celebration produced 53% more roots under drought conditions than any of the other five cultivars involved in the study.  In 

addition, Celebration had the highest evapotranspiration rate (meaning it displayed the most efficient use of water) and had less leaf firing.
These attributes and others caught the attention of Bill Ward, parks and recreation manager for the city of North Port.  Ward was looking for a grass for his new soccer complex that encompasses more than 300,000 sq. ft. of playing surface. He wanted something that would take more wear and tear, and offer greater stability than the cultivars currently popular for Florida sports fields.
He visited the polo fields at nearby Lakewood Ranch, where Celebration was installed, and his first impression of the turf was "how carpet-like it looked." He was equally impressed with how well it has held up under polo play. Two-months after installation of the rolled sod, Ward is impressed with how quickly it tacked down and that it was already "thick and green."
Gary Bradshaw, manager of SMR Farms, which supplied the Celebration for North Port and the polo fields and golf courses at Lakewood Ranch, is confident Ward made the right decision. "The grass is holding up real well," Bradshaw said. "Everybody who deals with it, they just love it. It holds a little deeper green color and it's a lot more dense and the recovery time for spike marks, divots and wear and tear is a whole lot less than for [a popular cultivar]."
Sod Solutions, Inc. is an international turfgrass developer that has patented and released several improved warm-season varieties of turfgrass. 
Ted Williams' high school field reborn
At first the project seemed to be overwhelming. It was more than the members of the SoCal (Southern California) Chapter of the Sports Turf Managers Association (STMA) probably wanted to take on.

Then, on further consideration, it became a possibility.
And, finally, when the chapter realized what kind of support it would receive from individuals and businesses, it was something that was definitely doable.
Rick Covert, STMA secretary and Facilities Supervisor/Landscape at Miramar College was on a walk-through at Petco Park with Ron Lardizibal, Athletic Director at San Diego's Herbert Hoover High.

</text>
