<text id="F47" category="" words="2001" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="How the Pro-Choice Movement Saved America" Author="Cristina Page " PublicationDate="2006 " SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.alternet.org/rights/32367/   http://www.alternet.org/rights/32367/?page=2  http://www.alternet.org/rights/32367/?page=3  http://www.alternet.org/rights/32367/?page=4">

For the most part, pro-lifers tend to be absolutists. For them, you are either churchgoer or sinner, procreator or contraceptor, for the culture of life or for the culture of death. Pro-choicers, by contrast, tend to be more pragmatic.
For the pro-life movement, decision making is less complicated. For the unmarried, the right course is abstinence (which we'll discuss later). And for everyone, single or married, the right course never, ever leads to abortion. Unfortunately, if the goal is to reduce abortion, the pro-lifers' morally unambiguous strategies don't seem to work.
To begin with, criminalizing abortion may be a sacred pro-life goal. But in practice, bans have failed to curb rates of abortions. Many countries that have outlawed abortion have higher abortion rates than countries where abortion is legal. Brazil, Chile and Peru -- in which the predominant religion is Catholicism -- are among these. (It's worth noting that the Catholic Church wasn't always pro-life. Until 1869, it supported legalized abortion until quickening, at approximately 19 weeks of pregnancy, which is when it considered the fetus was given a soul.) The truth is that if abortion is outlawed, women don't seek services less frequently; they just survive them less often. This has been true in the United States (when abortion was illegal) as well as in many countries abroad today.
And it's not just pro-choice women who seek abortions, and it never has been. Most people would be startled to learn that even today, when battle lines are drawn, 40 percent of women who have abortions in the United States are Evangelical Christian or Catholic. They are your average morality voter, your above-average churchgoer. In all likelihood, they call themselves pro-life. Even though the great wish of pro-lifers is to cast those seeking abortions as irresponsible daters, the actual statistics are more forgiving. The majority of women in the United States (61 percent) having abortions are already moms.
Unable so far to criminalize abortions in the United States, the pro-life movement has taken up a strategy of incrementalism. It has strived to delay abortions, placing hurdle after hurdle in their way. The result has been, even by pro-life definitions, perverse. After all, the net effect hasn't been to stop abortions, but to postpone them until the fetus is more developed and the woman is at greater risk. This strategy is carried out even if it means forcing a woman to have one of those dreaded late-term abortions. Indeed, some of the later-term abortions -- "partial-birth abortions," as the pro-life side labels them -- no doubt occur as a result of campaigns waged by the pro-life movement.
Let's take a look at how this works. One favorite pro-life strategy is to pass laws that require a waiting period before a woman can obtain an abortion. Twenty-three states have enacted what are called "mandatory delay" laws; all are coupled with mandatory-counseling laws that typically require abortion clinics to dispense information designed to dissuade women from having an abortion.
Once a woman receives the counseling, she must wait, usually 24 hours, before she can obtain the abortion. The 24-hour wait may seem inconsequential, but the effect on real lives is considerable. The series of small barriers often means scheduling two days of missed work or missed school, traveling long distances twice -- don't forget, 87 percent of U.S. counties don't have an abortion provider -- and paying to stay overnight in a hotel.
In fact, the statistics show that the mandatory delays postpone the procedure much more than 24 hours. A study of the Mississippi experience found that after August 1992, when the delay law took effect, 53 percent more women had abortions in the second trimester.
In Minnesota and Missouri, after these states enacted parental-consent laws, second-trimester abortions among teens increased in both states, by 18 percent and 27 percent, respectively.
Another barrier to early abortion is money. Here again the pro-life side has assiduously erected hurdles. The Hyde Amendment, named for its sponsor, Republican congressman Henry Hyde, bans the use of public funds for abortion, meaning that poor women who rely on Medicaid to pay their health bills can't get this governmental insurance program to pay for an abortion. Indeed, half of women who had an abortion after 16 weeks say pro-life restrictions were the cause, including needing time "to raise money" to pay for the procedure.
In the war of words, these kinds of outcomes may provide a strategic advantage to pro-lifers. The pro-life side is able to say that it quite reasonably favors involving parents in this important decision, and it endorses a mere 24-hour waiting period for reflection. In reality, these small barriers have a significant effect, not in reducing the number of abortions, but in creating more later-term abortions. It is perhaps convenient for pro-lifers who, it seems, prefer to rail against late-term abortions rather than prevent them.
Despite wide acknowledgment that with abortion, earlier is always safer, for more than a decade the pro-choice movement had to fight staunch pro-life resistance to the abortion method that allows women to end a pregnancy at the earliest moment. That method is medication abortion. Commonly known as RU-486, it is available in more than 29 countries. For decades, millions of women worldwide have used it safely. In the United States this method is called Mifeprex. (The French manufacturers of RU-486 were unwilling to distribute their product in the United States for fear of pro-life violence, so it is distributed by a new company formed for the exclusive purpose of marketing the drug in the United States.)
With all other methods of abortion, a woman must wait approximately seven weeks after her last menstrual period. But Mifeprex, which depends on the action of a pill rather than a surgical intervention, allows women to end a pregnancy as early as four weeks after her last menstrual period (usually meaning she's really only two weeks pregnant). At this stage, the embryo is about the size of the letter "T" as it appears here on this page.
In 2000, after years of struggle, the pro-choice movement succeeded in getting Mifeprex considered by the FDA, which, after extensive review, approved it for distribution. A sad footnote to the pro-life movement's success in keeping Mifeprex out of the United States for years is that U.S. doctors were prevented from studying its other potential uses, like treating many of the most fatal forms of cancer. (As long ago as 1993, the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies of Science, the government's scientific advisers, released a report on the potential life-saving medical uses of RU-486, stating, "Potential benefits of RU-486, other anti-progestins are extensive.")
Today, U.S. medical researchers are making up for lost time, exploring Mifeprex's potential in treating breast cancer, Cushing's syndrome, endometriosis, glaucoma, meningiomas, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer, uterine fibroids, brain tumors and even bipolar depression. With breast cancer alone, it is believed that Mifeprex presents the opportunity to treat 40 percent of all tumors.
Unfortunately, this new research may never reach fruition. The proposed RU-486 Suspension and Review Act of 2005, legislation that originated in the offices of the pro-life Concerned Women for America, would remove this earliest abortion method from the market indefinitely. The reason for wanting a ban, say pro-life groups, is that this simple medication is unsafe. With pro-life groups, supposed "safety" concerns have become one typical way to advance an ideological agenda.
After all, the facts suggest that this early abortion method is extremely safe. Of more than 350,000 American women who have used this drug since 2000, less than 1 percent have had a complication. The likelihood of death resulting from a medication abortion is 0.00085 percent, or less than 1 in 100,000. Compare this to the risk of dying during childbirth, which is 1 in 2,500.
In the case of Mifeprex, it's difficult to see the pro-life concerns with safety as anything but a political ploy. Abortion is one of the safest medical procedures performed in the United States, with less than 1 percent risk of major complication, though, as the pro-life movement well knows, risks do escalate later in pregnancy.
The pro-life movement does have a solution for unwanted pregnancy. It is like the "just say no" campaign against drugs -- the monumentally unsuccessful program of a previous fundamentalist president. The pro-life movement argues, "Just say no to sex until marriage." (This ignores the fact that many abortions, just like unwanted pregnancies, happen to married women too -- nearly 1 in 5 women having an abortion in the United States is married. But put that aside for a moment.) Abstinence for the unmarried may sound like a lovely solution. Clearly, in the religious-tinged, pro-life view, it's more than a solution for the abortion problem. It's an admirable alternative lifestyle, one in which only those who are married have sex, and the sex they have is with the goal of creating a family. Nearly $1 billion in federal and state matching funds has been spent since 1996 on programs that promote chastity until marriage; these programs are directed mainly at teens.
Promoting abstinence has been deemed so important to some that, in the service of this cause, it's been deemed OK to fill kids' heads with half-truths and even untruths. Abstinence programs have at times equated sex with disease, depression and death. Some programs have even tried to convince kids that condoms don't work, so that abstinence seems their only option.
The problem is that abstinence programs don't work. Like many pro-life initiatives, they backfire. Take, for instance, virginity-pledge programs, a main type of abstinence-only program. They are a colossal failure. In these programs, kids publicly promise to stay chaste until marriage
These programs, it should be acknowledged, do lead teens to abstain from intercourse for, on average, 18 months longer than teens not in similar programs. And that's impressive. In the teen years, 18 months is a big chunk of time. Yet, it's worth noting, those 18 intercourse-free months are a special time and not exactly what the pro-life sponsors had in mind. A major study of some 2,500 "virgin pledgers" showed that the kids who pledge to abstain from having intercourse don't abstain from sex. They just have other kinds of sex. Virginity pledgers have porn-star sex (though porn stars appear more likely to use protection). These "virgins" are six times more likely to have oral sex than nonpledgers, and male "virgins" are four times more likely to have anal sex than those who do not take the pledge.
In Minnesota, the Department of Health commissioned a study of the state's Education Now and Babies Later abstinence-only program. Alarmingly, it found that at three schools sexual activity actually doubled among junior high school students after they participated in the abstinence program. It was as if the program acted as an aphrodisiac. Within just one year, the number of participants who said they would "probably" have sex during high school nearly doubled as well. With the exception of some promising effects on parent-teen communication, the study found no positive impact of the program on teen sexual behavior.
The truth is that half of all teens between 15 and 19 are sexually active in the United States. Whether kids attend abstinence-only programs or not, they appear equally likely to have sex.
[But] it hardly seems likely that an alternative strategy will emerge from the federal government, now run by the abstainer-in-chief. Before George W. Bush took over the presidency in 2000, he had already sunk large sums of public monies into abstinence-only programs. As governor of Texas, he'd spent $10 million on such programs. Yet today, Texas is one of the more dangerous places in the country to be uneducated about safe sex. Texas has the fourth-largest population of people living with HIV/AIDS in the United States.
Despite the high stakes and hefty sums, Texas managed to keep most of its students in the dark about protection. Few, for instance, seemed to know about the effectiveness of condoms.

</text>
