<text id="G16" category="" words="2008" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="'Invisible Green: Selected Prose' Chicago Review, Spring2006, Vol. 51/52 Issue 4/1, p230-234" Author="Norman Finkelstein" PublicationDate="Spring 2006" SampledFrom="All" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=106&sid=2accbaaf-30b0-4e2f-8c38-8c38587fe326%40sessionmgr104&bquery=(JN+%22Chicago+Review%22+AND+DT+20060501)&bdata=JmRiPWE5aCZ0eXBlPTEmc2l0ZT1laG9zdC1saXZl">

And for attending philosophers, we have Plotinus, Whitehead, Sartre, Camus, Blanchot, and Deleuze. Ives provides the music; Jonathan Edwards blesses all present, along with sundry spiders. It's quite a party, and you couldn't find a more genial or gracious host.
Welcome, then, to Donald Revell's Poets' Paradise, aka America ("I believe all poets everywhere to be Americans in the necessity and abandoned stewardship of bliss"). Here, the poets commune with each other and with Poetry, "the soul of poems," which "does not reside or rest in them." Poetry is Ecstasy ("Death or ecstasy: there are no other options"), Horizon ("Horizon speeds to the opened eye at light-speed"), and above all, Friendship ("When I am writing, there is myself, and there is my subject or purpose. My friend makes three"). Poetry comes to us through reading, but "To see poems as the culmination of reading or of any process is to turn them against themselves, to make obstacles out of energies, shadows from daylight." Poets, therefore, do not suffer from the anxiety of influence; rather, they experience "the Delight of Influence," and like Orpheus, "go ensemble all the way in a moving space shared with the god, the poem, the beloved." Nor do poets, who are not creative writers ("The world creates itself, and poetry is pleased to show its new creation to our words"), have to concern themselves with imagination: "The poem is entirely of its real place and moment. Nothing is missing which imagination might supply."
Nothing is missing which a reviewer might supply either, and if this review already appears to be a cento drawn from a single source, it is because Revell himself has constructed that cento, a magnificent collage in which poet speaks to poet, vision looks upon vision, sound resonates against sound. Half the book is Invisible Green, a set of nine brief essays originally published as a column in American Poetry Review. The other half consists of an assortment of readings and homages. Revell's style is swift, concise, and, like Thoreau's, determinedly aphoristic. Half a page of one-liners from Invisible Green would provide enough material for a semester's worth of discussion in any poetry class. And yet the whole is of a piece, a remarkably consistent ars poetica, a gospel intended to renew our faith in poetry and remind us of why we read and write poems. A cheerful Protestant who delights in Jonathan Edwards, "America's one-man Reformation," Revell refuses all orthodoxies  -  not only those of the formalists (all too easily dismissed), but those of the avant-garde as well. As he writes in a somersaulting piece on the poetry of the circus, "Oh please, let us never talk about 'risk' in poetry! Let's have fun."
Revell is utterly devoted to Poetry as spiritual energy, and utterly unconcerned with artifice. In his discussion of poetry as Horizon, Revell declares that "Expression is purely a distance seen to close," which reminds me of Dickinson telling Higginson that "My Business is Circumference." Along the same lines, when "the poet is alone with poetry," then "Craft is irrelevant. Audience is nowhere to be seen." And yet this is a writer with an unerring sense of primal form and a wide sympathy for the reader; indeed, in Revell's poetic the former implies the latter:"Ecstasy pluralizes." Invisible Green continues a long tradition in American letters, the tradition of the isolato, listening to and gazing out upon the world, who, in his or her isolation, is simultaneously in communion with others. In one of his most important essays, "Joyful Noise: The Gospel Sound of Henry D. Thoreau," Revell postulates that Thoreau's close listening to the sounds around him, his attentiveness to the noise of daily life, is, in effect, a paradigm for the poetic act. Sound and hearing precede and anticipate the poem. "From Thoreau," Revell notes, "I learn that poetry is not words primarily. Not even words are words originally. First comes sound ...  Poetry is a first relation to the sounds of a day and only subsequently the relating of itself in sentences and lines." In hearing, we are put in relation to sound, which in turn puts us in relation to others: "Here in the world, hearts hear, and a new heart beats in every sound."
Nowhere is this more apparent than in "Purists Will Object," Revell's essay on John Ashbery, a perfect introduction to Ashbery's poetry via "eight brief meditations on the enabling qualities of eight passages, each from a different Ashbery collection." Revell has been reading Ashbery for over thirty years, starting as an undergraduate at Binghamton and then writing a dissertation on him at Buffalo. He can be trusted when he asserts that Ashbery's work "surrounds more than it designates; it animates more than it names." Those "purists" who take issue with Ashbery's poetry  -  and there are still plenty of them  -  often protest not merely against his "indeterminacy," but against what appears to be the overall vagueness of his writing, the unceasingly assimilative style. As the poet himself puts it in "The Skaters," "the carnivorous / Way of these lines is to devour their own nature, leaving / Nothing but a bitter impression of absence, which as we know involves presence, but still." Ashbery is a contested figure: like William Carlos Williams before him, there are at least two Ashberys, one cherished by the avant-garde, the other supposedly domesticated by the poetic "mainstream." Revell essay, happily, looks beyond canon and controversy; he loves Ashbery's poetry and wants to share his insights, while explaining why this work became a model for his own.
According to Revell, Ashbery, "in placing desire at the heart of his technique ... opts for the clarity of expansiveness, a kinetic rather than pictorial apprehension of whatever the imagination finds or makes desirable" Ashbery's poems are charged with "a presentational restlessness, a sequence not of images but of qualities." It is here that Ashbery breaks from most of his modernist precursors, exchanging, we might say, Pounds emphasis on the specificity of the image for Whitmans earlier embrace of worldly profusion. "Ashbery has taught me," Revell reveals in another startling moment, "that I must waste words, lots of them, trying them against and upon one another, allowing them and their syntaxes to fall apart sometimes in order to find not the true ones, but the ones that seem true at the time." "Poetry" Revell concludes, "works on principles of dispossession, resisting pressures to convert desire into acquisitiveness."
It is this insight, I believe, that partly accounts for Revell return to the figure of Ezra Pound at a number of points in his book. Revell reads Pound with immense compassion, and I am deeply moved by the way he shows how the old poet, doing penance "in a death cell in which he did not die," sought to redeem himself. Like many readers, Revell is drawn to the luminous moments of The Cantos, the moments when Pound stops hectoring and preaching, stops spewing venom, and he tells himself, as in Canto LXXXI, to "Learn of the green world what can be thy place." These are the moments when the authoritarian modernist comes to terms with Whitman, the easygoing democrat; the moments when the fascist "poem including history" becomes, according to Revell, something much more wholesome and intimate: "a presence addressed to something near and answering very closely."
This instance of Revells's religious confidence (one among many in Invisible Green) does not come easily, but one must go to his poetry for the final proof of that. Fortunately, we now have the record of his agon in Pennyweight Windows: New &amp; Selected Poems (Alice James Books, 2005). Invisible Green harvests some of that long-growing fruit and distills it into a spirit-prose that both clarifies and intoxicates; or as Traherne puts it in "My Spirit," a poem Revell discusses twice in his book, "It was so quick and pure, / That all my mind was wholly everywhere, / Whate'er it saw, 'twas ever wholly there." Such mindfulness, at once transcendental and fully focused on the things of this world, leads Revell to seriously consider the relation of the poetic to the political, but usually to address it obliquely. Indeed, it could be argued that over the course of his nine books of poetry, he has developed a method of writing political poems in which an unusually labile lyric sensibility moves among historical and current events, registering its ethical responses and measuring them against both the facts of personal life and a growing awareness that from those facts comes the possibility of spiritual witness.
In Invisible Green, Revell considers a number of political matters somewhat less obliquely but with the same nuanced awareness. For me, the most moving essay in the book is "The Moving Sidewalk," a personal reminiscence of the poet's childhood in the South Bronx which gradually modulates into a brilliant discussion of poetry as a counter-force in the shaping of identity. A white, male Episcopalian living among Hispanic and African Americans, Revell writes that "I was there because my family somehow lacked or had dissipated the advantage of its color. My whiteness was a blank prey made even more superfluous by its gender." From boyhood, Revell's father was "a thief and an expediter of thefts. Illiterate, inelegant, and untraveled, he nevertheless, because of his physical strength, his savvy and his rumored friendship with criminal big shots, acquired great prestige in my eyes." This dubious role model turns his more bookish son (bookishness here being a sign of rebellion) into a thief of language  -  but not before he passes through his own more literal criminal initiation as an adolescent member of a violent street gang. Again, Revell startles us with his revelations: the young poet turns to formalism for just the same reason he joined a gang. Writing of From the Abandoned Cities, his first book (winner of the 1983 open competition of the National Poetry Series), Revell declares that "Form gave me the illusion of control and escape. It made me feel like an insider, an initiate of mysteries, sheltered from chaos. But my poems were false interiors ...  The shadow-class of gangs remained their source. Contrived, not made, their music was a self-devouring silence."
This is tough stuff. But even tougher is the sight of Revell's father, lost in an airport when he picks up his son from his first trip by plane. Revell finds this violent man, so capable within his circumscribed life, in tears on a moving sidewalk, unable to read the monitors and in desperate need of rescue. Suddenly, the young poet can "think of poetry not as theft nor as a shadow power, but as an act of love: an unrehearsed, unclarifying unstructuring summons to the summons of the present moment." Thus for Revell, "Class is an understanding best refused, an explanation best forgotten."
And where, one may ask, is that understanding and that refusal truly possible? Where can one remake oneself through an act of the imagination, turning away from one's class origins without ever having to fully renounce them? Where is that "unstructuring summons" heard again and again? The answer is simple: "A bliss began to happen somewhere. There was America." Revell's love of America is not so much patriotic as Utopian, and in this respect it goes hand-in-hand with his ecstatic Protestantism, his communion of self and soul. Like his Transcendentalist forebears  -  and like Ronald Johnson, his older contemporary  -  Revell seizes upon an impossible "model of American ecstasy, a method of American poetic peace ...  Vision leads the harmless eye to Visionary peace, right here, right now. America at peace is the only real America." That this was written in early October 2001 makes Re veil's visionary idealism all the more poignant  -  and all the more necessary. When has America been at peace? As the bombs begin to fall, Revell stops receiving the newspaper, and when his son complains that he misses the news, the poet "pointed to the red sunrise reflected on the near Spring Mountains and said 'There's the news.'

</text>
