<text id="G21" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Redbud and Remembrance' Sewanee Review, Spring2006, Vol. 114 Issue 2, p179-194" Author="George Keithley" PublicationDate="Spring 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=106&sid=cbe95b5d-c2f2-47c2-bf4e-0055a72cb37f%40sessionmgr114&bquery=(JN+%22Sewanee+Review%22+AND+DT+20060301)&bdata=JmRiPWE5aCZ0eXBlPTEmc2l0ZT1laG9zdC1saXZl">

They risked being killed themselves, for wearing the enemy's colors, but the practice continued throughout the war. (In Russia a decade ago I heard stories of Red Army troops donning the uniforms of slain Germans during World War II to keep from freezing in the winter campaign, and then being shot as their own line advanced.)
Training and tactics contributed to the accidental killings. Initially the officers in both armies had been trained at West Point and brought similar tactics into combat. Infantry were formed in long lines and marched directly toward the enemy, firing away. If the front line knelt down before the order to fire, they could be spared. If not, infantrymen were sometimes shot in the back by their own troops.
The line of infantry was workable in the open terrain of the Mexican War, hut in the Civil War much of the fighting was in hill-and-ravine country, where the lines could not hold, and the Confederate cavalry could outride and outmaneuver the less experienced Union horsemen. In woods like the Wilderness the cavalry dismounted and fought as infantry, while others tried to lead the horses to safety. As you would expect, most Union casualties to friendly fire occurred in open terrain like Manassas, while most Confederate losses, like Jackson's death, resulted from fighting in woodlands, where vision was poor and superior horsemanship no longer mattered.
At Manassas, as elsewhere, communication was poor. Artillery fire, when called for, could hardly he controlled, and men were maimed or killed while fighting in front of their own gunneries. Training, tactics, vision, execution - soldiers on both sides learned quickly that mistakes in the field were deadly. Here at Manassas, in that first conflict, a regiment of what would become Jackson's Stonewall Brigade wore neither the Confederate grey that Lee favored, nor the butternut uniform, hut a solid blue. When Union forces mistook them for their own and, holding fire, let them advance, the Virginians blasted away with a barrage of musket-fire, and Jackson secured the hill that made his name. Though it was not friendly fire, it was a deadly misunderstanding that occurred on other battlefields as well, from those first days of the war to the last.
6. The Angel of the Battlefield.
At forty, while she was a clerk in the Patent Office, she began dressing the wounds of Union soldiers. Clara Barton was a native of Massachusetts, living in Washington, D.C., and these troops were from her home state. On their way south to combat duty in the first days of the Civil War, they were attacked by secessionists while passing through Baltimore - civilians hurled rocks and bricks at them, and when they fell to the
Street they were beaten. Finally arriving in the capital, they lay on the floor of the train depot, bruised and bleeding. She learned of the assault while at work - from two gloating coworkers who sympathized with the Rebels - and came at once to aid the victims. She cleansed wounds; she dressed them with handkerchiefs and wrapped them in towels which she'd gathered on her way. She brought them cups of water or coffee.
You might wonder, as I do, if she surprised herself. She was almost pathologically timid, often too shy to speak, yet she talked with these wounded men in a melodious voice. She had no medical training, but by pleading and browbeating she gathered essential supplies so that wounds were cleansed and sewn.
When the wounded from the first battle of Bull Run were brought from Manassas to a medical station in Washington, again she volunteered to nurse them. In the solitude of her life she'd already suffered nervous breakdowns, but in treating others she grew bold for the moment. Tender and determined, she nursed men with gaping wounds, cleansing them, providing meals of bread and fresh water, or crackers mashed into small jars of wine; asking their names; promising to write to their families; now and then consenting to a goodnight kiss from a man who mistook her for his wife or mother; closing the lids of a man's eyes after hearing his last words. It wasn't enough.
By the time the wounded were brought to the medical centers hastily established in Washington, or at the railroad station nearest to the battlefield, many had been without food for several days and were in too much pain to sleep. They arrived in mule-drawn carts or wagons traveling over rutted roads - the mules were considered merciful because they moved more slowly than horses, reducing the awful jostling. Survivors of Second Bull Run recalled ceaseless screaming as the wounded were lifted off the grass, here at Manassas, where limbs and skulls were strewn underfoot. While many were screaming in agony, others were cast into a numb silence that might take years to overcome.
Small, prim, painfully shy. Barton nevertheless berated government officials until they relented and let her travel to the battlefields with her supplies. The black man driving the stocked wagon was a quiet companion on these journeys. Soon after the wagon rolled past the sentries posted at the outskirts of the city, they entered the green countryside. The small woman seated beside him had begun singing to herself. For no reason but that her spirits were rising, she sang "Polly Wolly Doodle," a tune she'd heard in a theater in the capital just before the war began. When she heard her own voice, like a faint echo under the sun-struck trees, she stopped, afraid she might attract attention. "Clara," she said. "No more of that!"
She saw herself as a pale brown-haired woman accompanied by a black driver, and that might give cause for scandal. A risk she had to take. She was warmly welcomed by the medical corps that treated the maimed men carried from the field at Slaughter Mountain and, in the fading heat of mid-September at Antietam, where Lee's troops fought furiously, then withdrew.
Called "the angel of the battlefield," she brought bread, coffee, jams and jellies, wine, salt, sugar, towels, and lanterns so the surgeon could operate on the wounded after nightfall. The field hospital was not the familiar tobacco shed that she expected, but an abandoned bam with a thirty-foot high roof, cattle stalls, and a straw-covered floor soon soaked with the blood of men struck down by rifle and artillery fire. The rafters rose in darkness. Her lanterns, hung from the lower crossbeams, cast shadows across the wounded lying from the front of the bam to the back. All night she attended to them, crouching from one moaning figure to another in her billowing black dress, while they waited their turn to be brought over to the farmhouse. The old house had been ventilated by gunfire from both armies, and there the surgeon, too, labored by the light of Barton's lanterns.
Those who knew Clara Barton found her warm, gentle, kind, and modest. But anxiety stifled her, especially when she was inactive. When she was denied access to the wounded, when she could not obtain a pass to reach the front, she sank into depression. When she could come directly to the battlefield, as she did at Antietam, she could see that her work was essential, and she hated, with a deep-burning passion, the warfare that wasted so many lives.
Midway through the war the old-fashioned musket had given way to the more powerful and accurate Springfield rifle, but the infantry still fought in close quarters; cavalry carried the Spencer carbine, a short-barrel repeating rifle, but as they, too, usually fought on foot, firing at close range, gunshot wounds were horrendous. Victims of bayonet attacks frequently died on the field, before Barton or anyone else could treat them.
At Fredericksburg, Burnside ordered pontoon bridges strung across the Rappahannock to march his troops against the Confederates on the high ground above the town. The two armies exchanged thundering artillery fire. Rebel cannons shelled the ground around the house where Barton was quartered. The bluecoats advanced, raked by gunfire. Her skirt torn by a shell as she crossed the river. Barton closely followed the men. Through the cold morning they fought to reach Fredericksburg, but it had been abandoned except for Rebel infantry and sharpshooters - in hand-to-hand fighting it was reduced to a ghost town. The lone woman there, she made her way among blasted buildings to nurse mutilated men who lay among severed body parts and the stench of their blood.
Now, throughout the chilling afternoon, Burnside and his generals ordered their troops to cross a "killing field," an open plain on the approach to Marye's Heights, above the forsaken town. From the superior position of the heights, Rebel gunfire shredded the Union lines as they attempted to advance. Still they came, wave after wave, and were gunned down, until dusk covered the ground. Altogether twelve thousand Union soldiers were killed or wounded in that one day's fighting, and nothing was gained from the slaughter but the empty shell of a town. That night Clara Barton urged men to take apart the chimney from a ruined house and heat the bricks over a fire so they could be placed among the wounded to keep them warm, until the surgeons arrived to operate in the cold light of morning. You think of those men begging her for water or whiskey; for warm bread; morphine or chloroform; for a kind word or touch; or just to look at them tenderly And you ask yourself, In whose hands will you leave your life?
Later she would work in combat conditions at Battery Wagner, near the fighting in the Wilderness, and in the grinding sieges of Petersburg and Richmond. At the conclusion of the Civil War she traveled to the notorious Andersonville stockade in Georgia. Watched by armed guards. Union prisoners attempted to survive in tattered tents and holes dug into the earth. More than twelve thousand perished from atrocities, starvation, and disease. She helped to identify those who had been carted away to a common graveyard. For the next four years she traced the dead who'd been left on battlefields, buried in unmarked graves, or "disappeared." Finding, in all, another twenty thousand victims of the war, she wrote letters to their families wherever they might be.
Soon she was in Europe, assisting at hospitals that received the wounded from the Franco-Prussian War. Returning to the United States, she founded the American Red Cross - a four-year struggle - then, as you know, she served as its first president. Later she would aid survivors of the Armenian massacre at the hands of the Turks who killed men, women, and children with guns, knives, and swords, and burned their homes.
In the first year of the twentieth century the world s most devastating hurricane struck Galveston, Texas. Boats at anchor in the Gulf of Mexico were swamped and sunk by the incoming tidal surge. When the huge breakers hit the beach the clam shacks, lunchrooms, beer halls, and souvenir shops were inundated. The surf tore apart the big bathhouses and smashed its way into town. Wailing winds flattened fences and then uprooted trees and hurled them against homes. Shutters were flicked from windows and the exposed panes shattered. Roofs, pounded by torrents of rain, were blown away. Downtown, walls collapsed into the rising floodwaters. Rain as hard as hail pounded the rubble.
Clara Barton had arrived to treat orphaned infants, but she found that the youngest were among the first to die. As the water receded the scent of decay grew stronger in the silent streets, where the air was thick with mosquitoes. Daily she dispensed disinfectants to the adults and distributed clothing to the surviving children. After dark, in a city without electric power, she managed her tasks by lantern light, as she had done when nursing the wounded brought from the battlefield of Manassas or in the deep-shadowed barn near Antietam Creek. As always she felt both repressed and determined - but for joyful moments when she forgot all propriety and sang to herself. She was seventy-eight, weary, but still working.

</text>
