<text id="G29" category="" words="1998" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Search for America's Soul: Theatre in the Jazz Age' Theatre Journal Vol. 58, No. 3, Hearing Theatre (Oct., 2006), pp. 459-476" Author="David Savran" PublicationDate="October 2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/theatre_journal/v058/58.3savran.html">

An allegedly revolutionary practice that threatened to overturn hierarchies of taste, social class, and race (and which many likened to Bolshevism), jazz resisted being confined to the musical field. Throughout the 1920s it was consistently charged with either invigorating or demeaning virtually all the arts, from theatre, poetry, and dance to those, like painting or sculpture, that seemed to have little or nothing to do with music. Given the extraordinary proliferation and range of theatrical activities during the 1920s, theatre was arguably the most deeply impacted among music's sister arts. The most popular theatrical entertainments of the period, vaudeville and musical comedy, quickly accommodated themselves to and literally cashed in on the new musical craze by using jazz as scoring or underscoring for songs, dances, and scenes. But even the so-called legitimate theatre was not deaf to syncopated dance music, and jazz often featured in more serious plays (e.g., Eugene O'Neill's Diff'rent [1920], J. Hartley Manners's The National Anthem [1922], and George S. Kaufman and Marc Connelly's Beggar on Horseback [1924]) as the emblem of a new and dangerous "Age of the Young" and of an out-of-control modernity. I will argue here that jazz - as style, emblem, inspiration, metaphor, and performance practice - was a source of tremendous anxiety for playwrights and critics intent on legitimizing theatre as an elite cultural practice. Daring to lay claim to the "Soul of America," it was, in fact, decisive in separating a newly emerging literary theatre from its illegitimate theatrical cousins.
   One cannot begin to analyze the function of jazz, however, without examining its contested identity. Max Harrison, the writer of the entry on jazz in the New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, throws up his hands at the very beginning of his essay: "Attempts at a concise - even a coherent - definition of jazz have invariably failed." Indeed, most writers on the subject could explain their position by paraphrasing Justice Potter Stewart's description of pornography: I don't know how to define it but I know it when I hear it. Even during the Jazz Age, jazz denoted so many different kinds of music, including many that now seem quite unrelated to what has been classified as jazz since World War II. Charles Hamm argues that during the 1920s there were three bodies of music called jazz. The first kind - and the only one considered jazz by virtually all postwar jazz critics but almost never heard by the vast majority of white Americans during the 1920s - is "jazz (and blues) performed by black musicians for black audiences." Recordings of this music, sometimes called hot jazz, were "marketed as 'race records' by small independent record companies beginning in 1920" and, being sold in black record stores, enjoyed little mass distribution. The artists in this group are the ones routinely cited as the first great jazz artists: King Oliver, Jelly Roll Morton, Bessie Smith, Louis Armstrong, and many others. The second type, and one that did not become prominent until the second half of the decade, is "jazz (and blues) performed by black musicians" like Cab Calloway and Duke Ellington "for white audiences" at the Cotton Club and other Harlem and South Side Chicago speakeasies. The third type, and the one that enjoyed wide distribution on recordings and the radio and signified jazz for almost all white Americans and Europeans, Hamm describes as "so-called jazz performed by white musicians for white audiences." This last category, sometimes called sweet jazz, was the subject of "virtually all writing on 'jazz'" during the 1920s and early 1930s, despite the fact, in the words of one knowing contemporary critic, that "the 'sweet' technique" is "hardly connected with true jazz save by its employment of saxophones and banjoes." Paul Whiteman, who "made sweet jazz the Established Order," was the best-known of a group that included other band leaders like Vincent Lopez, Ted Lewis, and Ben Selvin and (mostly Jewish) composers for Tin Pan Alley and Broadway like Irving Berlin, Jerome Kern, and George Gershwin.
   The crucial role of the popular theatre in appropriating, developing, and propagating jazz underlines the fact that there was significant overlap between jazz and theatre both performatively and institutionally. During Prohibition, jazz cabarets and nightclubs often would stage elaborate floor shows that patrons could watch (and participate in as social dancers). As William Howland Kenney notes, these speakeasies provided a highly theatricalized setting in which "new styles of personal liberation - clothes, insiders' slang, cigarettes, bootleg gin, marijuana (called 'gage'), sexual expressiveness, and interracial mingling" functioned "to add drama to the new music." Particularly in Chicago, Kenney reports, "cabaret floor shows . . . put musicians on display and focused increased attention on visual dimensions of musical performance." In fact, the strategy adopted "most often" by saloons in an attempt to camouflage the illicit sale of alcohol was to "upgrade the entertainment into a small vaudeville show." Turning jazz into a kind of theatre, these cabarets often featured chorus lines of dancers as well as nonmusical performers, including actors and comedians, and so represented "an adaptation" - and extension - "of vaudeville comedy to the night club."11
   This newly theatricalized jazz was much more closely aligned with popular theatre forms - and with Jewish songwriters, performers, and producers - than with literary comedies and dramas. Like vaudeville and musical comedy, in which it was regularly featured, jazz is a partly improvisatory practice that depends upon the skill and / or the inspiration of a performer stimulated by an eager audience. During the 1920s, jazz, vaudeville, and musical comedy were performance practices that, to borrow Pierre Bourdieu's words, satisfied "a deep-rooted demand" of "the popular audience . . . for participation" that the "formal experimentation" of the legitimate theatre "systematically disappoint[ed]." In vaudeville proper, orchestras routinely theatricalized jazz performance and undermined the distinction between music and theatre by surrounding "the orchestra with expensive cycloramas and sets" and incorporating "in the act a song story, scenic exploitation [sic], costume bit, singing numbers, dances, or other unusual features to put the act across."13
   The identification of jazz with vaudeville, revue, and musical comedy was so strong that as early as 1917, one commentator, searching for the etymology of the word "jazz," turned to a vaudevillian who noted that "the phrase 'Jaz [sic] her up' is a common one to-day in vaudeville." This association points to the fact that between World War I and the mid-1920s, vaudeville and cabaret were by far the most important and popular venues for jazz performance. In 1923, a writer for Metronome, an orchestra and band monthly, found more than seventy-five jazz orchestras playing in vaudeville. Throughout the 1920s, jazz - the exemplary urban art form - was regularly described as being centered in the theatre district, as the common turn of phrase, "the jazz-mongers of Broadway," suggests. And Broadway, with its glittering, seductive, and often tawdry entertainments, became a metonym for and emblem of jazz. Both were imagined as being the "expression of the times, of the breathless, energetic, super-active times in which we are living." As an indignant guardian of high culture tartly put it, "If New York City, or rather a segment situated on Broadway, is America, then jazz does represent the American soul." Given its many manifestations, guises, contexts, and performance venues, jazz thus represented the most significant form of cross-mediated performance in the 1920s: a form that undermined the autonomy of dance and concert music, cabaret, social dancing, vaudeville, revue, and narrative theatre. It was, in short, less a musical form than a practice that, both institutionally and ontologically, revealed the necessarily contingent nature of all performance practices. 
   Although the legitimate theatre eschewed improvisation and disdained work that sought merely to provide amusement, a handful of experimental plays, most notably John Howard Lawson's Processional (1925), subtitled A Jazz Symphony of American Life in Four Acts, used jazz as a metaphor and inspiration for innovations in both content and dramatic form. By turning jazz into drama, Lawson "endeavored . . . to reflect . . . the color and movement of the American processional as it streams about us," whose "rhythm is staccato, burlesque, [and] carried out by a formalized arrangement of jazz music." Although Lawson stopped short of championing the form, Processional divided critics and perplexed audiences, running for only ninety-six performances despite the imprimatur of the prestigious (and noncommercial) Theatre Guild. Heywood Broun praised the play, but had to admit that he had "seldom seen first-nighters more mystified and annoyed." Critics who disliked it, meanwhile, made no attempt to disguise their contempt for the "oleaginous conserve of tommyrot entitled 'Processional'" (a play that "suffers from convulsions" and "writhe[s] all over the stage") as well as the "consummate hypocrisy" of the Guild for "pretending that this ludicrous and incoherent inanity had some deep significance."21
   For artists and critics less committed than Lawson to innovation and political radicalism, both jazzed theatre and theatricalized jazz remained an even more troubling and controversial cultural performance. This was especially true for a legitimate stage attempting to survive the insurgence of a lowbrow art form (cinema), separate itself decisively from a jazzed-up vaudeville, absorb and Americanize a vital European modernism, boost its prestige in relation to its many illegitimate cousins, and strive "seriously to become an art rather than a pleasant pastime." Playwrights in pursuit of cultural and symbolic capital often positioned their work by constructing disagreeable characters who loved jazz and sympathetic ones who held it in contempt. Jazz thereby served as the practice on which an emergent, would-be highbrow, literary theatre looked with horror and dismay in part because it was providing the substance and style for the theatrical genres from which this new theatre was most eager to distance itself, vaudeville and musical comedy. It provided the fulcrum that divided a heroic, universalizing modernism from its popular, mongrelized other. In many plays, like The National Anthem, jazz was constructed as the sign of decadence, moral turpitude, standardization, hypocrisy, and cultural miscegenation. Playwrights like Eugene O'Neill - who, in Diff'rent, associates jazz with one of his most "revoltingly incongruous" and deceitful women characters - were loath to associate their plays with jazz writing or a music that emerged from African Americans and the working classes. And the more conservative arbiters of culture applauded the legitimate theatre's studied dissociation from jazz. One critic characterized jazz as "musical rowdy" and maintained that it "occupies the same relation to the art of music that 'burlesque' (on the stage) does to the 'legitimate drama.'" Another expressed great relief that O'Neill was pursuing a heroic "dream" of an imperial America personified by a determined and powerful "young conqueror" striding across the globe rather than a jazz-loving, "strapping swaggerer . . . doing the 'Charleston.'" "Jazz has nothing in common" with the work of an O'Neill, which is "an expression of the groping and the real struggle of the nation" toward "a grandeur and wisdom to which jazz will forever be blind." 
Jewish Jazz
Discourses on jazz from the 1920s to the present have consistently agonized over questions of race, ethnicity, and social class. Indeed, jazz - and all that has been labeled jazz - remains, with the possible exception of minstrelsy, the most heavily contested musicological subject. While minstrelsy has proven the most embarrassing, and in the main repressed cultural remnant of chattel slavery, jazz has as a rule been regarded (see Hamm, above) as an African American musical genre that resists (and triumphs over) oppression. The racially charged nature of these discourses - and the enormousness of the cultural stakes - have ensured that race, as Nicholas M. Evans points out, has tended from the 1920s to the present "to be the lightning rod for the most emotionally and ideologically charged arguments," separating those historians (e.g., Stanley Crouch, LeRoi Jones [Amiri Baraka], Albert Murray, and Wynton Marsalis) who view jazz as essentially black from those (e.g., Gene Lees, Richard Sudhalter, James Lincoln Collier, and William Howland Kenney) who argue that it is essentially hybridized and multiracial.  Yet, as Evans argues, even those historians, like Sudhalter, who proselytize for the multiracial character of jazz end up falling back upon essentialized racial categories and emphasizing "white and black cultures' separateness."

</text>
