<text id="G43" category="" words="2003" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="There Is No Me Without You: One Woman's Odyssey to Rescue Her Country's Children' Bloomsbury" Author="Melissa Fay Greene" PublicationDate="September 2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.bookbrowse.com/excerpts/index.cfm/book_number/1858/There-Is-No-Me-Without-You">

On a dim, clattering afternoon in the rainy season, I sat in a crowded living room in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, stupefied by water. The rain drumming the tin roofs of the hillside district was deafening, as if neighbors on rooftops banged with kettles and sticks. The mud yard boiled and popped in the downpour. Through the wide-open front door, I watched arriving visitors leap across stepping-stones slick with clay. At the doorstep of Haregewoin Teferra's two-room brick house - an earthier, leakier dwelling than the modern two-story stucco house she'd once enjoyed - the men took off their hats and shook them and the women wrung out their shawls. Though Haregewoin was sliding further every day from her former middle-class standing, a dozen old friends opted to sit out the cloudburst with her - some as a sign of loyalty, some probably to see what she was going to do next. Despite misgivings about whom they might find among her guests, all entered beaming. They greeted everyone by handshake or raised eyebrows, dripped across the cement floor, and squeezed in to join the inactivity.

Ebullient and round, four foot eight, the hostess slapped across the wet floor in rubber flip-flops. Haregewoin Teferra (Ha-re-ge-woin Te-fare-uh) was a country-born, well-educated, bilingual woman in her late fifties. Her thick hair, bunched under a triangular kerchief, had sprung a few curlicues of gray. Her coffee-dark skin gleamed in the heat. She wore what she always wore: a long, leopard-print cotton skirt with an elastic waist, and a red, short-sleeve T-shirt. As each caller took a seat, Haregewoin hurried back to her chair and pitched forward brightly to hear the news. When she laughed, she clutched her hands to her chest and leaned back; her eyes crinkled shut and her shoulders jiggled.

This was no special occasion or holiday. Some of Haregewoin's old friends had retired from work in retail or the professions; others were underemployed, simply unable - in Ethiopia's listless economy - to fill their days with gainful activity. Still others had hidden reasons for their freedom to visit in the middle of a weekday afternoon.

One guest practically dared new arrivals to sit beside him. "Let's see how far your good manners will get us" was the look on the face of Zewedu Getachew (Zoe-dew Ge-tah-chew) a once-handsome and affluent man. He had been director of construction for a French company and had taught engineering at Addis Ababa University. The shoulders of his khaki overcoat were angrily bunched up less against the rain, it seemed, than against the trick life had played him, the change in his health status that had cost him his job and good name.

Across the continent, people were lining up by the millions on one side or the other of a new binary system, being told they were "positive" or "negative" as if they had turned overnight into protons and electrons and everyone spoke of subatomic physics, rather than of who was going to live and who was going to be shunned, endure terrible suffering, and die.

Only Haregewoin, among many friends who had once hosted Zewedu, still welcomed him. He tilted far back on a metal-legged kitchen chair with his arms crossed on his chest, not expecting to be offered a handshake, nor offering one. Unshaved whiskers darkened his cheeks.

A humble and pretty young woman, wearing a long skirt, seated herself on a low stool to roast fresh coffee beans. She shook them in an iron skillet over a portable stove. Sara had been expelled from college during her sophomore year and denounced by her parents when her persistent cough had turned out to be not only tuberculosis (at which point her parents had bundled her up and raced around with her to the best doctors) but something unspeakable (when they evicted her). The lessons in subservience drilled into most Ethiopian girls did not prepare a young person for finding herself alone in the city; Sara was huddled in a doorway when Haregewoin found her. Haregewoin knew - even if Sara did not - that the college girl's options might soon be a choice between begging or the sex trade.

Thus, on this average weekday in East Africa, a rare scene: a house in which middle-class men and women untouched by the epidemic sat beside men and women who had crossed over the great divide.

The hard rain pummeled the roof, stirred up the courtyard, and sent herds of barefoot little kids galloping past Haregewoin's open door.

I was unhappily wedged in a love seat beside a fierce-looking old woman in a cocoon of homespun cotton. Her dark, pendulous skin and droopy eyes were pulled up and back by a head scarf, giving her an expression of alarmed disapproval. I didn't know if she was frowning against the upward yank of her face or because she had been stuck with me. Over the long hours, we became reluctant familiars, like strangers on an all-night bus trip. We secretly shoved each other over disputed millimeters of territory, but faced forward politely.

The wind sprayed mist through the open door. The whitewashed brick room seemed to dip and sway as if we rode a houseboat whipped by dark waves. The mummified dowager at my side slowly gained ground, as her long cotton shawls began to unwind. 

It had taken me a few weeks to get the hang of this. On the long afternoons when the air fattens to water in Addis Ababa, the city's animal life - goats, sheep, donkeys, stray dogs, woodpeckers, catbirds, swallows - fall asleep standing up in crevices and bowers, or with their heads bowed in the deluge. That is when I long to trudge up the stairs to my room in the tidy Yilma Hotel, peel off my muddy shoes and socks, drink from a liter of bottled water, fall across the bed with Bahru Zewde's History of Modern Ethiopia, and sleep while the tall, sheer curtains drift into the room full of the scent and weight of rain.

But I was stuffed into a love seat in Haregewoin's common room and there was no getting out of it. The group inertia overwhelmed me. "Now?" everyone stirred and asked in bewilderment. "You want to go somewhere now, in this weather?" Some were thinking, I'm sure, "The ferange [white] has to go somewhere now?" My friend and driver, Selamneh Techane (Se-lam-nuh Te-tchen-ay), who was rolled forward with his head resting on his hands, sat up and looked at me with bleary confusion. Every time I tried to stand up, the materfamilias beside me sloughed off another layer of shawls.

Better just to sink down, everyone implied; we'll get through this together. So together we sank through the endless soft drone of the afternoon rains. The demitasse cups of coffee, thick with the sliding brown silt of sugar, somehow knocked one even faster into a somnolent state. The conversation, after we returned our empty cups to a wooden, four-legged tray on the floor, dropped off steeply. When the dim lamp flickered off, nobody thumped it. Nobody turned on the dusty television under its yellowing doily and vase of plastic flowers. (There was nothing to watch on TV: nearly all day, every day, the government-controlled TV station broadcast traditional dancers leaping and shimmying under harsh studio lights.) My impregnable seatmate, in an advanced state of coming unraveled, was snoring. 

Haregewoin's cell phone rang and she answered with a crisp "Allo? Abet?" (Yes?) The coffee table was spread with papers, and there was a landline telephone, which often rang, too. Haregewoin Teferra was not weighed down by wind and rain and drowsiness. Things were happening in the city, even at this torrential hour, and she was deep in negotiations. Or perhaps the message she meant to relay to her old friends was "You see? I am still alive."

She put down the phone for a moment and looked out, calculating.

"What is it?" someone asked, as she knew someone would.

"It is the kebele [a local council, like a county commission]. They ask if I have room to take in a child."

Several visitors chuckled. Disbelief stirred under the surface. Ethiopians - especially the highlanders, the Amhara and the Tigray - are famously sarcastic people, so there probably were a few sly remarks, in a language and of a degree of subtlety impossible for me to understand even in translation. Centuries of living under tyrants have given Ethiopians the gift of double entendre. The hidden speech has a name: s채m enna w채rq (wax and gold): the s채m is the surface meaning and the w채rq is the deep or hidden meaning. Skilled practitioners are respected as masters of verbal artistry.

At any rate, of course Haregewoin had no room for another child: the two-room brick house, two small outbuildings, and rusted, bright blue boxcar with a door carved out of it overflowed with children and teens of every size, and there were wistful adult hangers-on, too.

She sat for a moment, holding the receiver against her chest and curling the fingers of one hand around her lips, counting. No one moved, nor did anyone offer to shelter the child in Haregewoin's place. Who knew what his condition would be? Probably sick, maybe contagious, certainly hungry and filthy; barefoot, uneducated, and hysterical. No thank you. While it was appreciated that the neighborhood's administrative unit, the kebele, took an interest, neither the kebele nor the federal government had a stipend to offer for the child's upkeep.

Haregewoin stood up. "I go," she said.

Thinking I'd caught the rhythm of the afternoon, I protested, "Now? You're going somewhere now?" I looked to the others for approval.

But one doesn't ask this of someone who actually has work to do, for real work is hard to find and always respected. Some now must have thought, "Now the ferange doesn't want to go?"

"May I come too?" I asked more humbly.

"Yes. Ishi [Okay]. Come. Please."

Selamneh Techane, the taxi driver, instantly alert, stood up, keys in hand. Haregewoin no longer had a car, much less the two cars of her married life. She gathered her shamma (thick, handwoven shawl) and black handbag and splashed cheerfully into the courtyard.

"Where are we going?" I asked, wading behind her.

"To pick up the child," she called over her shoulder, already hoisting herself into the front seat of Selamneh's tin blue taxi. I got into the back and off we backfired. 

At the intersection of the mountain lane and a paved thoroughfare, we pulled over to pick up a woman in khaki slacks and a zipper windbreaker waiting outside her apartment building. She got into the backseat with me and introduced herself, shaking hands all around. Her name was Gerrida; she was a housewife, married to a police officer. It was she who had just phoned on behalf of the kebele.

"The little boy is Mintesinot [Min-tess-eh-note]. He is about two and a half years old," Gerrida said. He was growing up on a sidewalk near a busy intersection in town. Two months ago, his mother, Emebate (Em-eh-bott-ay) died of pneumonia (an opportunistic infection of AIDS); now his father was very sick, coughing all night, probably from tuberculosis (TB was one of the typical opportunistic infections of AIDS [OIA] invading immune systems weakened by HIV disease). It was evident to everyone in the neighborhood that the young father would soon die.

Gerrida had given charity to the small family over the years, she said, and many others in the district had also tried to help them. Finally, though, with the death of Mintesinot's mother, it was time: the boy required better care than what his homeless, terminally ill father was giving him in plain sight of the entire world, beside the gutter of a busy street, nearly under the hooves of urban herds of goats and donkeys.

"The child is so smiling face," Gerrida turned to assure me in English. "He is wonderful."

I wondered briefly why Gerrida didn't take in the little boy. But if he was indeed an orphan of the unspeakable disease, then she could not.

</text>
