<text id="G66" category="" words="1985" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Thick Style: Steady Sellers, Textual Aesthetics, and Early Modern Devotional Reading' PMLA, Vol. 121, No. 1, January 2006" Author="Matthew P. Brown" PublicationDate="January 2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.mlajournals.org/toc/pmla/121/1">

On 21 November 1678, Joseph Rowlandson Preached a fast-day sermon in Weathersfield, Connecticut, just two days before his death. Entitled The Possibility of God's Forsaking a People, it reached memorial publication in 1682, as separate title and as both appendix and frame to the famous captivity narrative of his wife, Mary Rowlandson. To berate an audience in perceived decline, the minister quoted a textual crux from Jeremiah. Chapter 2, verse 31 - "And you, O Generation, behold the word of the lord!" (Metzger and Murphy) - has mystified biblical editors, since the phrasing is guesswork from a vague Hebrew original. This doubt was Rowlandson's opportunity: "Oh Generation of what? of what you will, God leaves a space that you may write, what you please, generation of Vipers, or Monsters, or any thing rather then Generation of Gods people. See ye the word of the Lord behold your face in that Glass" (13 -  14). While the passage is familiar as jeremiad, its strategy raises key questions for study of the material text in relation to the disciplines of literary criticism and book history. A literary critic, for instance, would note that Rowlandson does not practice the antiaesthetic of transparent communication so often associated with New England writing. Rather, Rowlandson invites manifold responses through the will and pleasure of the reader. He offers figurative and open-ended variants ("Vipers, or Monsters . . ."), hemming in those responses with a punitive reproach that is nevertheless indefinite (". . . or any thing rather then Generation of Gods people"). Additionally, the passage layers voices, as the citation orchestrates God's speech to the Israelites, Jeremiah's prophecy to the Judaeans, and Rowlandson's sermon to his congregants. While the message is admonitory, its extended figuration, deliberate ambiguity, and polyvocality partake in the kind of multiple meaning that is the resource of art writing, traditionally conceived.
The passage compels special attention, however, for its allusion to the modes of textual transmission animating this literary method. The instability of a crux inspires Rowlandson, but instead of resolving it, the preacher avows the bibliographic uncertainty of imprecise or conflicting sources. Though seemingly fixed in print, the passage refers to the oral performances and scribal mediations that also structured literacy protocols in the early modern period. With the apostrophic address, the curt monosyllables dominating the first four clauses, and the parallelism of the imperatives ("See," "behold") in the final sentence, the passage sounds an acoustic impatience. It also prompts note-taking in response to sacred text - a custom encouraged in worship practices of the more zealous Reformation pietists. The intertext of the auditor notebook returns us to the cross-referencing habits of Rowlandson himself, who, to give point to the scriptural fragment from Jeremiah 2.31, indexes and collates material through biblical translations, commentaries, and marginalia. For Rowlandson and his devotional audience, textuality is a nonlinear, performative sensorium, a richly imagined environment where words exist in multiple media, where books are navigated by hand and eye, and where information is gathered and meaning creatively regenerated.
While helping us rethink the plain style, Rowlandson's clever reprimand is nevertheless presented in a jeremiad and attached to a captivity narrative and thus seems to sit squarely in the tradition of colonial American literary genres. But in fact it alludes to modes of textuality that complicate categories of literary history not only for seventeenth-century New England but for early modern England as well. For early New England, attention to genres such as the jeremiad and to single authors such as Anne Bradstreet and Edward Taylor has obscured the dominant literary culture of the seventeenth century. Research on the book trades and probate has recovered a set of devotional works - manuals of piety, guides to conversion, sermon series, and psalmbooks - that were, along with scripture, the popular literature of early New England. Inexpensively formatted, this prescriptive literature makes up the era's steady sellers, titles ordered and reordered from London by Boston booksellers and reprinted at the local presses, "steady" in the sense of ensuring dependable sales that could cover centuries, as David D. Hall notes ("Uses" 61 - 62, Worlds 48 - 49). Written by moderate-to-radical Reformers and later by Nonconformists, the most reprinted devotional works included Lewis Bayly's The Practise of Pietie (1612), Samuel Smith's The Great Assize (1617), Henry Scudder's The Christians Daily Walke (1627), and Arthur Dent's The Plaine Man's Path-way to Heaven (1601). The titles are in part informational texts, used as reference manuals to prescribe conduct. Unlike secularized conduct books of gentility, the devotional works guided behavior through a kind of Renaissance soul-fashioning, wherein the pious life was nurtured. Indeed, their popularity poses a challenge to descriptions of English literary culture of the period. Steady sellers are best understood through numbers of editions, and these numbers far outweigh those of poetry or drama editions published in the period. On mandate from the Stationers' Company, London print runs in the seventeenth century averaged between 1,250 and 2,000 copies per edition; although higher runs occurred when enterprising printers evaded official policy and when control weakened during mid-century tumult, runs were oftentimes much lower. Works thus published in only one edition would not have the enduring impact of Bayly, Dent, and Smith, which each went through over thirty editions up to 1700. At the same time, the number of copies per steady-seller edition could be much higher, because they were produced in smaller formats; one impression of Joseph Alleine's An Alarme to Unconverted Sinners (1673) is said to have run to 30,000 copies. These small encyclopedic manuals - formatted in duodecimo and sixteenmo, often between four hundred and six hundred pages long - have been called "short, tubby bricks" by the historian of religion Stephen Foster (87). While meditational poetry, fast-day jeremiads, captivity tales, and Shakespearean drama deserve our attention, the devotional steady sellers must be reckoned a - perhaps the - canon of popular reading in the early modern West.
At another level, Rowlandson's play with the crux is fully consistent with the import of the devotional steady sellers, which likewise comprehend textuality as a nonlinear, performative sensorium. The steady sellers are structured by cross-referencing: their indexical organization, as well as their verbal content, promotes discontinuous reading, akin to Rowlandson's learned research. Although they existed in a print format, the steady-seller canon presents evidence of its oral performance, and its passages existed also as scribal commonplaces, echoing Rowlandson's preaching style and behavioral expectation. The aesthetics of the steady sellers, like Rowlandson's wordplay, call on the creative rendering and sensory experience of the word, on the varied meanings that emerge from its mediation through sight, sound, and gesture. Nonlinear, performative, and sensorium are words rarely associated - alone, much less together - with the seventeenth-century English devout who transplanted themselves to Algonquian lands and occupied southern New England. The description is closer to the language of a different set of zealots, the twenty-first-century digerati who proclaim the death of the book. But, in fact, the steady sellers illustrate a central point book historians make in response to the digital hype. Historically, books - the steady sellers are an exemplary case - have been search engines, randomly accessed and cross-referenced; they have been physically experienced, engaging the senses in public and private settings; and they have been radically unstable, printed with multiple variants and disseminated in reconfigured formats. As many book specialists have indicated, the salient analogy in the Western tradition for the current information revolution is not the change from manuscript to print but rather the shift from scroll to codex in the second to fifth centuries CE, when the enforced linearity of self-contained rolls gave way to the nonlinear navigation of individual and multiple books.
The steady sellers thus prompt an inquiry into the idea of literature and the codex format that can benefit literary scholars, digital theorists, and book historians. In this essay, I explain why these devotional titles might be construed as defining a literary culture for the seventeenth century; I also argue that a reading of the religious manuals helps substantiate the scroll-to-codex analogy. At once informational and aesthetic, the steady sellers generate meaning through their thickness. Thickness refers in part to the sensorium of effects implied in the Rowlandson passage, where meaning is multivalent rather than transparent. Thickness also refers more prosaically to the bricklike quality of these six-hundred-page reference works, where meaning is discontinuously gathered rather than linearly developed. To establish a framework, I begin by drawing on editorial theory and information history, both subfields of book studies, to describe the concept of thickening. I then discuss prescriptions for and descriptions of codex use in the conduct literature. The steady sellers portray reading as a performance: they value the nonlinear cross-referencing of passages, handled tactilely and experienced aurally, as contrasted with the conventional image of literacy defined by the silent, solitary, linear consumption of written texts. Next I consider the thickening of these manuals of piety through their iconographic framing. The title image of The Practise of Pietie illustrates how page design engages sight and touch, induces proper gestures, and promotes continuous and discontinuous reading. The analysis turns ultimately to an individual colonist's commonplace book - cum - spiritual diary. Evidence of practice rather than prescription, Joseph Tompson's personal miscellany excerpts passages from the devotional titles, then treats the gathered fragments as reference items to be consulted discretely. My effort thus is twofold: to argue for the cultural work of the codex format in early New England and to show why the devotional steady sellers can be understood as literary expression in the period.
Book history has tended to investigate questions of literary merit in the light of the social uses of aesthetics, examining the contingencies that construct the value of particular texts. If book historians and bibliographers throw cold water on the literary critic's passion for certain authors and genres, they nevertheless remain fairly mute on qualities of a text that foreground the imaginative and the interpretive. This is perhaps a legacy of the scientism behind W. W. Greg's "pure bibliography" and of the quantitative emphasis behind book history's macrological approaches. Within book studies, editorial theory has been more propositional about the literary. Whether implicit in D. F. McKenzie's belief in an aesthetic of decorous professionalism - embodied in William Congreve - or avowed in Hershel Parker's defense of creative frenzy, editors refreshingly document relations between the materiality of a text and its aesthesis. In The Textual Condition, Jerome McGann is especially forward in this regard. With pedagogical clarity, his book presents scholarly vocabulary for textual analysis, protocols for classroom assignments, practical case studies, and a conservative selection of canonical texts. But this institutional function masks an underexamined and more radical claim for literary value. McGann argues for a distinction between historical writing and art writing. For him, historical records are intended to transmit information, and their concrete documentary manifestations do not have a relevant aesthetic dimension. By contrast, literary writing is characterized by multiple levels of intentionality (authorial and nonauthorial) and by multiple documentary forms. Literary works are conveyed through a network of linguistic and bibliographic (or documentary) codes; they are polyvocal and mediated, refusing transparency by both the rich imagination of the author and the mediating agency of editors, institutions, and the artifacts themselves; they are a place where "metaphor and metonymy thrive" (76); and they are subject to multiple editions and wide dispersal. McGann calls this phenomenon the thickening of literary discourse. The elevation of art writing here - derived perhaps from the narrow range of authors and texts that compose McGann's canon - limits the reach of the theory. Indeed, rather than separate artistic creations from historical documents, we might better use this vocabulary, first, to include more kinds of discourse; second, to appreciate the expressivity of records; and, third, to measure textual aesthetics in historicized social formations.
To wit, the social context of writing, publication, and reading in the early modern period differs significantly from that in the post-1700 West; it is, most obviously, a profoundly religious era, such that art writing of the kind practiced by the Romantic and post-Romantic authors McGann prefers is a less germane category.

</text>
