<text id="H04" category="" words="2011" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Joint study Committee on the Equine Industry. North Carolina Legislative Library." Author="David Weinstein, Nelson Cole" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://www.ncleg.net/documentsites/legislativepublications/Study%20Reports%20to%20the%202006%20NCGA/Equine%20Industry%20-%20Joint%20Select%20Committee.pdf">

The Joint Study Committee on the Equine Industry met three times from March 7, 2006, until April 18, 2006. The Committee heard presentations from a number of experts in the equine industry including: 
• Mr. Glen Petty, from the North Carolina Horse Council, presented the results of the 2005 economic impact study done by the American Horse Council Foundation which showed that the total impact of the equine industry in the United States is approximately $101.5 billion. This impact can be broken down into $32 billion from recreation, $28.8 billion from showing, $26.1 billion from racing, and $14.7 billion from other activities. The study also showed the North Carolina ranked 8th among the states in the number of horses. North Carolina, however, has not taken a census of its equine population since 1996 and it has never conducted an economic impact study of the industry. 
• Mr. Gene Parker, Parker Farms, Orrum, NC, made a presentation on quarter horse breeding and showing. Mr. Parker is a national Director for the American Quarter Horse Association. He described a number of large shows that have been held in the State and the great potential that exists. 
• Mr. Howard Isley, Assistant Commissioner, NC Department of Agriculture, reported on the three State horse facilities. Mr. Isley also told the Committee that the last study of the State's equine population was done in 1996 and even then they did not get a complete count. Mr. Isley stated that the Department recommended that a census be taken of the number of horses by county. He estimated that the cost of such a study would be approximately $273,000.00. He also suggested that NC State University could use the information to perform an economic impact study at a cost of approximately $30,000. 
• Ms. Peggy McElven, Director of St. Andrews Presbyterian College Equine Program discussed the school's program and facilities. In 1995, St. Andrews established the nation's first four year degree program in Equine Business Management. The school also has a therapeutic equine center that opened in 2001. Ms. McElven noted that the program has grown continuously and that they have seen directly the tremendous opportunity and economic impact of the equine industry. 
• Mr. Roger Secrist from the NC Horse Park Association talked about the development and success of the Stoneybrook Steeplechase. Mr. Secrist noted that statistics show that most horse parks struggle at 
first but that they can become engines for economic development in the whole surrounding area. 
Senator Weinstein appointed a sub-committee to develop recommendations for the Committee to consider. The sub-committee, chaired by Tom Hendrickson, met four times. The sub-committee considered the need for an assessment of the economic impact of the equine industry similar to the study that was done by the University of North Carolina at Charlotte and the Sanford Holshouser Business Development Group for the motorsports industry. Ernie Pearson, Managing Partner with the Sanford Holshouser Business Development Group spoke to the sub-committee about the process for conducting such a study and the estimated cost. 
The sub-committee further discussed the studies and activities ongoing in a number of east coast states. Virginia, Maryland, Florida, Pennsylvania, Kentucky and a number of other states have recently conducted economic impact studies and used the information gained to develop tools for improving the equine industry in their states. 
The sub-committee recommended that the General Assembly fund a study to be conducted by the Agricultural Advancement Consortium to provide a thorough assessment of the current status of the equine industry in the State and to develop a comprehensive plan to maximize the economic opportunities of the industry. The sub-committee further suggested that several other actions be consider in order to improve the short-term and the long-term viability of the industry. A copy of the sub-committee report is attached as Appendix A. 
The full committee met to review the recommendations of the sub-committee. The committee voted to adopt the sub-committee recommendations.

FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
FINDINGS 1: 
The Committee finds that North Carolina is very well suited to hosting equine operations and events. The Committee also finds that studies in other nearby states have shown an economic impact of $1 billion or more from the equine industry in each of those states. Other states are moving rapidly to capitalize on this potential source of revenue. Virginia has recently upgraded the Virginia Horse Center in Lexington. A 2004 economic impact study showed that the total economic impact from that facility alone was in excess of $52 million dollars. The facility draws competitors and spectators from all over the country, including North Carolina. Maryland has begun developing a state horse park similar in nature to Kentucky's world class facility. Florida has recently opened their horse park in Ocala. 
While, North Carolina appears well situated to develop the equine industry, there has been no recent survey of the equine population or analysis of its impact on the North Carolina economy. The Committee finds that without a proper assessment, development of this industry will be haphazard and the State will not be able to fully capitalize upon a growing source of jobs and revenue. A thorough study of the industry base is needed to make proper plans and recommendations for its future growth. 
RECOMMENDATION 1: 
The Joint Study Committee on the Equine Industry recommends that the 2006 General Assembly appropriate funds to the Agricultural Advancement Consortium to study the economic impact of the equine industry in North Carolina and develop strategies to maximize the economic impact in the State.
PROPOSED LEGISLATION 
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED 
AN ACT TO APPROPRIATE FUNDS TO THE AGRICULTURAL ADVANCEMENT CONSORTIUM TO STUDY THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF THE EQUINE INDUSTRY IN NORTH CAROLINA AND DEVELOP STRATEGIES TO MAXIMIZE THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF THIS INDUSTRY IN THE STATE. 
Whereas, the 2005 economic impact study of the horse industry in the United States done by the American Horse Council showed a total impact of $101.5 billion: $32 billion from recreation, $28.8 billion from showing, $26.1 billion from racing, and $14.7 billion from other activities; and 
Whereas, that study ranked North Carolina 8th among the states in the number of horses in the State; and 
Whereas, the last survey of the equine industry in North Carolina was undertaken by the North Carolina Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services in 1996; and 
Whereas, no comprehensive study has ever been done to determine the economic impact of the equine industry in the State; and 
Whereas, Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Kentucky, and other states have recently conducted economic impact studies and have found that the equine industry contributes substantially to each state's economy. For example, Maryland determined the total economic impact of the equine industry to be $1.5 billion dollars per year, and Virginia estimated a $1 billion dollar impact with the Virginia Horse Center in Lexington alone generating in excess of $53 million; and 
Whereas, a number of states also have established equine industry boards and are actively recruiting equine operations and activities; including the development of major horse parks in Maryland and Florida; and 
Whereas, North Carolina is well situated as to climate, geography, and transportation routes for equine operations and activities and has an opportunity to increase its share of the equine industry dollar; and 
Whereas, North Carolina was the home of Janus, the foundation sire of the American Quarter Horse; and 
Whereas, Sir Archie, considered one of the foundation sires of the American Thoroughbred, lived in North Carolina during the early 1800s; and 
Whereas, expansion of the equine industry would provide jobs, alternatives to tobacco production, aid in the preservation of farmland and open space, and contribute to the general welfare of the State; Now, therefore, 
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts: 
SECTION 1. There is appropriated to the Rural Economic Development Center the sum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) to be allocated to the Agricultural Advancement Consortium for the purpose of assessing the numbers, composition, and value of the equine industry in North Carolina, analyzing the direct and indirect impact of the industry on the State's economy and the development of a comprehensive plan to maximize the economic opportunities presented by the industry. 
SECTION 2. The assessment of the equine industry shall provide data on both a statewide and county basis. The assessment shall include the following: 
(1) A census of equines in the State, including numbers, breeds, and disciplines. 
(2) The value of equines in the State. 
(3) The number of equine owners. 
(4) The number of equine operations. 
(5) The size of equine operations. 
(6) The total acreage devoted to equine operations. 
(7) The value of equine-related assets. 
(8) The number of equines and owners participating in various activities within the State. 
(9) An analysis of the economic impact of the existing exhibition facilities including the Hunt Horse Complex, the Senator Bob Martin Horse Complex, the WNC Agricultural Center, and the Carolina Horse Park. 
(10) An analysis of the programs, contributions, and industry support provided by the North Carolina State University College of Veterinary Medicine and other equine programs, at both private and public education institutions including the College of Agriculture and Life at North Carolina State University, Martin Community College, and St. Andrews College. 
(11) An analysis of the economic impact of breeding, training, and other horse operations. 
(12) An analysis of the economic impact of services provided to the equine industry including farrier, veterinary, design and planning, farm management and consulting, show management, and other services related to equines and equine operations. 
(13) An analysis of the economic impact, including manufacturing, agricultural production and employment, and wholesale and retail sales, of the purchase of equines, feed and grain, hay, tack and other horse equipment, riding clothes, insurance, vehicles and trailers, farm and pasture inputs, capital improvements such as barns, sheds and fencing, and real estate, including planned equestrian communities. 
(14) An analysis of the economic impact of other recreational uses of equines, including trail riding, camping with horses, therapeutic riding programs, other recreational activities, and equine-related agritourism.
(15) An analysis of the impact of the equine industry on State and local governments including the generation of tax revenues. 
SECTION 3. The Agricultural Advancement Consortium, in developing a plan to maximize the economic impact of the equine industry, shall: 
(1) Evaluate existing equine-related facilities, programs, and services in the State and make recommendations for enhancing those facilities, programs, and services so as to maximize their economic impact on the State. 
(2) Identify opportunities for the growth of the equine industry, including the production of feed crops, improved pasture, and high quality horse hays, attracting industry engaged in the production of horse-related products, equipment, and pharmaceuticals, the addition of exhibition and show facilities, including the development of a world class equestrian park, and other horse-related programs, activities, and facilities, and evaluate the potential economic contribution to the State's economy of each of these potential undertakings. 
(3) Evaluate the need to create an equine industry board tasked with the market development, education, publicity, research, and promotion of the North Carolina equine industry and other such measures it deems appropriate to promote the objectives, findings, and recommendations of the equine industry survey and analysis. 
(4) Evaluate the laws, rules, and policies that impact equine owners and persons engaged in equine activities, including land-use policies, preservation of trails, use of State recreational facilities, and tax credits and make recommendations directed toward making North Carolina more attractive to equine operations and activities. 
SECTION 4. The Agricultural Advancement Consortium may contract with other agencies of State government, any of the constituent institutions of The University of North Carolina, and private consultants as it deems necessary and advisable in its conduct of the assessment and plan development. The Agricultural Advancement Consortium shall complete its work within 12 months of the funds becoming available and shall file a report containing the results of the assessment of the equine industry and its plan for maximizing the economic impact of the equine industry with the Chairs of the Joint Legislative Commission on Governmental Operations and the Chairs of the Senate and House Appropriations Committees.

</text>
