<text id="H10" category="" words="1996" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="State Planning Project For the Uninsured" Author="Michigan Focus Group Report Center for Collaborative Research in Health Outcomes and Policy Michigan Public Health Institute" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.michigan.gov/mdch/0,1607,7-132-2943_37434-151452--,00.html">

Approximately fifteen employers for each group were identified, with the hope that at least eight to ten individuals
would attend. Some of the regions, as previously mentioned, had very limited lists that prohibited reaching this
goal. Additional recruitment methods were used to increase the number of participants. State Planning Project
Workgroup members were asked to provide contact information for potential participants. Flyers were distributed
to Workgroup members via email. Contact information for project staff was given out and Workgroup members
were encouraged to forward contact information for employers to them, and to distribute information about the
focus groups to interested individuals. Please refer to Appendix V for all marketing materials related to
recruitment.
During recruitment telephone calls, interested individuals were asked if they knew other local employers who might
be interested in participating. Flyers were provided to employers for distribution to fellow employers. Project staff
also contacted local and regional Chambers of Commerce for their assistance.
Workgroup members and their contacts helped to recruit participants for both the uninsured focus groups and the
insurance agent focus groups. Directors of free health clinics and community health centers helped project staff to
recruit participants for the uninsured focus groups. Insurance agent focus group participants were sought by
sending informational letters and maps to members of professional associations and insurance companies via email,
and by making announcements at association meetings.
Focus Group Locations
The locations for the employer focus groups were determined by using the regions from the survey strata utilized
for the surveys conducted in the first two waves of data collection, the Michigan Household Health Insurance
Survey and the Michigan Employer Health Insurance Survey. The survey strata are a variation on the regions used
by the Michigan State University State of the State Survey (SOSS). This was done so data collected in the surveys
for this project will be comparable to future SOSS surveys. For the Michigan Household and Employer Health
Insurance Surveys strata, the state was divided into seven regions. Those regions are: Upper Peninsula, Northern
Lower Peninsula, West Central, East Central, Southwest, Southeast, and the city of Detroit (refer to diagram A-1).
Although Detroit is within the Southeast region, because it is a unique urban city with a large population, for this
project Detroit was considered a separate region. For a complete listing of counties included in each region, see
Appendix I.
Within each region, the recruitment list from the Michigan Employer Health Insurance Survey was analyzed to
determine the most convenient location for participants, based on driving distance and accessibility. Initially, one
focus group was to be run in each of the seven regions in Michigan. In the Southeast region, two focus groups were
planned due to the large concentration of employers. The list of possible locations was submitted to MDCH and
project workgroups for their review.
Once the most appropriate city for the focus groups was identified for each region, contact with local businesses
was made to finalize a location. Most employer focus groups were held in the conference room of a hotel or
community college. The locations for the uninsured focus groups and insurance agent focus groups were provided
without charge by the agencies that assisted with recruiting. Uninsured individual focus groups were held in a
conference room or community room at local Federally Qualified Health Centers and free clinics for ease of
transportation and familiarity. The insurance agent focus groups were held in the conference room of an insurance
company and a health insurance association. The locations of all focus groups are presented in diagram A-2.
Schedule
Weather and geography were used to determine the focus group schedule. The employer focus groups in the Upper
Peninsula and Northern Lower Peninsula took place at the beginning of the project timeline to reduce the likelihood
of inclement weather. Focus groups were scheduled according to the project timeline and approved by MDCH.
Refer to chart A-3 for the full schedule of focus groups.
Data Collection
Two research team members staffed each focus group. One person functioned as the moderator of the group and
the other was the recorder. Team members alternated roles for the morning and afternoon sessions of the employer
focus groups. The moderator followed a script with introduction, background information, informed consent and
questions to provide a consistent structure. The moderator was responsible for timekeeping and keeping the
discussion on track. The moderator also took short handwritten notes during the discussion. The recorder took
detailed notes of the discussion using a laptop computer, and operated the audio-recording devices. Research staff
transcribed the tapes from the focus groups shortly after completion of each group.
Supplemental Telephone Interviews
Telephone interviews were conducted to supplement the information collected in the employer and insurance agent
focus groups. Many employers indicated during recruitment calls that they were interested in participating, but the
time commitment required to participate in the groups was prohibitive. Using the recruitment list for the focus
groups, contact information was loaded into Sawtooth's Ci3 Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing (CATI)
software and a sample was generated for the calls. New sample records were added when contact information from
workgroup members was forwarded to project staff.
Employers were contacted after the focus group had been conducted in their region to see if they would participate
in a short telephone interview. Employers who indicated during the initial recruitment calls that they were
interested in participating, but did not attend, were prioritized for being contacted. The sample size for the
telephone interviews was 289 employers; 196 employers were attempted with a maximum of five attempts per
employer. On average, it took two attempts to complete the telephone interview. Only 12 employers that were
reached by phone refused to complete the interview. The goal for the telephone interviews was to have a total of
eight to ten employers offering insurance, and the same number of employers not offering insurance responds to the
interview in each region.
Interviewers used CATI software to manage the sample and the data. Two scripts were developed for the phone
interviews: one for employers offering health insurance and another for employers not offering health insurance.
The interviews were programmed into CATI and the instrument was tested. Both versions of the interview had the
same short introduction. The questions were open-ended, and interviewers used additional follow-up probes when
needed to gather specific information. All interviews were audio-recorded for quality control purposes. Data was
recorded by the interviewer into the CATI interviewing software. The data were then exported from CATI into
Excel and SPSS to analyze the themes.
Telephone interviews were also conducted with insurance agents in the West Central Region due to low attendance
at this focus group. Those interviews were conducted using the moderator script from the focus group. Interviews
were audio-recorded for quality control purposes and the tapes were transcribed.
Limitations
Like all research studies, this study's results must be considered in light of the limitations of the research
methodology. Focus groups are a way to gather the opinions and experiences of the individuals in the group.
When the results of multiple groups are compared, themes that are common to all groups may emerge. The results
may not represent the entire state or be generalized to a larger group. Focus group data cannot be quantified with
absolute measures or analyzed with statistical significance. The results must be reviewed from a qualitative frame
of reference only. Some of the information presented may appear to be inaccurate or inconsistent with fact. The
information presented is valid from the point of view of each participant, but is limited by each participant's
knowledge base and the accuracy of his or her perceptions. Even the inaccurate information can be seen as useful
to the reader as it reflects the participant's level of understanding on the issue and suggests areas where further
education on the topic may be needed.
Low levels of participation are also a limitation. With less than eight participants, a focus group discussion may be
more limited and less informative than would occur with the addition of more opinions into the dialogue. Through
conversations with employers and insurance agents, we learned that the time of year during which the focus groups
were held was a barrier to achieving goals for recruitment and attendance. For many insurance agents and
employers who offer benefits, the last two months of the year often comprise the open enrollment period for
benefits. There were other seasonal factors given as reasons for not attending, such as the holiday season for
employers in the retail industry, and the start of deer hunting season for employers in the more rural areas of the
state. When possible, focus groups were rescheduled. However, due to the project timeline, the focus groups had
to be completed by the end of 2005. The time commitment to participate was also viewed as a deterrent, especially
for owners of small businesses. In addition, employers who did not offer insurance were much less likely to attend
the focus group after signing-up than employers who did offer insurance.
The telephone interview method of collecting data was added to the protocol to ensure that enough information was
collected to generate themes for each group. Although the interview questions were open-ended and additional
probing was done, the telephone interview format is likely to produce less information than would be generated
through group discussion. The results presented in this report are a compilation of the information collected
through focus groups and telephone interviews.
Analysis
Focus group data were analyzed using notes and audio-tape recording. Team members created a document for the
insurance agent, uninsured consumers and employer focus groups. Each comment made by focus group
participants was reviewed by two team members, and placed into a document of overall themes. The team then
discussed the themes as a way to insure a sufficient degree of inter-rater reliability. Quotes from the respondents
were placed with the corresponding questions.
Upon completion of all telephone surveys, raw data were directly exported from CATI to Excel and SPSS where it
could be reviewed for common themes. Once the themes from the telephone interviews were developed, quotes
from the respondents were retrieved from the data output and through a review of the audiotapes. These comments
and quotes were then added to the overall document of themes created from the actual focus group sessions. The
major findings from insurance agents, uninsured consumers, and employers are reported separately.
Michigan's Health Insurance Market
Health insurance in Michigan has traditionally been provided through employer-sponsored benefits programs.
Because of the manner in which insurance rates are determined, large companies and those with younger employees
have an advantage because their workers represent less risk to insurance companies, and may therefore receive
lower rates through Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) and commercial insurance carriers. Blue Cross
Blue Shield of Michigan (BCBSM), as the insurer of last resort, must provide coverage to all individuals who can
afford to pay the premiums, regardless of their health status. According to the Office of Finance and Insurance
Services, in 2000 approximately 71% of the small group market was covered by BCBSM.
In the last decade, the health insurance market has been impacted by state and federal legislation, which regulates
the manner in which insurance rates can be determined, and provides for consumer protections. The passage of the
Federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) in 1996 created a market in which
commercial carriers must renew policies at the insured's request, except under certain conditions. Because of the
way in which rates are determined, insurance carriers and HMOs were able to raise their rates to high-risk groups to
encourage non-renewal. However, BCBSM could not use age, medical condition, or other case characteristics to
determine their rates. Reportedly, this led to a trend in the market where younger, healthier employees were
leaving the BCBSM pool to get lower rates with commercial carriers or chose to discontinue coverage, while older,
less healthy individuals were enrolling in BCBSM policies because they could not afford the alternatives.

</text>
