<text id="H12" category="" words="1968" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="An Act To authorize trial by military commission for violations of the law of war, and" Author="One Hundred Ninth Congress of the United States of America AT THE SECOND SESSION " PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=109_cong_bills&docid=f:s3930enr.txt.pdf">

''§ 948b. Military commissions generally
''(a) PURPOSE. - This chapter establishes procedures governing
the use of military commissions to try alien unlawful enemy combatants
engaged in hostilities against the United States for violations
of the law of war and other offenses triable by military commission.
''(b) AUTHORITY FOR MILITARY COMMISSIONS UNDER THIS
CHAPTER. - The President is authorized to establish military
commissions under this chapter for offenses triable by military
commission as provided in this chapter.
''(c) CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS. - The procedures for military
commissions set forth in this chapter are based upon the
procedures for trial by general courts-martial under chapter 47
of this title (the Uniform Code of Military Justice). Chapter 47
of this title does not, by its terms, apply to trial by military commission
except as specifically provided in this chapter. The judicial
construction and application of that chapter are not binding on
military commissions established under this chapter.
''(d) INAPPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS. - (1) The following
provisions of this title shall not apply to trial by military
commission under this chapter:
''(A) Section 810 (article 10 of the Uniform Code of Military
Justice), relating to speedy trial, including any rule of courtsmartial
relating to speedy trial.
''(B) Sections 831(a), (b), and (d) (articles 31(a), (b), and
(d) of the Uniform Code of Military Justice), relating to compulsory
self-incrimination.
''(C) Section 832 (article 32 of the Uniform Code of Military
Justice), relating to pretrial investigation.
''(2) Other provisions of chapter 47 of this title shall apply
to trial by military commission under this chapter only to the
extent provided by this chapter.
''(e) TREATMENT OF RULINGS AND PRECEDENTS. - The findings,
holdings, interpretations, and other precedents of military commissions
under this chapter may not be introduced or considered in
any hearing, trial, or other proceeding of a court-martial convened
under chapter 47 of this title. The findings, holdings, interpretations,
and other precedents of military commissions under this
chapter may not form the basis of any holding, decision, or other
determination of a court-martial convened under that chapter.
''(f) STATUS OF COMMISSIONS UNDER COMMON ARTICLE 3. - 
A military commission established under this chapter is a regularly
constituted court, affording all the necessary 'judicial guarantees
which are recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples' for purposes
of common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions.
''(g) GENEVA CONVENTIONS NOT ESTABLISHING SOURCE OF
RIGHTS. - No alien unlawful enemy combatant subject to trial by
military commission under this chapter may invoke the Geneva
Conventions as a source of rights.
''§ 948c. Persons subject to military commissions
''Any alien unlawful enemy combatant is subject to trial by
military commission under this chapter.

''§ 948d. Jurisdiction of military commissions
''(a) JURISDICTION. - A military commission under this chapter
shall have jurisdiction to try any offense made punishable by this
chapter or the law of war when committed by an alien unlawful
enemy combatant before, on, or after September 11, 2001.
''(b) LAWFUL ENEMY COMBATANTS. - Military commissions under
this chapter shall not have jurisdiction over lawful enemy combatants.
Lawful enemy combatants who violate the law of war are
subject to chapter 47 of this title. Courts-martial established under
that chapter shall have jurisdiction to try a lawful enemy combatant
for any offense made punishable under this chapter.
''(c) DETERMINATION OF UNLAWFUL ENEMY COMBATANT STATUS
DISPOSITIVE. - A finding, whether before, on, or after the date of
the enactment of the Military Commissions Act of 2006, by a
Combatant Status Review Tribunal or another competent tribunal
established under the authority of the President or the Secretary
of Defense that a person is an unlawful enemy combatant is dispositive
for purposes of jurisdiction for trial by military commission
under this chapter.
''(d) PUNISHMENTS. - A military commission under this chapter
may, under such limitations as the Secretary of Defense may prescribe,
adjudge any punishment not forbidden by this chapter,
including the penalty of death when authorized under this chapter
or the law of war.
''§ 948e. Annual report to congressional committees
''(a) ANNUAL REPORT REQUIRED. - Not later than December 31
each year, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the Committees
on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of Representatives
a report on any trials conducted by military commissions under
this chapter during such year.
''(b) FORM. - Each report under this section shall be submitted
in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.
''SUBCHAPTER II - COMPOSITION OF MILITARY
COMMISSIONS
''Sec.
''948h. Who may convene military commissions.
''948i. Who may serve on military commissions.
''948j. Military judge of a military commission.
''948k. Detail of trial counsel and defense counsel.
''948l. Detail or employment of reporters and interpreters.
''948m. Number of members; excuse of members; absent and additional members.
''§ 948h. Who may convene military commissions
''Military commissions under this chapter may be convened
by the Secretary of Defense or by any officer or official of the
United States designated by the Secretary for that purpose.
''§ 948i. Who may serve on military commissions
''(a) IN GENERAL. - Any commissioned officer of the armed forces
on active duty is eligible to serve on a military commission under
this chapter.
''(b) DETAIL OF MEMBERS. - When convening a military commission
under this chapter, the convening authority shall detail as
members of the commission such members of the armed forces
eligible under subsection (a), as in the opinion of the convening
S. 3930 - 5
authority, are best qualified for the duty by reason of age, education,
training, experience, length of service, and judicial temperament.
No member of an armed force is eligible to serve as a member
of a military commission when such member is the accuser or
a witness for the prosecution or has acted as an investigator or
counsel in the same case.
''(c) EXCUSE OF MEMBERS. - Before a military commission under
this chapter is assembled for the trial of a case, the convening
authority may excuse a member from participating in the case.
''§ 948j. Military judge of a military commission
''(a) DETAIL OF MILITARY JUDGE. - A military judge shall be
detailed to each military commission under this chapter. The Secretary
of Defense shall prescribe regulations providing for the
manner in which military judges are so detailed to military commissions.
The military judge shall preside over each military commission
to which he has been detailed.
''(b) QUALIFICATIONS. - A military judge shall be a commissioned
officer of the armed forces who is a member of the bar of a Federal
court, or a member of the bar of the highest court of a State,
and who is certified to be qualified for duty under section 826
of this title (article 26 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice)
as a military judge in general courts-martial by the Judge Advocate
General of the armed force of which such military judge is a
member.
''(c) INELIGIBILITY OF CERTAIN INDIVIDUALS. - No person is
eligible to act as military judge in a case of a military commission
under this chapter if he is the accuser or a witness or has acted
as investigator or a counsel in the same case.
''(d) CONSULTATION WITH MEMBERS; INELIGIBILITY TO VOTE. - 
A military judge detailed to a military commission under this
chapter may not consult with the members of the commission
except in the presence of the accused (except as otherwise provided
in section 949d of this title), trial counsel, and defense counsel,
nor may he vote with the members of the commission.
''(e) OTHER DUTIES. - A commissioned officer who is certified
to be qualified for duty as a military judge of a military commission
under this chapter may perform such other duties as are assigned
to him by or with the approval of the Judge Advocate General
of the armed force of which such officer is a member or the designee
of such Judge Advocate General.
''(f) PROHIBITION ON EVALUATION OF FITNESS BY CONVENING
AUTHORITY. - The convening authority of a military commission
under this chapter shall not prepare or review any report concerning
the effectiveness, fitness, or efficiency of a military judge detailed
to the military commission which relates to his performance of
duty as a military judge on the military commission.
''§ 948k. Detail of trial counsel and defense counsel
''(a) DETAIL OF COUNSEL GENERALLY. - (1) Trial counsel and
military defense counsel shall be detailed for each military commission
under this chapter.
''(2) Assistant trial counsel and assistant and associate defense
counsel may be detailed for a military commission under this
chapter.
''(3) Military defense counsel for a military commission under
this chapter shall be detailed as soon as practicable after the
swearing of charges against the accused.
''(4) The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe regulations providing
for the manner in which trial counsel and military defense
counsel are detailed for military commissions under this chapter
and for the persons who are authorized to detail such counsel
for such commissions.
''(b) TRIAL COUNSEL. - Subject to subsection (e), trial counsel
detailed for a military commission under this chapter must be - 
''(1) a judge advocate (as that term is defined in section
801 of this title (article 1 of the Uniform Code of Military
Justice) who - 
''(A) is a graduate of an accredited law school or is
a member of the bar of a Federal court or of the highest
court of a State; and
''(B) is certified as competent to perform duties as
trial counsel before general courts-martial by the Judge
Advocate General of the armed force of which he is a
member; or
''(2) a civilian who - 
''(A) is a member of the bar of a Federal court or
of the highest court of a State; and
''(B) is otherwise qualified to practice before the military
commission pursuant to regulations prescribed by the
Secretary of Defense.
''(c) MILITARY DEFENSE COUNSEL. - Subject to subsection (e),
military defense counsel detailed for a military commission under
this chapter must be a judge advocate (as so defined) who is - 
''(1) a graduate of an accredited law school or is a member
of the bar of a Federal court or of the highest court of a
State; and
''(2) certified as competent to perform duties as defense
counsel before general courts-martial by the Judge Advocate
General of the armed force of which he is a member.
''(d) CHIEF PROSECUTOR; CHIEF DEFENSE COUNSEL. - (1) The
Chief Prosecutor in a military commission under this chapter shall
meet the requirements set forth in subsection (b)(1).
''(2) The Chief Defense Counsel in a military commission under
this chapter shall meet the requirements set forth in subsection
(c)(1).
''(e) INELIGIBILITY OF CERTAIN INDIVIDUALS. - No person who
has acted as an investigator, military judge, or member of a military
commission under this chapter in any case may act later as trial
counsel or military defense counsel in the same case. No person
who has acted for the prosecution before a military commission
under this chapter may act later in the same case for the defense,
nor may any person who has acted for the defense before a military
commission under this chapter act later in the same case for the
prosecution.
''§ 948l. Detail or employment of reporters and interpreters
''(a) COURT REPORTERS. - Under such regulations as the Secretary
of Defense may prescribe, the convening authority of a military
commission under this chapter shall detail to or employ for
the commission qualified court reporters, who shall make a verbatim recording of the proceedings of and testimony taken before the
commission.
''(b) INTERPRETERS. - Under such regulations as the Secretary
of Defense may prescribe, the convening authority of a military
commission under this chapter may detail to or employ for the
military commission interpreters who shall interpret for the
commission and, as necessary, for trial counsel and defense counsel
and for the accused.
''(c) TRANSCRIPT; RECORD. - The transcript of a military commission
under this chapter shall be under the control of the convening
authority of the commission, who shall also be responsible for
preparing the record of the proceedings.
''§ 948m. Number of members; excuse of members; absent
and additional members

</text>
