<text id="H14" category="" words="2003" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="eport to Congress  Health-Related Research and Development Activities at USAID " Author="US-AID" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PDACH111.pdf">

Issues and Rationale 
The ancient scourge of tuberculosis remains a public health threat, with almost 9 million new cases each year. TB is a disease of poverty that disproportionately affects poor countries and marginalized populations. The internationally recommended DOTS strategy for managing TB cases has been accepted nearly worldwide, and its use has increased considerably in the last five years. Yet, only 53 percent of estimated TB cases are detected and benefit from this therapeutic intervention. 
The DOTS strategy is the best proven line of defense against tuberculosis. However, it relies on a 100-year-old diagnostic technology, a drug regimen whose newest addition came 40 years ago, and labor-intensive case management of the six- to eight-month treatment. The only vaccine available for TB, BCG, was introduced in 1921 and offers protection against severe forms of disease in children under age 5 but offers minimal protection to adults. 
For decades, TB was a neglected disease that saw little investment in research for new tools. The TB community has forged ahead with these antiquated tools and has succeeded in slowing the epidemic in most regions of the world by successfully treating 82 percent of the patients managed under DOTS. Yet almost half of TB cases remain undetected, largely due to barriers to access to appropriate diagnosis and care. Fortunately, increasing attention to TB is stimulating research to address these constraints.
In Africa high rates of HIV have ignited a resurgence of TB with some countries experiencing increases in TB incidence of up to 300 percent during the last decade. In many settings up to 50 percent of TB patients are estimated to be HIV-positive, and TB is the primary single infectious cause of death among those living with HIV/AIDS. HIV is making it more difficult to diagnose the disease as current diagnostic technologies are not highly sensitive in HIV-infected individuals. The complexities of treating TB and HIV/AIDS simultaneously are not yet resolved. Preventing the emergence of TB in those infected with HIV/AIDS is possible through chemoprophylaxis, but the evidence base is insufficient to guide practice.
Another powerful threat to the control of TB is the emergence of multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB). A recently completed survey of 74 countries and geographical regions found MDR-TB in an average of 1.7 percent of TB cases. Eleven countries/settings reported rates higher than 10 percent. Cases of MDR-TB must be treated with second-line drugs that can cost 10 to100 times more than first-line drugs. Death rates for MDRTB are high and as experienced in New York City in the early 1990s, outbreaks of MDR-TB can wreak havoc on TB control efforts. 
Even with promising new drugs on the horizon, the protection of the limited number of second-line drugs is an urgent priority. The emergence of drug resistance is associated with poorly performing routine TB control services. Inappropriate use of second-line drugs to treat resistant disease could result in untreatable strains of TB. Research is still needed to improve the detection of drug resistance in resource/infrastructure-poor settings, and to manage drug-resistant TB in HIV-infected patients who are simultaneously receiving ART. Further additional efforts are needed to develop new, safer, and more effective drugs against MDR-TB and ensure that they reach the market.
The global TB community recently developed a consensus "Global Plan to Stop TB 2006-2015," which aims to halve TB prevalence and mortality by 2015 from the 1990 baseline. The achievement of this plan will result in the treatment of 50 million TB patients, and 14 million lives will be saved. The plan emphasizes the need for new drugs, new diagnostics, a new vaccine, and other innovations to improve program performance and patient access to DOTS. The critical role of research in meeting these aims is evident. 
US AID's Role in TB Research
The "Global Plan to Stop TB 2006-1015" and the new Stop TB Strategy proposed by WHO mainstream innovations in service delivery such as DOTS-Plus for drug-resistant disease, algorithmic approaches to screening for TB, public-private partnerships for implementing TB control, coordinated management of TB-HIV, and revised treatment regimens that only five years ago were topics of research. USAID was a key donor for the research behind many of these advances. 
USAID brings its field presence to bear on the TB research agenda, both informing the research community about the field-based needs and priorities, enabling field-based trials of new technologies, and moving the results of research into policy and practice in the field. USAID's significant comparative advantage is in its ability to contribute to research where it has direct implications for country-level TB programs, i.e. clinical trials at Stage IIb and beyond, field demonstrations of new technologies and implementation approaches, and operations research to improve program performance.
USAID collaborates with other U.S. Government partners to ensure seamless and non-duplicative support to the continuum of research, drawing on the comparative advantages of each agency (figure 2). USAID participates in several cross-agency partnerships to nurture this collaboration, including the TB International Workgroup, hosted by NIH; the Federal TB Task Force, coordinated by CDC; and the TB-HIV Working Group, convened by the Office of the U.S. Global AIDS Coordinator. Once promising developments are ready to be tested in the field and moved into policy, USAID has a clear role to fund and coordinate their introduction. 
Strategy 
USAID's strategy is to invest in research that will improve the performance and public health impact of country-level TB programs while mitigating the risks of drug resistance by: (1) reducing diagnostic delay, (2) reducing the duration and improving the efficacy of treatment, (3) preventing disease, and (4) increasing access to DOTS. 
USAID will invest in new tools and approaches that are less labor intensive, more cost-effective, and can be delivered close to patients to minimize the health workforce burden and improve patient access, thereby improving case detection and treatment success rates. USAID will prioritize research that has the potential to change policy and practice in developing countries within three to five years. 
These strategic investments mean that USAID will not invest in several other possible lines of research. For example, USAID will not support research related to TB in animals nor will it engage in research for which the resulting technologies or approaches would not be cost-effective or feasible for use in developing countries. USAID will not invest in basic science or Phase I or II clinical trials, as this work can be better supported through NIH. USAID will not invest in research related to pediatric TB, with the exception of research to better cotreat TB and HIV in children, as there is less of a public health burden resulting from pediatric cases.
During the first year of the implementation of this strategic plan, USAID will support research to optimize the effectiveness of existing technologies while continuing its support for late-stage clinical trials of new drugs and diagnostics. It will also ramp up efforts to prepare the field for the introduction of new technologies and to address barriers to access to services. By 2009, USAID will be responding to a robust pipeline of potential new diagnostics and drugs by supporting field trials and test ing novel approaches to deliver these new tools at the country level. USAID will leverage country-level resources, such as those from the Global Fund, to support mainstreaming of new technologies into standard practice and to guide investments in infrastructure and human resources for future adoption of technologies and approaches. It is anticipated that by 2011, a new vaccine that will prevent disease among adolescents and adults may be ready for demonstration trials in the field, warranting targeted support from USAID. Meanwhile, USAID will continue to move successes from research into practice and policy.
Reproductive Health and Family Planning
Contraceptive Research and Development Program 
Issues and Rationale
The range and availability of contraceptive methods around the world has expanded significantly in the past 40 years due to the work of USAID. Nevertheless, there is still an urgent need to further expand the range of methods and ensure access to women and men who wish to use contraception. Nearly 123 million women in less developed regions have an unmet need for family planning, and the demand for expanded access to safe, effective, acceptable, and affordable contraceptives will continue to grow as millions more young women and men reach reproductive age. Two consequences of the unmet need for contraception and unintended pregnancy are abortion and maternal death  -  19 million unsafe abortions occur each year in less developed countries, contributing to approximately 15 percent of maternal mortality (or 68,000 deaths),1 while an estimated 20 to 35 percent of all maternal deaths could be prevented through the use of contraception.2 Family planning reduces unintended pregnancy and consequently reduces abortion, improves birth spacing, and enables couples to achieve their desired family size. Thus, a wide range of contraceptive choices ultimately promotes maternal health and child survival. 
In addition to the unmet need for contraceptives, nearly every developing country needs substantial improvements in coverage and quality of family planning services and effective ways to reach out to youth, men, and the hard-to-reach rural poor. Access to services that can provide a minimal range of contraceptive options, for example, is not available in 75 percent of sub-Saharan African countries. 
US AID's role
USAID plays a crucial role in bringing new contraceptive products to market, especially for public sector use in developing countries. Over the past 15 years, support for USAID's contraceptive research program has been relatively steady, although declines have been seen during the past two years. The program enables USAID to support research to develop improved and new methods, gain better understanding of current methods, and increase the overall use of family planning. Figure 3 on the Standard Days Method illustrates this work. USAID is the only major donor agency, bilateral or multilateral, actively contributing to the field of contraceptive research and development; other donors look to USAID for leadership in this field. With few exceptions, private sector drug companies are not prepared to pursue contraceptive development, particularly of methods appropriate for use in low-resource settings, due to issues of product liability and limited profit potential. 
USAID coordinates its contraceptive research program with other federal agencies, intergovernmental agencies and multilateral donors, private foundations, NGOs, and pharmaceutical companies. The high level of coordination has eliminated unnecessary duplication of effort and has facilitated cost-sharing with other donors. USAID's leadership has helped to focus the international agenda on maximizing the use of effective and affordable technologies and approaches.
Strategy for Research and Development of Contraceptive Technologies
The objective of USAID's contraceptive research program is to improve and expand family planning use through provision of new and improved contraceptive methods, including methods that also reduce the transmission of HIV and other STIs. Activities in support of this objective include: 
•	Development and implementation of preclinical, clinical, and acceptability studies on a wide range of methods with a focus on new and improved barrier methods for both contraception and STI prevention 
•	Epidemiological studies to assess the effectiveness, safety, and long-term risks and benefits of current and new contraceptive methods 

The contraceptive research and development program is integrated within USAID's comprehensive family planning program and is thus driven by the need for culturally acceptable, easy-to-use, and affordable methods for family planning providers and their clients. This integration is the key to USAID's success as the primary donor agency concerned with developing and evaluating methods appropriate for use in developing-country settings.
Ongoing and Planned Activities to Advance Product Research and Introduction
Over the next five years, USAID's contraceptive research strategy will focus primarily on the development of several new hormonal and barrier methods and on improvements to existing methods. The portfolio includes support for the development of new spermicidal microbicides that prevent both pregnancy and HIV transmission. Six products are slated to enter Phase II/III effectiveness trials for contraception, and three will also begin testing for STI prevention. USAID and its partners will seek FDA approval for new methods, identify private sector and new manufacturing partners, and introduce new methods into existing USAID family planning programs.

</text>
