<text id="H22" category="" words="1984" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Report of the Sixteenth Meeting of the NAFTA Advisory Committee on Private Commercial Disputes in Morelia, Mexico, June 22 and June 23, 2006." Author="NAFTA Advisory Committee " PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="http://www.nafta-sec-alena.org/NAFTA/CMFILES/Meeting%20Minutes/Minutes-16th%20meeting-Morelia.pdf">

On October 17, 2005 Claimant filed its memorial in the Talsud &amp; Gemplus case.
Mexico filed its counter memorial on May 31, 2006. Claimant's reply is due on
September 18, 2006 and Mexico's rejoinder on January 29, 2007.
3. WTO Developments.
Sylvie Tabet informed that in the last WTO Ministerial Meeting in Hong Kong
(13-18 December 2005) the WTO Members agreed to complete "full modalities" in
agriculture and non-agricultural market access by the new deadline they have set
themselves: 30 April 2006. Unfortunately this deadline was missed. Despite this, some
of the WTO Members like United States have been more receptive to some issues such
as market access. India and Brazil show more flexibility too. With regard to the GATS
negotiations, the deadline to submit revised offers is July 2006.
4. Bilateral Trade Negotiations.
A) Canada
Sylvie Tabet informed about Canada's trade negotiations:
3
Free Trade Agreements (FTA) Negotiations: Canada is negotiating FTA with
Peru, Singapore, Ecuador, Dominican Republic and South Korea. Negotiations with
South Korea are in an advanced stage.
Bilateral Investment Treaties (BIT) Negotiations: Canada maintains negotiations
with South Korea, China and India in order to sign a BIT. The Investment Treaty
negotiations with China and India possibly will finish at the end of this summer.
All the Canada's dispute settlement negotiations are running on the basis of the
NAFTA model.
B) United States
David Stewart informed about US trade negotiations:
FTA Negotiations: United States is carrying out talks to negotiate a FTA with
the United Arab Emirates. Negotiations with South Korea as well as with Malaysia
started this month. With respect to Ecuador, future rounds of negotiations for a FTA
have not been scheduled. At the moment there is nothing to report with regard to the
negotiations with Panama.
BIT Negotiations: United States is negotiating with Pakistan.
Concluded Agreements: On April 12, 2005, the United States signed a FTA with
Peru. In February a FTA with Colombia was concluded and currently it is under legal
review. In November 2005, the United States signed a BIT with Uruguay. In January
19, 2005 a FTA was signed with Oman. Finally, regarding the status of the CAFTADR,
it entered into force between the United States and El Salvador on March 1, 2006
and with regard to Nicaragua and Honduras on April 1, 2006 but no yet with respect to
Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic and Guatemala.
C) Mexico
Linda Pasquel and Hugo Perezcano informed about Mexico's trade negotiations:
FTA Negotiations: Mexico is currently negotiating a FTA with South Korea and
another with Peru. With respect to Argentina negotiations have just concluded.
BIT Negotiations: Mexico is currently negotiating with India and China. The
BIT with Spain is about to expire, so it is currently under review and the next round of
negotiations will take place in about two weeks.
Concluded Agreements: México concluded BIT negotiations with United
Kingdom
III. Report on UNCITRAL Working Group.
José María Abascal presented a report on the UNCITRAL Working Group. With
regard to the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration, he
4
informed that in its last meeting in January, the Working Group finished a draft on
interim measures and written form, which will be discussed by the Commission next
week in New York. With regard to interim measures, the final draft contains a new
Chapter 4 bis titled "Interim measures and preliminary orders". This new Chapter has
eleven provisions. Section I, is related to the power of arbitral tribunals to order interim
measures and conditions for granting interim measures. Section II relates to preliminary
orders and its specific regime. Section III contains provisions applicable to interim
measures and preliminary orders, such as modification, suspension, termination,
provisional security, disclosure, costs and damages. Section IV relates to the recognition
and enforcement of interim measures. Finally, Articles related with court-ordered
interim measures are contained in Section V. There is a minor proposal to modify
Article 1 in order to include one of the provisions related to the territoriality of court
enforcement.
The draft also includes a controversial proposal to modify Article 7 with regard
to the form of arbitration agreements because it includes a wide definition of what
"writing" means. In contrast to this wide definition, and as a result of a Mexico's
proposal, the draft includes an alternative text that offers a definition that makes no
reference to the term "writing". A modification to Article 35 is also proposed, it mainly
refers to the elimination of the requirement to supply the arbitration agreement when a
party is applying for the enforcement of an award.
With regard the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards (New York Convention), the Working Group proposed a declaration
regarding the interpretation of Article II, paragraph 2, and Article VII, paragraph 1. It
basically recommends courts to take into consideration the Model Law, its amendments,
and the case law. It also recommends that Article II, paragraph 2 be applied recognizing
that the circumstances described therein are not exhaustive, and that Article VII,
paragraph 1, should be applied to allow any interested party to avail itself of rights it
may have, under the law or treaties of the country where an arbitration agreement is
sought to be relied upon, to seek recognition of the validity of such an arbitration
agreement.
Some of the relevant issues that will be subject to discussion in the next
UNCITRAL Meeting on June 25-June 29, are: the review and update of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, arbitrability of intellectual property rights, investment
disputes, unfair competition, and online dispute resolution.
IV. Legal Developments in each country.
1. Developments in the United States of America.
Robert Lutz reported on the recent legal developments in the United States. He
focused in some trends regarding recent developments in the United States practice in
the last year: (1) partiality in US arbitrators; (2) the use by US court of sanctions with
respect to parties who make "frivolous challenges" to the enforcement of arbitral
awards; and (3) efforts to make the arbitral process more transparent.
Regarding the first issue, there is a particular case that highlights this trend; this
is the Positive Software vs. New Century Mortgage case, where the arbitrator failed to
5
disclose that seven years before becoming an arbitrator, he and his former law firm were
co-counseling in a case with one of the law firm which was counseling one of the
parties in the quoted case. So, the arbitrator ruled in favor of the party that was
represented by that law firm. The Court of Appeals, determined that the arbitrator did
not make a proper disclosure. So, regardless of whether there was actual bias, it
determined that this situation raises an appearance of bias that satisfies the standard of
evident partiality foresee in section 10 of the US Arbitration Act, which provide that a
court may vacate an arbitral award where there was evident partiality in the arbitration.
The second trend raises the question of whether challenging arbitral awards can
be risky. Challenges and efforts to vacate arbitral awards are in fact proliferating,
whether they are meritorious or not, and there is a draft Article, written by Susan Franck
from the University of Nebraska, which identifies this trend.
Finally, there is a trend towards transparency in arbitration, particularly with
respect to investor arbitration under ICSID. Many cases highlight the fact that the
ICSID is more receptive to the "amicus curiae" figure, in particular a recent case called
"Aguas Provinciales" against Argentina, where the "amicus curiae" issue was brought
by a public group interested in the environmental impact of the decision. This group
requested to the tribunal three things, which were considered by the tribunal: (1) to
allow the petitioners to submit oral arguments at the hearings in the case as a non-party;
(2) the ability to file an "amicus curiae" brief; and (3) to have access to documents and
other information of the case. The tribunal denied the first and third petitions, however,
the tribunal granted an opportunity to the petitioners to submit an "amicus curiae" brief.
This decision was based on a criteria that essentially indicates that if the petitioner, a
third party or a non-party, shows good reason and sufficient independence of any of the
parties to bring new issues to the tribunal, such "amicus curiae" will be allow, but other
participation will be limited.
David Stewart spoke about the US "manifest disregard of the law" doctrine,
which is essentially a creation of the US judiciary interpretation of the Federal
Arbitration Act, and has been a matter of some controversy in terms of courts ability to
set aside or refuse to enforce domestic awards rendered by arbitrators in "manifest
disregard of the law" ever since its adoption in 1953 by the Supreme Court in Wilko v.
Swan. Nonetheless, this non-statutory doctrine has been applied to domestic awards, but
not to arbitral awards under the New York Convention, and based on recent cases, it
seems to be a trend to narrow and restrict this doctrine, mainly due to the many
frivolous arbitration appeals that rely without justification on the "manifest disregard of
the law" doctrine.
2. Developments in Canada.
Frédéric Bachand reported that there can be found in a number of recent
Canadian cases, issues that may be considered as troubling statements. Most of the time
they are dicta that can be found in Canadian courts decisions, dealing with motions
seeking to annul international awards made in Canada. All these statements suggest that
defenses such as "manifest disregard of the law", "manifest disregard of the facts" even,
"manifest injustice" or "unreasonableness" could arguably be available to parties who
6
launch proceedings in Canada. Those are decisions interpreting the Model Law or
interpreting the New York Convention.
Another issue reported was the binding of the clause of arbitration in the context
of the class action. The core of this issue is the opposition between the class action and
the autonomy of the parties. Courts in Canada have issued opposite criteria. In one
hand, some courts have upheld the prevalence of the parties' autonomy over the class
action; meanwhile others have considered that the class action is a public policy
prevailing over the arbitration clause that is under the parties' autonomy.
Professor Bachand referred to the Dell Computers Company v. Union des
consommateurs, et al. case before the Supreme Court of Canada (hearing will take place
in October, 2006). The Supreme Court decision will rule about the validity of the
arbitration clause on contracts celebrated trough the internet and regarding the
arbitrability of consumer disputes.
Finally, William Horton focused on the following courts decisions related to
arbitration:
a) According to a decision from an Ontario's court, in consumer cases the
arbitration clause is not enforceable unless the consumers agree otherwise after
the dispute has arisen.
b) Relating to the "competence-competence" principle, a Canadian appeal court
ruled that the courts, but not only the arbitral tribunals, may decide whether the
assignee, with respect to an agreement which foresees an arbitration clause, is
bound to it.
c) In a case before a Court of Appeal in Canada related to the compulsory of an
arbitral agreement for third parties, the parties in the arbitration agreement
agreed to be bound by the Alberta Rules of Court. These rules provide that
parties may request for discovery of non parties. One of the parties on the
arbitration requested to the competent court (in accordance to Article 27 of the
International Arbitrations Model Law) its assistance in taking evidence, but the
Court ruled that it was not permissible to compel non parties under an arbitral
procedure. But the Appeals Court ruled that the examination for discovery
oppositions was a valid and perfectly permissible kind of evidence in arbitral
procedures, due to the fact that from the point of view of a non party, being
required for examination in a jurisdictional process represents the same burden
than in an arbitral procedure.

</text>
