<text id="J06" category="" words="2025" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Characterization of tunneling systems in molecular versus polymer glasses by high-pressure photon echo spectroscopy" Author="Michael J. McIntire  and Eric L. Chronister" PublicationDate="4 January 2006" SampledFrom="Journal of Chemical Physics" WebAddress="http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?hid=122&sid=64d4c73f-e037-4939-a3b7-ca24594e2b5a%40sessionmgr115&vid=3">

Intrinsic differences between tunneling two-level systems (TLSs) in molecular versus polymeric
glasses are revealed by studying the effect of compression on TLS dynamics. Photon echo studies
under variable low-temperature (1.1 - 2.3 K) and high-pressure (0 - 30 kbar) conditions have been
performed to contrast the effect of compression on molecular [2-methyl-tetrahydrofuran (2MTHF)]
versus polymer [Polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)] glasses. The pressure-induced reduction in the
magnitude of the optical dephasing rate of rhodamine 640 in a molecular glass 2MTHF is found
to be comparable to the volume decrease of the glass (e.g., 20% at 30 kbar), indicating that TLSs
in 2MTHF are associated with void space or low-density regions of the glass. In contrast, the
relative pressure insensitivity observed for organic polymer glasses (PMMA) supports the idea that
these TLSs are associated with side chain defects. The power-law exponent for the
temperature-dependent dephasing in 2MTHF also decreased significantly at high pressure,
suggesting a change in the form of the TLS density of states upon compression of the molecular
glass.
INTRODUCTION.
The thermal, acoustic, and optical dephasing characteristics of glasses at low temperature are well described by tunneling two-level-system (TLS) models that postulate a
distribution of phonon-assisted tunneling rates. Furthermore, the similar TLS dynamics observed for a variety of inorganic, organic, covalent, and molecular glasses has led
to a rather homogeneous view of TLS. In the present study, high pressure is used as a relevant variable for probing the nature of TLS in different glasses. The compression of materials under extreme pressure permits experimental perturbation of low frequency modes, including tunneling two-level systems in glasses. The ability to experimentally alter TLS of glasses provides a tool
to differentiate the microscopic origin of TLS in glasses. The standard approximation in TLS dynamics yields a temperature dependent pure dephasing rate at (sufficiently low temperatures,
4 K).
In this TLS model the magnitude of the pure dephasing rate a is proportional to the product of the TLS-chromophore coupling and the TLS density (i.e., number of TLSs per unit
volume), and the temperature exponent a is related to the TLS density of states (i.e., number of TLSs of energy E per unit volume), where E is the TLS energy splitting and a=1+m. At temperatures
above 4K the excited state of the chromophor could couple to thermally populated optical phonons15 and obscure the TLS dynamics. In the present study the temperature is low enough (1.1 - 2.3 K) that TLS dynamics is the dominant dephasing mechanism, and high pressure is utilized
as a probe of the physical nature of TLS. The microscopic nature of TLSs has been identified in only a few systems, such as the reorientation of the central phenyl ring of
p-terphenyl near boundaries between domains of different
central phenyl ring ordering or the large cooperative reorientations
of 30 SiO4 tetrahedra in SiO2. For polymer systems
and molecular glasses such as polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) and 2-methyl-tetrarydrofuran (2MTHF), the microscopic
nature of the TLS is unknown. The present study utilizes
high pressure to differentiate the properties of TLSs in a
molecular versus a polymeric glass.
The compression of the glass matrix under high pressure
leads to corresponding changes in the TLS coordinates18,19
that can affect the TLS dynamics. Photon echo measurements
under variable low-temperature (1.1 - 2.3 K) and variable
high-pressure (0 - 30 kbar) conditions can be used to
characterize changes in the TLS dynamics. High-pressure
optical dephasing studies in various polymer glasses at low
temperature(4 K) indicate that pressure-induced
changes in TLS density, tunneling barrier heights, and TLS-phonon
interactions can lead to dephasing rates that are either
insensitive to pressure or that increase at higher
pressure. In contrast, high-pressure hole-burning measurements
in molecular glasses yield pressure-induced line
narrowing. The present study will contrast temperatureand
pressure-dependent photon echo measurements using a rhodamine 640 (Rh640) chromophore in a 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (2MTHF) molecular glass versus a polymethylmethacrylate
(PMMA) polymer glass. 
EXPERIMENT.
A methylene chloride solution of Rh640 and PMMA was evaporated to obtain a film of a few hundred microns thickness. The final concentration of Rh640 in the PMMA film
was 10−4M. For high-pressure studies a sample was placed in a gasketed Merill-Bassett diamond-anvil cell (DAC), which was then immersed in liquid helium. Samples
of Rh640 in 2MTHF were prepared by dissolving Rh640 in 2MTHF. At low pressures, solutions of Rh640 in 2MTHF were frozen by immersion into liquid helium while high-pressure
Rh640 in 2MTHF was solidified by compression in a DAC, which was subsequently immersed in the liquidhelium cryostat.
The sample pressure of the DAC in the helium bath was
determined by measuring the fluorescence shift of a ruby
chip placed in the DAC sample compartment. Temperatures
from 1.2 to 2.1 K were obtained by controlling the
vapor pressure in a liquid-helium immersion Dewar.
The photon echo measurements were performed using a
cavity-dumped, tunable dye laser (maximum pulse energies
of 10J), pulse width of 30 ps, at a repetition rate of 800 Hz
[pumped by the second-harmonic output of a mode-locked
Q-switched neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet
(Nd:YAG) laser]. The laser wavelength was set slightly to
red of the zero-phonon absorption peak (e.g., 585 nm at 0
kbar and 605 nm at 30 kbars for Rh640 in PMMA). The laser
pulses were attenuated to about 0.1J, focused to 50m,
and spatially overlapped in the sample.
RESULTS.
Pressure-dependent photon echo measurements.
The "homogeneous" dephasing time T2 was determined
by fitting the two pulse photon echo measurements to an
exponential decay, where T is the delay time between the two laser pulses. The
temperature-dependent dephasing time T2 was determined at
several different pressures over the range of 0 - 30 kbar for
Rh640 in both 2MTHF and in PMMA. Independent transient
grating measurements of the pressure-dependent lifetime T1
were used to determine the temperature dependence of the
pure dephasing rate 1/T2=1/T2−1/2T1.
Effect of compression on TLS dynamics in 2MTHF versus PMMA.
The temperature-dependent pure dephasing rate of
Rh640 in 2MTHF and PMMA, at both ambient pressure (0 kbar) and at high pressure (30 kbar), is illustrated in Fig. 1. The data in Fig. 1 were fit to a power law 1/T2=aT to
obtain the parameters listed in Table I. A significant lowering
of the pure dephasing rate is observed for Rh640 in 2MTHF
when the pressure is increased from 0 to 30 kbars. The
power-law prefactor a decreased by 20% over the 30 kbar
pressure range a30 kbars (a30 kbar=131/162), which is comparable
to the 20% volume decrease of the 2MTHF matrix
over this pressure range. The correlation of the dephasing
rate decrease with the volume reduction suggests that compression
of void space may be reducing the number of
TLS.9,10 In addition, the power-law exponent (i.e., the
slope in Fig. 1) was also observed to decrease from T1.6 at 0
kbar to T0.9 at 30 kbar. If the TLS density of states p(E) Em correlates with a power law of the form 1/T2=aT1+m, then this change would also suggest a corresponding
pressure-induced change in the form of the TLS density of
states.
Optical dephasing of Rh640 in PMMA versus 2MTHF at ambient pressure.
The temperature-dependent optical dephasing rates for
Rh640 in 2MTHF and PMMA have nearly the same powerlaw
exponent at ambient pressure; however, the optical
dephasing rate was observed to be 1.5X faster in 2MTHF
versus PMMA. The faster dephasing rate in 2MTHF has been attributed to a stronger TLS-chromophore coupling in 2MTHF. Since both the PMMA polymer (Tg=378 K) and
the 2MTHF molecular glass (Tg=87 K) are polar, the coupling
mechanism of the TLS to the polar ionic Rh640 chromophore
is expected to be similar in both glasses. The stronger
TLS-chromophore coupling in 2MTHF versus PMMA
(Ref. 8) may be due to slightly different solute-solvent interactions
e.g., ether versus ester oxygen or due to TLSs that
are intrinsically different (e.g., void space in 2MTHF versus
side group motion in PMMA).
Comparison of high-pressure photon echo and spectral hole-burning studies of 2MTHF glass.
The pressure-dependent photon echo results for Rh640
in 2MTHF are comparable with pressure-dependent fast (15 ms delay) spectral hole-burning results reported for bacteriochlorophyll-a (BChl-a) in 2MTHF (not shown).
Hole-burning and photon echo measurements do not necessarily probe the same subset of TLSs (due to different intrinsic timescales), and different probe molecules (e.g., ionic
Rh640 versus nonpolar BChl-a) may also couple to different
TLS subsets. Nevertheless, the pressure-induced spectral line
narrowing reported for BChl-a in 2MTHF glass is comparable
to the decreased dephasing rate observed for Rh640 in
2MTHF at high pressure, suggesting that similar TLSs are
being probed in these different measurements.
DISCUSSION.
In general, the microscopic nature of TLSs are not well
understood. Crest and Cohen have proposed that TLSs can
be associated with void spaces that form as the temperature
of the glass is lowered below its glass transition temperature.
Simulations on Lennard-Jones computer glasses have indicated
that polymeric side groups can act as defects that give
rise to TLSs. Therefore, two types of TLSs are considered:
TLSs associated with internal void space formed as the viscous
glass formed and TLSs primarily associated with the
restricted motion of polymeric side groups. High pressure
provides an experimental means of compressing void space
to probe the properties of TLS in different glasses. The surprisingly
similar optical dephasing characteristics observed
for a wide variety of inorganic, organic, covalent, and molecular
glasses at ambient pressure have led to a rather homogeneous
picture of TLS in different glasses. However, the
present study illustrates that high pressure can be used to
characterize intrinsically different types of TLS that otherwise
yield similar dynamics under ambient conditions.
Compression of a glass can change the TLS dynamics by
decreasing the spatial separations, increasing the coupling of
TLS to both the chromophore and/or phonons, increasing
barrier heights, and collapsing TLS associated with voids.
It has been proposed that the free volume near the liquidglass
transition temperature can give rise to tunneling centers,
and Tg has also been used as a qualitative measure of
such tunneling barrier heights. The glass transition temperature
for PMMA at ambient pressure is Tg=378 K, and it
increases by 23 K/kbar from 0 to 3 kbar. A conservative
extrapolation yields a twofold increase in Tg by 30 kbar. A corresponding twofold increase in the average tunneling barrier
height (and corresponding increase in the distribution of
asymmetry parameters) should make a significant perturbation
of the TLS dynamics.
The volume change of PMMA under pressure (at room
temperature is given by P=6.4(kbar)[V0/VP)−1], where
P is the applied pressure and V0 /VP is the associated volume
change. Assuming the bulk modulus is not a strong function
of temperature, this corresponds to a volume reduction of
20% at a pressure of 30 kbar. However, this compression is
not isotropic on a molecular scale. For example, compression
is greatest along coordinates with the weakest intermolecular
interactions (e.g., void spaces followed by intermolecular
contacts and followed by covalent bonds). The significant
decrease in the compressibility of PMMA at pressures 10 kbar indicates a significant decrease in the available free volume over the pressure range of this study. Thus,
TLSs closely associated with free volume within the glass
are expected to be strongly affected by the 20% volume
compression, whereas TLS associated with tightly packed
polymer side groups may be relatively insensitive to void
space compression.
CONCLUSIONS.
Temperature-dependent optical dephasing measurements
under variable high pressure have been used to identify intrinsically
different TLSs in molecular versus polymer
glasses. The pressure-induced decrease of the pure dephasing
rate in the molecular glass 2MTHF is attributed to a reduction
in the number of TLSs associated with the collapse of
void space. The 20% reduction in the magnitude of the
dephasing rate of Rh640 in 2MTHF that occurs when the
pressure is increased from ambient to 30 kbar is comparable
to the corresponding 20% volume reduction of the glass.
This correspondence supports the idea that TLS in 2MTHF
may be associated with void space or low-density regions of
the glass. The pressure-induced change in the temperaturedependent
power-law exponent also suggests that the form of
the density of states of the remaining TLS is altered at high
pressure.
The relative pressure insensitivity of the lowtemperature
dephasing rates in polymer glasses indicates that
the nature of TLS in organic polymers  (e.g., PMMA and
polyisobutylene) is intrinsically different than those in molecular
glasses.

</text>
