<text id="J08" category="" words="2037" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="A climate of injustice : global inequality, North-South politics, and climate policy " Author="J. Timmons Roberts and Bradley C. Parks" PublicationDate="Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 2007" SampledFrom="e-book" WebAddress="http://lib.myilibrary.com/Open.aspx?id=209696&loc=&srch=undefined&src=0">

Introduction: Wet Feet Marching.
Blame It on Rio?
Imagine you carefully save money your entire life to buy a beautiful piece of land in the country to farm. The land and equipment cost more than you expect, and you quickly become dependent on a narrow margin of profit to sustain yourself and your family. Soon after you move in, however, someone buys the property bordering your land and immediately opens a landfill, accepting trash and hazardous wastes from the entire region. A mountain of trash rapidly grows; the landfill stinks, the noise of the trucks and bulldozers is deafening, and the waste leaks into your groundwater. Since the land is in an unzoned, unincorporated township, you have no recourse to stop the dumping through zoning limits, and the landowner is best friends with the major political and economic players in the county, state, and even the federal government. The value of your property plummets, and you cannot afford to move. The owner of the dump lives elsewhere and grows rich on its income; you suffer all the costs of his operation and gain none of the benefits. You seek to make an agreement with the neighbor, asking for some limits on his behavior. He negotiates with you for years, but never agrees to any substantial changes in his dumping. Instead, he says it would be unfair to have to do so unless you also agreed to stop dumping your farm waste, which would prevent you from being able to farm effectively. You turn to your other neighbors, seeking partners who will force the dump owner to clean up or close. Some agree, but these are only the poorest and least powerful of your neighbors - the others are friends of the dump owner, or own businesses that they fear might be hurt by the restrictions you seek. The dump owner suggests that the impacts of his dumping require more study and promises enormous research projects by scientists of his choosing. Repeatedly and with great fanfare he promises to lend you money on good terms to build a wall as a visual screen, to clean your drinking water, and to help you deal with other effects. Desperate for any progress, you accept his offers, but his promises are quickly forgotten, and the improvements are never completed. He asks you again to sign an agreement that in a few years would make it impossible for you to increase production on your farm to the point where your family could live decently. You and the other less powerful neighbors resist the agreement. With only slight changes in the details, this is the story of global warming and all the years of discussion and action since the issue was identified in the late 1980s. Now picture this nonfictional scene: After three years of frustrating negotiations following the drafting of the world's first framework for a treaty on global warming, Atiq Rahman, of the Bangladesh Centre for Advanced Studies, rose to his feet in a huge Berlin conference room. Looking out across a sea of scientists, negotiators, and lobbyists from around the world, Rahman struggled to express the urgency of the injustice of global warming in as plain words as he could find.  In the decade leading up to the 1995 conference, Bangladesh had been struck by two devastating floods and two typhoons that left over a hundred thousand people dead and tens of millions of people homeless.  With climate change, scientists predicted a rise in sea level and more severe tropical storms. 'If climate change makes our country uninhabitable,' Rahman warned, 'we will march with our wet feet into your living rooms' Looking back a decade later, Rahman's warning remains as painfully absurd now as it was then. The globe's wealthy and poor nations live in worlds so distant and disparate, and the wealthy are so sealed off from the poor, that Rahman's words might sound farfetched. Yet the plight of the world's poor cannot be ignored. The issue of reconciling social justice with environmental protection has surfaced at every major international meeting since the first environment and development conference at Stockholm in 1972, Nairobi in 1982, Rio 
in 1992, Rio+5 in New York, and Johannesburg in 2002. At the Rio Earth Summit, poor na- tions feared limits on their efforts to grow economically and care for the basic needs of their people, but several powerful industrialized nations refused to curtail their own excesses unless poor nations did the same. President George H. W. Bush's famous statement that 'the American lifestyle is not open to negotiation' remains a colorful reminder of this key sticking point. The most controversial issue at Rio was global climate change. Under intense pressure to do something, 187 nations eventually signed the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). However, the treaty avoided tough details. It called on nations to 'protect the climate system . . . on the basis of equity and in accordance with their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities' but consensus on these 'first principles' masked profound disagreement on the issue of actual obligations. Developing countries interpreted the 'common but differentiated' language with great precision: industrialized nations would need to take the lead by cutting their own emissions and transferring large sums of environmental assistance to the South.  However, developed countries saw more room for selective interpretation. Before the ink had even dried on the UNFCCC agreement, rich nations began to backpedal on their promise of massive technology transfer and technical assistance to the developing world.  The estimated price tag for sustainable development in the Third World was $625 billion a year, with the North supplying about 20 percent of the total cost in grants or below-market rate loans.  However, the rich nations delivered less than one-fifth of that promise.  Three years later, the 'Berlin Mandate' called for the rich nations to first reduce their emissions, with the poorer nations joining on the second or third round. More rounds of negotiations foundered on the rocks of equity and justice at Kyoto, Buenos Aires, Bonn, The Hague, and Marrakech.  President Bill Clinton signed on to the Kyoto Protocol to limit carbon dioxide emissions in 1997, but even before he did, the U.S. Senate voted 95 to 0 to support the Byrd-Hagel Resolution, which would block any 'unfair' treaty that did not require the poor nations to also address the problem.  This move by the United States bred great animosity in the developing world because of what was widely perceived to be Americans co-opting and thus undermining the Southern position of 'climate injustice.' Third World policy makers and activists were quick to point out that the average U.S. citizen dumps as much greenhouse gas into the atmosphere as nine Chinese and eighteen Indians, and that developing countries are immeasurably more vulnerable to rising tides, tropical storms, droughts, and flooding than rich nations. However, as we will argue in this book, social understandings of fairness are highly elastic and subject to political manipulation. The ominous 95 to 0 vote on the Byrd-Hagel Resolution specifically tried to discredit the protocol on the basis of the 'disparity of treatment between Annex I Parties [essentially the wealthy OECD] and Developing Countries.' Eventually, U.S. Secretary of State Madeline Albright declared a 'diplomatic full court press to encourage meaningful developing country participation' but poor nations continued to hold out.  Yet interestingly, almost all developing countries refused to accept scheduled commitments for future reductions of emissions in the name of fairness. In fact, the very suggestion that poorer nations should restrict their economic growth by reducing emissions led to an openly hostile negotiating environment. China's lead negotiator said 'In the developed world only two people ride in a car, and yet you want us to give up riding on a bus' Facing pressure from President Clinton, Chancellor Luiz Felipe Lampreia of Brazil flatly stated, 'We cannot accept limitations that interfere with our economic development.' President Clinton and Vice President Gore never dared to bring Kyoto to the Senate for ratification. Their successors, President George W. Bush and Vice President Cheney, then pulled the United States out of the Kyoto treaty entirely in March 2001 and in February 2002 offered a much weaker policy on reducing U.S. contributions to global warming. The Bush administration continues to oppose Kyoto because it is 'an unfair and ineffective means of addressing global climate change concerns' and 'would cause serious harm to the U.S. economy.' Diametrically opposed perceptions of 'climate justice' among rich and poor nations, we argue, pose a serious threat to political resolution and pollute a diplomatic atmosphere already teetering on the edge of disaster. Scientists and environmentalists in the world's wealthier nations are mystified as to why this life-threatening issue has elicited such an anemic policy response, but many of them miss the point: Responses to
climate change are wound up with other social and economic issues facing nations and are fundamentally about inequality and injustice. The Kyoto Protocol suffers from a similar short-sightedness. While Russia's ratification of Kyoto has put the treaty into effect, and public concern about climate change seems to be increasing, the foot dragging of the world's largest emitter and the skittishness of developing countries cast a long shadow of uncertainty over the future viability of any post-2012 North-South climate pact. A better understanding of the current policy impasse is therefore urgently needed.
Our Argument in Brief.
Over the past twenty years, the theoretical literature in international environmental relations has blossomed. Scholars have argued that international environmental policy outcomes are the result of material self-interest,  bargaining power, and the ability to strong-arm weaker states through more coercive forms of power. Others have emphasized the importance of exogenous shocks and crises,  salient solutions,  a scientific 'burden of proof'  environmental nongovernmental orga- nizations (NGOs),  postmaterialist values,  epistemic communities,  transnational activist networks,  corporate nonstate actors,  intergovernmental organizations,  and political leadership.  Yet curiously, few scholars speak of the one variable singled out repeatedly by policy makers: global inequality. The small body of theoretical work that does exist on the topic rarely provides clear causal explanations of how inequality matters and under what conditions it affects outcomes in international environmental politics. Most analysts rely selectively on anecdotal evidence and particularize explanations without explicitly addressing the generalizability of their claims.  And rather than explaining the origins of global inequality and the forces leading to its persistence, scholars often take it as given. Inequality as it relates to climate change is also rarely measured systematically in its several dimensions, and its roots are poorly understood. We take a different approach. We develop scientific measures systematically in its several dimensions, and its roots are poorly understood. We take a different approach. We develop scientific measures of climate inequality, utilize statistical methods to evaluate its proximate and deeper social and historical determinants, and examine the causal channels through which inequality influences the form, frequency, timing, substance, and depth of international cooperation. Our account of the North-South stalemate on climate policy relies on the integration of three types of arguments: general theories about the behavior of states, intermediate explanations about international environmental politics and North-South politics, and issue-specific insights concerning the 'problem structure' of climate change. In the first group are issues of trust, worldviews, causal beliefs, and principled beliefs - issues we believe are largely attributable to the position of countries in the global division of labor. Inequality, we argue, dampens utility-enhancing cooperative efforts by reinforcing structuralist worldviews and causal beliefs, creating incentives for zero-sum and negative-sum behavior, polarizing preferences, generating divergent and unstable expectations about future behavior, eroding trust and civic norms among different social groups, destabilizing policy coalitions, and making it difficult to coalesce around a socially shared understanding of what is 'fair' At the intermediate level are explanations of the ongoing development crisis and those arising in environmental debates over the definition of sustainable development, foreign assistance for the environment, and global versus local environmental concerns. Climate negotiations do not take place in a vacuum. They are taking place at a time when concerns about Northern callousness and opportunism in matters of international political economy are rising, levels of generalized trust are declining, and calls for fair processes and fair outcomes are being marginalized.

</text>
