<text id="J10" category="" words="2012" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Clinical trials : a methodologic perspective  " Author="Piantadosi, Steven." PublicationDate="2005" SampledFrom="Hoboken, N.J. : Wiley-Interscience" WebAddress="http://lib.myilibrary.com/Open.aspx?id=27719&loc=&srch=undefined&src=0">

PRELIMINARIES.
INTRODUCTION.
The best time to contemplate the quality of evidence from a clinical trial is before it begins. High-quality evidence about the effects of a new treatment is a consequence of good study design and execution, which themselves are the results of careful planning. This book attempts to acquaint investigators with ideas of design methodology that are helpful in planning, conducting, analyzing, and assessing clinical trials. The discussion covers a number of subjects relevant to early planning and design; some that find general agreement among methodologists and others that are contentious. It is unlikely that a reader experienced with clinical trials will agree with all that I say or what I choose to emphasize, but my perspective should be mainstream, internally consistent, and useful for learning. This book is not intended to be an introduction to clinical trials. It should be part of a one- or two-quarter second structured postgraduate course for an audience with quantitative skills and a biological focus. The first edition evolved over a dozen years from the merging of two courses: one in experimental design and one in clinical trials. This second edition is the result of seven additional years of teaching and concomitant changes in the field. The book assumes a working knowledge of basic biostatistics and some familiarity with clinical trials, either didactic or practical. It is also helpful if the reader understands some more advanced statistical concepts, especially lifetables, survival models, and likelihoods. I recognize that clinicians often lack this knowledge. However, many contemporary medical researchers are seeking the required quantitative background through formal training in clinical investigation methods or experimental therapeutics. No clinical knowledge is needed to understand the concepts in this book, although it will be helpful throughout. Many readers of this book will find the discussion uneven, ranging from basic to technically complex. This is partly a consequence of the very nature of clinical trials and partly the result of trying to address a heterogeneous population of students. My classes typically contain an equal mixture of biostatistics graduate students, medical doctors in specialty or subspecialty training (especially working toward a degree in clinical investigation), and other health professionals training to be sophisticated managers or consumers of clinical trials. For such an audience the goal is to provide breadth and to write so as not to be misunderstood. This book should be supplemented with lecture and discussion, and possibly a computer lab. The reader who does not have an opportunity for formal classroom dialogue will need to explore the references more extensively. Exercises and discussion questions are provided at the end of each chapter. Most are intentionally made open-ended, with a suggestion that the student answer them in the form of a one- or two-page memorandum, as though providing an expert opinion to less-experienced investigators.
AUDIENCE AND SCOPE.
The audience for this book is clinical trialists. It is not a simple matter to define a clinical trialist, but operationally it is someone who is immersed in the science of trials. Being a truly interdisciplinary field, trialists can be derived from a number of sources: (1) quantitative or biostatistical, (2) administrative or managerial, (3) clinical, or (4) ethical. Therefore students can approach the subject primarily from any of these perspectives.
It is common today for rigorous trialists to be strongly statistical. This is because of the fairly rapid recent pace of methods for clinical trials coming from that field, and also because statistics pertains to all of the disciplines in which trials are conducted. However, the discussion in this book does not neglect the other viewpoints that are also essential to understanding trials. Many examples will relate to cancer because that is the primary field in which I work, but the concepts will generalize to other areas. Scientists who specialize in clinical trials are frequently dubbed 'statisticians' I will sometimes use that term with the following warning regarding rigor: statistics is an old and broad profession. There is not a one-to-one correspondence  between statisticians or biostatisticians and knowledge of clinical trials. However, trial methodologists, whether statisticians or not, are likely to know a lot about biostatistics and will be accustomed to working with statistical experts. Many trial methodologists are not statisticians at all, but evolve from epidemiologists or clinicians with a strongly quantitative orientation, as indicated above. 
I have made an effort to delineate and emphasize principles common to all types of trials: translational, developmental, safety, comparative, and large-scale studies. This follows from a belief that it is more helpful to learn about the similarities among trials rather than differences. However, it is unavoidable that distinctions must be made and the discussion tailored to specific types of studies. I have tried to keep such distinctions, which are often artificial, to a minimum. Various clinical contexts also treat trials differently, a topic discussed briefly in Chapter 4. There are many important aspects of clinical trials not covered here in any detail. These include administration, funding, conduct, quality control, and the considerable infrastructure necessary to conduct trials. These topics might be described as the technology of trials, whereas my intent is to focus on the science of trials. Technology is vitally important, but falls outside of the scope of this book. Fortunately there are excellent sources for this material.
No book can be a substitute for regular interaction with a trial methodologist during both the planning stages of a clinical investigation and its analysis. I do not suggest passive reliance on such consultations, but intend to facilitate disseminating knowledge from which true collaborations between clinicians and trialists will result. Although many clinicians think of bringing their final data to a statistician, a collaboration will be most valuable during the design phase of a study when an experienced trialist may prevent serious methodologic errors, help streamline a study, or suggest ways to avoid costly mistakes. The wide availability of computers is a strong benefit for clinical researchers, but presents some dangers. Although computers facilitate efficient, accurate, and timely keeping of data, modern software also permits or encourages researchers to produce 'statistical' reports without much attention to study design and without fully understanding assumptions, methods, limitations, and pitfalls of the procedures being employed. Sometimes a person who knows how to run procedure-oriented packages on computerized data is called the 'statistician', even though he or she might be a novice at the basic theory underlying the analyses. It then becomes possible to produce a final report of a trial without the clinical investigator understanding the limitations of analysis and without 
the analyst being conversant with the data. What a weak chain this is. The ideas in this book are intended to counteract these tendencies, not by being old-fashioned but by being rigorous. Good design inhibits errors by involving a statistical expert in the study as a collaborator from the beginning. Most aspects of the study will improve as a result, including reliability, resource utilization, quality assurance, precision, and the scope of inference. Good design can also simplify analyses by reducing bias and variability and removing the influence of complicating factors. In this way number crunching becomes less important than sound statistical reasoning. The student of clinical trials should also understand that the field is growing and changing in response to both biological and statistical developments. A picture of good methodology today may be inadequate in the near future. This is probably more true of analytic methods than design, where the fundamentals will change more slowly. Analy- sis methods often will depend on new statistical developments or theory. These in turn depend on (1) computing hardware, (2) reliable and accessible software, (3) training and 
re-training of trialists in the use of new methods, (4) acceptance of the procedure by the statistical and biological communities, and (5) sufficient time for the innovations to diffuse into practice. It is equally important to understand what changes or new concepts do not improve methodology but are put forward in response to non-science issues or because of creeping regulation. The best recent example of this is the increasing sacrifice of expertise in favor of objectivity in the structure and function of clinical trial monitoring (discussed in Chapter 14). Such practices are sometimes as ill considered as they are well meaning, and may be promulgated by sponsors without peer review or national consensus. Good trial design requires a willingness to examine many alternatives within the confines of reliably answering the basic biological question. The most common errors related to trial design are devoting insufficient resources or time to the study, rigidly using standard types of designs when better (e.g., more efficient) designs are available, or undoing the benefits of a good design with a poorly planned (or executed) analysis. I hope that the reader of this book will come to understand where there is much flexibility in the design and analysis of trials and where there is not.
OTHER SOURCES OF KNOWLEDGE. 
The periodical literature related to clinical trials is large. I have attempted to provide current useful references for accessing it in this book. Aside from individual study reports in many clinical journals, there are some periodicals strongly related to trials. One is Controlled Clinical Trials , which has been the official journal of the Society for Clinical Trials (SCT) (mostly a U.S. organization). The journal was begun in 1980 and is devoted to trial methodology. The SCT was founded in 1981 and its 1500 members meet yearly. In 2003 the SCT changed its official journal to Clinical Trials , the first issue of which appeared in January 2004. This reincarnated journal should be an excel- lent resource for trialists. A second helpful periodical source is Statistics in Medicine , which frequently has articles of interest to the trialist. It began publication in 1982 and is the official publication of the International Society for Clinical Biostatistics (mostly a European organization). These two societies have begun joint meetings every few years. Many papers of importance to clinical trials and related statistical methods appear in various other applied statistical and clinical journals. Reviews of many methods are published in Statistical Methods in Medical Research . One journal of particular interest to drug development researchers is the Journal of Biopharmaceutical Statistics . A useful general reference source is the journal Biostatistica , which contains abstracts from diverse periodicals. Statistical methodology for clinical trials appears in several journals. The topic was reviewed with an extensive bibliography by Simon (1991). A more extensive bibliography covering trials broadly has been given by Hawkins (1991). In addition to journals there are a number of books and monographs dealing with clinical trials. The text by Meinert (1986) is a practical view of the infrastructure and administrative supports necessary to perform quality trials, especially randomized controlled trials. Freidman, Furberg, and DeMets (1982) and Pocock (1996) also discuss many conceptual and practical issues in their excellent books, which do not require extensive statistical background. A nice encyclopedic reference regarding statistical methods in clinical trials is provided by Redmond and Colton (2001). There is a relatively short and highly readable methodology book by Silverman (1985), and a second more issue oriented one (Silverman, 1998) with many examples. Every trialist should read the extensive work on placebos by Shapiro and Shapiro (1997). In recent years many Web-based sources of information regarding clinicaltrials have been developed. The quality, content, and usefulness are highly variable and the user must consider the source when browsing. Resources of generally high quality that I personally find useful are listed in Table 1.1. My list is probably not complete with regard to specialized needs, but it provides a good starting point.
In the field of cancer trials, Buyse, Staquet, and Sylvester (1984) is an excellent source, although now becoming slightly dated. A contemporary view of cancer trials is given by Girling et al. (2003). The book by Leventhal and Wittes (1988) is useful for its discussion of issues from a strong clinical orientation. A very readable book with many good examples is that by Green, Benedetti, and Crowley (2002). In the field of AIDS, a useful source is Finkelstein and Schoenfeld (1995).

</text>
