<text id="J17" category="" words="2013" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Medicine and Place: an Inquiry" Author="Julie M. Aultman and Delese Wear" PublicationDate="Winter 2006, pp. 84-98 " SampledFrom="Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, Volume 49, Number 1" WebAddress="http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/perspectives_in_biology_and_medicine/v049/49.1aultman.pdf">

ABSTRACT. 
This essay explores the various places inhabited by doctors and
patients, in order to lead doctors to a more complex understanding of their patients'
experiences of illness. Using Adam Haslett's "The Good Doctor" (2002), we examine
what happens when doctors enter the worlds of their patients, both the literal landscapes
of their patients' homes and the hidden landscapes of their minds.We illustrate
the impact place has on doctors' understanding of their patients and on the patients'
attitudes toward their illness. In addition, we examine how place informs readers' perceptions
of both the coherence and the divide between the worlds of doctor and
patient.
"THE HYPHEN," Ron Carson (2002) argues, "is a key to understanding the
relationship between patients and doctors. . . . It calls attention to the
distance between parties to the clinical encounter. And then, in the blink of an
eye, it is a bridge across the divide" (p. 171). This hyphen, he continues, represents
a liminal place between doctor and patient whereby "one is suspended,
straddling, or wavering between two worlds, neither here nor there, betwixt and
between settled states of the self " (p. 175).
This essay explores the various places inhabited by doctors and patients, an
exploration that might lead doctors to a richer, more complex understanding of
their patients' experiences of illness. Such inquiry involves the acquisition of narrative
knowledge, which one gains through written or spoken accounts of
patients' stories, some fictional, some not. Whatever its form, narrative knowledge
is always context-embedded and particular,
concerned with examining and understanding singular events within the specific
time and place of a unique life story. In order to find coherence in sequences of
events and to form meaningful wholes, physicians need to use not only the logicoscientific
knowledge that enables them to gather and evaluate generalizable,
replicable, and empirically verifiable data, but also narrative knowledge that
enables them to use the epistemology and interpretive abilities of a good reader.
(Montello 1997, p. 190)
Through our examination of place we achieve a better understanding of how it
figures into the relationship between doctors and patients - how one's location
colors the ways doctors and patients view each other, create expectations for
each other, place trust in each other, and form an ability to work with each other.
We show how place is more than the obvious physical or social dimensions of
one's life - how it is more than the "psychosocial" part of the biopsychosocial
model, the part which is, in crowded hospitals and other clinical settings,"not so
much opposed as treated with indifference or institutional cynicism" (Morris
1998, p. 73).As we develop it here, place is a kind of "geographical epistemology
which is founded on personal geographies composed of direct experiences,
memory, fantasy, present circumstances, and future purposes" (Relph 1976, p. 4).
When we speak of place, we are concerned with the full array of experiences
through which we come to both know places and to make places. Place is an essential
part of our existence that tells us, if only provisionally, who we are, where
we've been, and where we might be going. It is worthy of study and reflection,
particularly by doctors committed to understanding and respecting their
patients' lived experiences.
Using Adam Haslett's "The Good Doctor" (2002) as an organizer for our discussion,
we examine the specific place of life stories when doctors enter the
worlds of their patients, both the literal landscapes of the patients' homes and the
hidden landscapes of their minds.We illustrate the impact place has on doctors'
understanding of their patients and on the patients' attitudes toward their illness.
In addition, we show how place informs readers' perceptions of both the coherence
and divide between the life worlds of doctor and patient. Place contextualizes
a patient's story, inserting the reader or listener into that patient's experience
of illness, imparting a sense of what it is like to be that person.
To explore the relationship between medicine and place, we borrow heavily
from humanistic geography, a domain rarely used in medical discourse and one
that emphasizes the human construction and experience of place (Gregory and Walford 1989).To begin with, humanistic geographers (among other disciplines)
make a clear distinction between space and place. Space is an arena with no meaning
other than a mathematical one (Houston 1978); indeed, space precedes or
becomes place (Ley and Samuels 1978). Place, by contrast, has context,
historical associations where vows are made; encounters and obligations, met;
commitments, fulfilled; limits, recognized. Place implies belonging. It establishes
identity. It defines vocation. It envisions destiny. Place is filled with memories
of life that provide roots and drive direction.There is a verticality as well as a
horizontality to place that space does not have, for the former embodies the
verticality of human values and human needs. (Houston 1978, p. 226)
Place so conceived is not merely the physical backdrop of one's existence but is
created, elastic, and relational, mediated by culture (Ward 2003); it has the power
to "direct and stabilize us, to memorialize and identify us, to tell us who and
what we are in terms of where we are" (Casey 1993, p. xv). Moreover, place is
process, never static: "People constitute places even as they move within them;
people and their bodies are not self-contained but rather a merging occurs, place
flows" (Ward 2003, p. 85).
At first glance, readers may report that "The Good Doctor" is a story about a
young physician's home visit to a depressed woman in an isolated area of the
Midwest, having noted the descriptive "prairie" and an offhand reference to
"back East." Place, then, is circulating in the first page or two of the story, even
before Frank meets his patient, Mrs. Buckholdt. First, place refers to the literal
landscape, the "whereness" of the patient, the space she occupies, which has been
described as barren and run down, matching her depression. She is inside this
place; it is home and has been the site of both extraordinary and everyday events.
Second, we use place to refer to both Frank's and Mrs. Buckholdt's identities,
which include a fusion of personal history, actions, the meanings associated with
those actions, and the context in which they occur - in short, their lived experiences.
Thus, time is very much a part of place, which, in some cases, keeps the
idea of place fluid even as structures and natural features remain static. Frank's
place - his professional sphere - is rarely enacted in locations like Mrs. Buckholdt's
environment, but rather in hospitals and other clinical settings where he
and people like him are in charge because of their knowledge, skills, and social
position.There, he is inside his place; here, he is outside, literally and figuratively.
Mrs. Buckholdt's place is yet to be determined from the little information we
have at this time, but we assume that it is tied to this location.
Third, we use place to refer to the interaction that will take place between
Frank and Mrs. Buckholdt soon after Frank enters her house. Here we examine
place as mind, which includes all the values, beliefs, personal histories, and ways
of thinking and behaving they both bring to those moments, as well as how they
are played out during and after the characters' interaction. That is to say, "place
is not just the 'where' of something; it is the location plus everything that occupies that location seen as an integrated and meaningful phenomenon" (Relph
1976, p. 3).
Thus, the intense interaction between Frank and Mrs. Buckholdt, filled with
words, shifts, gestures, glances, and silences, each brimming with meaning, is tied
literally and figuratively to the ground on which they both sit. In the following
sections we examine this ground of meaning-making across the above three
dimensions as we watch and listen to Frank and Mrs. Buckholdt: place as landscape,
place as identity, and place as mind.
Place as Landscape
The character of a subject's own self-identity and self-conception, are tied to the places in which
the subject finds itself.
 - J. E. Malpas (1999)
We first meet Frank, the young doctor in "The Good Doctor," as he pulls into
the Buckholdts' driveway. The first thing he sees is a rusty, "battle-wasted tank"
of a Chevy Nova buried in grass as tall as its windows, and as he scans the rest of
the environment, the collective images are even more depressing: a brown yard
with plastic toys strewn everywhere, a sagging house, a dilapidated barn that has
been childishly spray painted "No Girls Allowed."We quickly sense that Frank is
not happy to be there. He is nursing a hangover after receiving word the day
before that his National Health Services Corps funding, which supposedly would
repay his medical school loans for three years' work in an underserved area, has
run dry. He has driven two and half hours to evaluate a patient, Mrs. Buckholdt,
who has refused to return to the clinic where he works but still wants refills on
her medication.The clouds of dust stirred up by his car mirror his mood.
To this point, Frank's impressions are tied to landscape, to the particularities
of this place. Indeed, place is often conceived as a physical, visual form that includes
human-made structures and natural features. Place is "substantial, capable
of being described. . . . The spirit of a place lies in its landscape" (Relph 1976, p.
30).The spirit of this place is tied to the beholder, for
the process of viewing a landscape is . . . one of careful construction, through
which the indifferent or unaccommodating space of a site or environment is
transformed into a place, which draws the viewer into its territory. Crucial to
this task of conversion is the viewer's location . . . from which to gain access
to the landscape. On encountering a particular site, the viewer must find her
bearings in relation to it. . . .The contemplation of landscape teaches us that
what we see is always and inevitably a question of how we see and from
where we see. (Whitehead 2003, p. 275)
"The Good Doctor" is written with a limited omniscient point of view; that is,
we know what Frank, but no one else, is thinking about the landscape he encounters. As he sees it, the Chevy is a skeleton; the 100-degree heat is oppressive;
the dirt is powder dry.The first signs of life - an eight- or nine-year-old girl
standing in the driveway, and a middle-aged man who answers the door - are
similarly flat and dismal: the girl's mouth is rigid, her eyes are narrowed; the man
holds a cigarette between thumb and forefinger as he scrutinizes Frank, his skin
blotched with spidery angiomas ("Hepatitis C, Frank thinks, or the end of a serious
drinking habit").To Frank's announcement that he is here to see Mrs. Buckholdt,
the man's only response is "Yeah . . . she's in there," spoken as he crosses
the porch and wanders into the yard. Left alone on the porch, Frank calls out
"Mrs. Buckholdt?" through the door the man has left open.
Other than weighty impressions gleaned through the surroundings of her
home and perusal of the girl and the man who must surely be part of her family,
what does Frank know about Mrs. Buckholdt? The psych notes tell him that
she is a 44-year-old woman with no family history of mental illness. She first
presented with depression after her oldest child died four years ago; she has two
younger children, a girl and a boy.At this point, these notes are the official story
of her illness; she is merely an entry here (Frank 1995). Her case, as Frank reads
it, has been miserably handled. He thought to himself, "A brief course of antidepressants,
probably never finished, and since then nothing but benzos - sedatives - 
written as needed. No therapy. . . . the shrink [I] had replaced wasn't about
to drive five hours round-trip for a meds consult, so he just kept calling in her
refills" (Haslett 2002, p. 29).
At this point, readers are very much "in" the setting: we can see it, smell it,
and hear it, pretty much as Frank does.

</text>
