<text id="J27" category="" words="2007" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Combining Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing With Gestalt Techniques in Couples Counseling" Author="Frederick Capps" PublicationDate="January 2006 " SampledFrom="The Family Journal Vol. 14 No. 1, January 2006 p. 49-58" WebAddress="http://www.swetswise.com/FullTextProxy/swproxy?url=http%3A%2F%2Ftfj.sagepub.com%2Fcgi%2Freprint%2F14%2F1%2F49.pdf%3Fxdata%3D194080032009&ts=1292692087386&cs=2010778231&userName=5613949.ipdirect&emCondId=5613922&articleID=25877303&yevoID=1610788&titleID=74">

Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) is gaining
acceptance as efficacious treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder
for individuals but not for couples. This article reports three case
studies of couples in which EMDR is combined with Gestalt therapy
in a single session to resolve relational trauma effects, increase empathy
and awareness in the supportive partner, and deepen intimacy
within the couple. Case studies are described, and implications for
research and clinical applications are discussed.
The purpose of this article is to report the findings of three
case studies of couples counseling in which eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) is used to
achieve three goals: (a) to resolve the effects of trauma for the
traumatized partner (TP) that result from relational trauma
previously inflicted by the supportive partner (SP) during the
course of the relationship, (b) to increase empathy in the SP
by increasing cognitive awareness of the other partner's
trauma effects, and (c) to deepen intimacy within the couple.
Furthermore, this article demonstrates that by combining
EMDR with Gestalt techniques in an experiential couples
counseling context, it is possible to achieve treatment goals in
a single counseling session.
BACKGROUND.
Following a brief but stormy history, EMDR is now
accepted as an efficacious treatment for posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD; American Psychiatric Association, 2004;
Chambless et al., 1998; Chemtob, Tolin, van der Kolk, &amp;
Pitman, 2000; Foa, Keane, &amp; Friedman, 2000; Foa &amp;
Rothbaum, 1998; Shapiro, 2001; Veterans Health Administration
[VHA] &amp; Department of Defense [DOD], 2004).
Carole Alto (2001) selected 21 controlled research studies of
EMDR for inclusion in her meta-analysis. A cursory perusal
of the Digital Dissertations database via the Internet yielded
15 doctoral dissertations in which EMDR was the focus of
controlled experiments. Although effect sizes varied among
the 36 studies, all of them indicated efficacy in the use of
EMDR.
The origin of EMDR (Shapiro, 1989a, 1989b) has been a
source of controversy as has the role of eye movements
(Acierno, Tremont, Last, &amp; Montgomery, 1994; Levin,
Lazrove, &amp; van der Kolk, 1999; Rosen, 1995, 1997; Welch,
1996). In the first comprehensive text on EMDR, Shapiro
(1995) claimed that more than 10,000 therapists had been
trained in the method. Although Shapiro continued to advocate
for her proprietary training, she published details on the
protocol that could be followed by non-EMDR-trained
researchers. Shapiro's early reluctance to divulge details of
her method may have added to the controversy. Some early
studies failed to adhere to the EMDR protocol (Devilly,
Spence, &amp; Rapee, 1998; Merckelbach, Hogervorst,
Kampman, &amp; de Jongh, 1994; Muris &amp; Merckelbach, 1997;
Muris, Merckelbach, Holdrinet, &amp; Sijsenaar, 1998; Sanderson&amp;
Carpenter, 1992). These studies were less than enthusiastic
about EMDR. Chastising Shapiro for making replication
of her research difficult was a common theme among
early EMDR investigators (Herbert &amp; Mueser, 1992). Many
of these authors live and work abroad, which may have created
logistical problems in receiving EMDR training. In any
case, it seems likely that methodological problems
contributed to negative reports by these researchers.
Maxfield and Hyer (2002) found that methodological
standards were highly correlated to effect size. McNally
(1999) summarized the elements of the controversy in a particularly
unflattering analysis of EMDR. However, a substantive
majority of the more than 330 articles that have been published on EMDR since 1989 (Baldwin, 2004) have supported EMDR for PTSD treatment and show promise for EMDR's
efficacy in the treatment of other problems, as well (Maxfield
&amp; Hyer, 2002; Perkins &amp; Rouanzoin, 2002; Shapiro, 2002;
Shapiro &amp; Forrest, 1997). In addition, physiological measures
such as neuroimaging have aided in the understanding
of the role of eye movements in EMDR (Levin et al., 1999;
van der Kolk, 2002).
Since 1989, EMDR has been used to treat survivors and
emergency workers, including disaster relief counselors,
worldwide. EMDR has been used effectively in Oklahoma
City, Belfast, Zagreb, Rwanda, Dunblane, Sarajevo, Columbine,
and Londonderry; with veterans fromWorldWar II, the
KoreanWar, Beirut, and the VietnamWar; and in many other
applications (Shapiro, 2002; Silver&amp;Rogers, 2002). EMDR
effects exceed those of nonspecific effects shared by all treatments
and are independent of client expectations (Perkins &amp;
Rouanzoin, 2002;VanEtten&amp;Taylor, 1998).Moreover,EMDR
effects are at least equal to effects of cognitive-behavioral
therapy, and EMDR often requires less time than other models,
with less client attrition (Silver &amp; Rogers, 2002; VHA &amp;
DOD, 2004). Shapiro has continued to advocate for proprietary
training. Tobin (2004) recently reported that more than
40,000 practitioners have been trained in Shapiro's model.
Couples Counseling.
Conjoint therapy is a time-honored clinical practice
(Bowen, 1978; Pesso, 1996; Roth&amp;Chasin, 1994). However,
EMDRwas not widely studied in conjoint therapy prior to the
21st century. One reason for the dearth of early couples
research may be because of Shapiro's caution toEMDRclinicians
about using EMDR in the context of couples therapy
(Shapiro, 1995, 2001). Shapiro noted mixed results and indicated
the key in deciding whether to use EMDR in a conjoint
session was the level of commitment to support by the SP.
However, Shapiro did not cite the research on which her position
was based. EMDR therapists have reported therapeutic
gains with the use of EMDR in couples therapy (Flemke &amp;
Protinsky, 2003; Protinsky, Sparks, &amp; Flemke, 2001; Snyder,
1996). Moses (2003) advocated for the use of EMDR in couples
counseling in a model that promotes safety and balance.
Protinsky et al. (2001) reported thatEMDRfits within experientially
based treatment and believe that it can increase therapeutic
effectiveness. More recently, Flemke and Protinsky
(2003) successfully integrated EMDR with Imago Relationship
Therapy. Snyder (1996) reported therapeutic gains in
increasing intimacy with a lesbian couple in conjoint sessions
using EMDR with one partner, and the partner not receiving
EMDR provided emotional support in alternate sessions.
Role of Gestalt Therapy.
Experiential therapy has been shown to be effective in
symptom reduction in depression (Greenberg &amp; Watson,
1998). This factor is believed to play an important therapeutic
role in couples counseling because major depressive episodes
and dysthymia are often associated with dyadic dissatisfaction
(Whisman, 1999). Gestalt techniques in conjoint therapy
afford the SP the opportunity to gain visceral awareness of the
other's pain and to experience the trauma resolution of the TP
at a deep level, thereby gaining awareness and empathy for
the partner. Experiential techniques, borrowing heavily from
Gestalt therapy in which "experiment is the cornerstone"
(Zinker, 1977, p. 123), have been used effectively in dealing
with both trauma and "attachment injuries" in couples counseling
(Greenberg &amp; Malcolm, 2002; S. M. Johnson, 2003;
S. M. Johnson, Makinen, &amp; Millikin, 2001). In keeping with
traditional experiential family therapy, the goal of integrating
EMDR in couples counseling with Gestalt techniques is
growth and integrity, that is, congruence between inner experience
and outward behavior (Nichols &amp; Schwartz, 1991).
Definitions.
Because of the novelty of EMDR therapy, many terms
associated with the model may not be immediately clear to
the reader. In addition, this article contains terms and acronyms
that might be obscure. The following list of operational
definitions and explanations is provided to assist the reader
who is unfamiliar with EMDR.
Attachment injury. Attachment injury is a traumatic relational
event that occurs early in life and tends to shape relatively
enduring relational patterns. The traumatic event itself
is typically one that is not outside the range of normal human
experience and therefore is not usually associated with a diagnosis
of PTSD. It can be a single incident or a series of similar
events, described by Shapiro (2001) as "small t traumas."
Balance. This is a therapeutic technique in which both
partners receive equivalent treatment to minimize the perception
that one is "the patient" or has "more issues" than the
other (Moses, 2003; Weeks &amp; Treat, 2001).
Body scan. A body scan is a procedure in which the client
is invited to notice any physiological sensations and to
describe them to the counselor (Shapiro, 2001).
Containment. Containment refers to the handling of
charged material within and between sessions. It includes
assessment, development, and installation of internal and
external resources of the partners; placement and coaching of
the SP; and being reasonably available by telephone between
sessions when necessary (Moses, 2003).
Desensitization. This refers to the implementation of sets
of eye movements while focusing on the disturbing material.
Between sets, the counselor instructs the client to breathe, to
"let it go," and asks the client what he or she is experiencing.
This procedure is the heart of the model of EMDR and is
repeated until the disturbance is removed or minimized and
the positive cognition is strongly endorsed by the client
(Shapiro, 2001).
Installation. Installation is the use of additional eye movement
sets to reinforce the endorsement of the positive cognition
(Shapiro, 2001).
Relational trauma. Relational trauma is operationally
defined as any physical, psychological, or emotional insult
that is perpetrated by one partner in a primary dyad toward the
other partner.
Safety. In response to risks of increased vulnerability as
the result of conjoint counseling, safety refers to assessing
client stability and fidelity to a clear structure with both partners
and the counselor committed to the process (Moses,
2003).
Supportive partner. SP is operationally defined as the former
perpetrator of relational trauma whose aberrant behavior
is in full remission and is seeking to mend the primary
relationship.
Traumatized partner. TP is operationally defined as a survivor
of relational trauma who is currently manifesting posttraumatic
stress symptoms and is seeking to mend the primary
relationship.
RATIONALE
The treatment method under discussion is believed to have
wide applicability to diverse populations. EMDR has been
effectively used in resolving trauma in the aftermath of wars,
terrorist acts, and natural disasters worldwide for individuals
from diverse populations (Silver &amp; Rogers, 2002). An assumption
of this study is that the diverse applicability for individuals
will extend to couples. There is a fairly large degree of
diversity of ethnicity, gender, and age in the three cases
currently discussed (see "Methods").
At least one previous case study reports that conjoint couples
EMDR therapy may be effective in increasing intimacy
in a lesbian primary relationship (Snyder, 1996). However,
the three cases in this study involve heterosexual couples in
which the TPs are female. It is assumed, based on controlled
research, that traumatized males and females benefit equally
from EMDR in the treatment of trauma effects (VHA &amp;
DOD, 2004). However, females may be more likely to report
trauma effects in couples counseling. This assumption is
based on the wide body of literature that demonstrates that
substance abuse is more common in males (Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration, 2004) and that
perpetrators of intimate partner violence are 5 times more
likely to be male (Rennison &amp;Welchans, 2000). In addition,
at least one recent study indicates that females are more likely
to be traumatized than males (Breslau, Wilcox, Storr, Lucia,
&amp; Anthony, 2004). Based on Snyder's (1996) methodology,
the work of Flemke and Protinsky and their colleagues, and
the universal applicability ofEMDR(Silver&amp;Rogers, 2002),
it seems likely that attachment injuries and relational trauma present barriers to intimacy in primary dyads without regard
to gender or worldview of the couple.
Gestalt therapy has long been used with success in the
treatment of substance abuse (V. Johnson, 1973; Ramey,
1998). Gestalt techniques, such as empty chair and making
the rounds, have been shown to be useful in helping substance
abusers attain visceral awareness that leads to congruence.
Both Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and Al-Anon Family
Groups use the 12 steps, in which the 4th and 5th steps
embrace experiential therapy techniques (Anonymous,
2001). Unfortunately, experiential techniques that are geared
toward the substance abuser do not address the experiences of
the family in relation to the substance abuse. Edwards (1990)
stated that individual therapy techniques cannot address any
systemic experience unless they are utilized in the context of
couples or family therapy and approached systemically by the
therapist. S. M. Johnson, Hunsley, Greenberg, and Schindler
(1999) reported that experiential therapies, such as emotionally
focused couples therapy (EFT), utilize Gestalt techniques
in encouraging a visceral reaction that tends to resolve
unfinished business (Greenberg &amp; Malcolm, 2002). EFT utilizes
techniques that lead to deepening of feelings to promote
affinity (S. M. Johnson, 2003).

</text>
