<text id="J32" category="" words="2021" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Bad language :  are some words better than others?" Author="Battistella, Edwin L. " PublicationDate="2005. " SampledFrom="Oxford : Oxford University Press" WebAddress="http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/oso/public/content/linguistics/9780195172485/toc.html">

Bad Language: Realism versus Relativism.
What does the phrase "bad language" mean to you? Perhaps you think of swearing or slang. Is it bad language to curse if you hit your thumb with a hammer? Is it bad language for a novelist to use the f-word in dialogue? What about the speech of a sitcom character, newscaster, or presidential candidate? Is it bad for young people to use slang like dude, chill, my bad, hook up, or bling-bling? 
Some people think of regional or ethnic dialects as bad English. Texas writer Molly Ivins, for example, once suggested that to Northerners "a Southern accent is both ignorant and racist." She cited the World War II genre of movies, whose stock characters included "a Midwestern hero, a wise-cracking New Yorker, and a dumb Southerner" as one source of dialect stereotypes.  Is it really bad English to pronounce ten and pen as "tin" and "pin" or to use the pronoun y'all? Another stigmatized dialect form is the New York City dialect. Are pronunciations like "cawfee" and 
"chawklit" bad English? And what about Ebonics? Are pronunciations like "aks" or grammatical usages like "He been married" bad?
People also identify bad English with a foreign accent or with English mixed with another language. In a 1952 episode of the program I Love Lucy, Lucy Ricardo hires an English tutor to polish her speech so her son won't learn her bad habits. Commenting on her husband Ricky's Cuban accent, she says "Please, promise me you won't speak to our child until he's nineteen or twenty."  Is it bad English to speak with a Cuban accent and mix Spanish with English, as in "Okay, gracias" (or "Yo quiero Taco Bell")? More than fifty years after "Lucy Hires an English Tutor," accent modification is big business in the United States and internationally.
Even if you don't have a definite opinion on swearing, slang, and accents, it is likely that you equate bad English with certain forms of grammar or word use. I once heard someone talk about his office being made the escape goat for problems. Even though the phrase was a natural re-interpretation of the word scapegoat, it suggested to me that the speaker hadn't read much. When I teach writing, I try to model standard usage and I correct nonstandard forms such as "I seen the Cascade Mountains," "We should of found another route," and "There had to be a way in which to do that." But there are many so-called errors that I do not correct. Consider, for example, these items, from practice tests in an early twentieth-century grammar correspondence course: 
What do you think of (me - my) going to town? 
I was frightened at (that examination's length - the length of that examination). 
You must act (quicker - more quickly). 
The order was (only intended - intended only) for the major. 
You must report to me (more often - oftener). 
In each case, the test maker intended the first choice to be marked out as incorrect. But none of these seem to me to be errors worth correcting, and the last example actually seems smoother with more often rather than oftener.
Bad English is hard to define. One way is simply to say that it is English that doesn't follow the rules. That of course raises a new question. What do we mean by the rules of a language? Broadly speaking there are two ways of thinking about rules. One view is that rules describe the regularities that speakers follow in using their language. For example, consider how English speakers form simple questions. We invert the helping verb (also known as the auxiliary verb) and the subject. In order to make a question from the simple statement Mary has left, we shift the auxiliary verb has to the front yielding Has Mary left? Similarly, the sentence Is John busy? is the question form of John is busy; Will you close the door? is the question form of You will close the door; and so forth.
What if there is no auxiliary verb in the statement form? In that case we add the special auxiliary verb do and put that in front of the subject. So Do you see that? is the question form of You see that. A rule of English is that questions are formed from statements by moving the auxiliary to the left of the subject or by adding a form of do when no other auxiliary is present. Such rules document how the English language works. They also provide building blocks for deeper investigation into the patterns of language. From very simple questions such as these, we could go on to investigate questions with interrogative pronouns, such as What are you reading? or we could study the use of do in negative sentences, as in I didn't see that movie.
The study of language that focuses on patterns of use and rules like this is known as descriptive grammar. Descriptive grammar is the basis for dictionaries, which record changes in vocabulary and usage, and for the field of linguistics, which aims at describing languages and investigating the nature of language. Taking the description of language seriously means paying attention to such details as how questions are formed and similar patterns of language. It also means recognizing that these patterns are subject to variation and change. Dictionaries provide the most obvious illustration of the way that language changes. As new editions of dictionaries are published, they document new words that arise like Botox, identity theft, phat, and bioterrorism. They document 
new meanings of existing words such as the use of the word nuke as a verb meaning to heat by microwaving, or the change in the meaning of the verb print from mechanical to electronic reproduction of text and images.
Rules of grammar change as well. A moment ago I discussed the pattern of question formation in present-day English. But Shakespeare's characters ask questions that reflect a different pattern of question formation. They ask such questions as What said he? and Came he not home to night? These questions are formed by inverting the main verb rather than by adding do, which was the common pattern in earlier English. In Shakespeare's time, questions could be formed by inversion of the main verb or by adding do, as in And did you not leave him in this contemplation?  The different options were used in different styles and situations, but eventually the forms with do became the only pattern for questions not having an auxiliary. In other words, the rules for forming questions have changed over the centuries.
The idea of following a rule is so deeply associated with correct behavior that it is tempting to think of rules as applying only to formal language and to view informal language as being without rules or being lax about them. But informal speech obeys rules as well. Take contraction, for example, a process that occurs in much informal language. Contraction of the verb is takes place in sentences such as Where's my pen? Who do you think's going to be there? and What's going on? But contraction does not typically occur at the end of a sentence. We can say I wonder who that is but not I wonder who that's.  Other informal language is systematic as well. Even apparent conversational filler words have a system and meaning to them.  Like, for example, is used to indicate approximation or exaggeration, as in He has, like, six sisters and He's, like, 150 years old. It may also serve as an informal synonym for says, as in the sentence, I tried to play some music and he was all like "Quit making so much noise." 
It is also tempting to think of regional dialects as breaking the rules of good English. The grammar of regional speech varies from that of Standard English, but the variation is systematic and patterned. It is more accurate, then, to view dialects as having different rules from the standard. In Appalachian English, for example, speakers sometimes put an a-sound before words that end in  - ing. This results in familiar expressions like a-hunting we will go. But speakers who use this dialect feature do not simply put the a- before any word that ends in  - ing. Appalachian speakers who use the a- prefix might say Everyone went a-hunting but not Everyone likes a-hunting or I bought a new a-hunting dog. The a- is possible when the  - ing word is a verb, but not when the -ing word is a noun or adjective.  So the grammar of Appalachian English has a fairly sophisticated rule of a-prefixing that is missing in Standard English.
Dialect variation also occurs in the usage of individual words as well. An example involves the use of the adverb anymore. In Standard English, its primary use is in negative sentences (such as Yogi Berra's famous statement that "Nobody goes there anymore. It's too crowded") and in questions (such as Do you go there anymore?).  In some parts of the county, however, speakers also use anymore in sentences such as Everyone is cool anymore or Anymore you're working too much. The extension of anymore to positive statements does not mean breaking a rule. Rather, different speakers have different rules for using this adverb, and dictionaries recognize such variation in usage notes. The eleventh edition of Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, for example, notes that positive anymore "is now reported to be widespread in all speech areas of the U.S. except New England."
The idea that dialect and informal speech are organized systems with rules is an important one. Suppose you try to write a novel with an Appalachian or Midwestern character. It is possible to use the rules of the dialect to draw a convincing portrait of that character's speech or to bungle the rules of the dialect to create an ineffective portrayal. Or suppose you are an advertiser or politician wishing to appeal to an audience of young people, blue- and pink-collar workers, or senior citizens. You are likely to want to tailor the level and formality of your 
speech to them, and to follow the rules for the speech variety you believe is most effective for your audience.
The variability of language is significant in another way. It means that good and bad language cannot be defined in absolute terms. The standard language of one era, generation, medium, or region might well differ from the standard of another. The editorials of the New York Times or Wall Street Journal differ from the arts and culture reporting in Time magazine. Educated speech in Atlanta or Austin differs from educated speech in Seattle or Boston. Speakers shift their styles depending on their audience, using vocabulary, pronunciation, and grammar that fit well. And vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation norms all change. If they did not change, we might still be using dictionaries from one hundred years ago and Chaucer and Beowulf would be much more popular with students.
Language change does not mean that any novelty automatically becomes the norm and achieves widespread educated usage. Some innovations become widely used while others fail. Television is an excellent source of newly coined vocabulary but some new vocabulary takes hold and some does not. A coinage like regift, from the series Seinfeld, seems to me to be a likely candidate to become standardized. Other novelties, such as low-talker, hand-sandwich, and shushee (also from Seinfeld) or kitteny, frowny, girl-powery, knifey, and huntery (from Buffy the Vampire Slayer) are unlikely to become widely used.  
Innovation and variation in pronunciation and grammar evokes similar strong feelings. Some variation is unremarkable while other variation is contentious and stigmatized. Consider the pronunciation of the words economic, Uranus, Oregon, and nuclear, for example. The variable pronunciation of the first two words is typically treated as a matter of alternate standard pronunciations: EEKonomic versus ECKonomic or YOURunus versus youRAYnus. The pronunciation of Oregon as or-uh-GUN or or-uh-GAWN varies according to whether one is native or an outsider.  The pronunciation of nuclear is different. The pronunciation of nuclear is different. For many it is a marker of education and refinement whether one says NU-clee-ur or NU-cu-lar.

</text>
