<text id="J40" category="" words="2011" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Portfolio selection using hierarchical Bayesian analysis and MCMC methods  " Author="Alex Greyserman, Douglas H. Jones, and William E. Strawderman" PublicationDate="February 2006 p. 669-678" SampledFrom="Journal of Banking & Finance Volume 30, Issue 2" WebAddress="http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=MImg&_imagekey=B6VCY-4GTW8T9-1-14&_cdi=5967&_user=196517&_pii=S0378426605000889&_origin=browse&_zone=rslt_list_item&_coverDate=02%2F28%2F2006&_sk=999699997&wchp=dGLbVlb-zSkWb&md5=2dc7f528f49ff596a487bd2e2afd906b&ie">

Abstract.
This paper contributes to portfolio selection methodology using a Bayesian forecast of the
distribution of returns by stochastic approximation. New hierarchical priors on the mean vector
and covariance matrix of returns are derived and implemented. Comparisons between this
approach and other Bayesian methods are studied with simulations on 25 years of historical
data on global stock indices. It is demonstrated that a fully hierarchical Bayes procedure produces
promising results warranting more study. We carried out a numerical optimization procedure
to maximize expected utility using the MCMC (Monte Carlo Markov Chain) samples
from the posterior predictive distribution. This model resulted in an extra 1.5 percentage points
per year in additional portfolio performance (on top of the Hierarchical Bayes model to estimate
l and R and use the Markowitz model), which is quite a significant empirical result. This
approach applies to a large class of utility functions and models for market returns.
Introduction.
Portfolio theory is concerned with the allocation of an individuals wealth among
various available assets. The basic Markowitz version of the portfolio selection problem
is (Markowitz, 1952).
W = (w1,w2, . . .,wm)Rm is a column vector of proportions representing a
portfolio of assets, R and l are the covariance matrix and mean column vector of
asset returns y = (y1,y2, . . .,ym)0, k is the investors risk-aversion parameter, and e
is a column unit vector. For no short sales restrictions, an additional constraint,
wi&gt;0, can be added. This portfolio selection approach is termed the Mean - Variance
(MV) method because it ranks portfolio weights by their mean - variance pairs.
The set of optimal portfolios obtained as the level of risk-aversion, k, varies is termed
the Markowitz efficient frontier.
The Markowitz MV method can be viewed as maximizing expected utility. For
example, if the investors current wealth is W0, his terminal wealth is
W = (1 + wy)W0.
According to Von Neumann and Morgenstern axioms, the investor determines w
by considering the expected value of a non-decreasing utility function of W. Using
the exponential utility function,
U(W)=-exp(W) and assuming y is distributed multivariate normal N(l,R), the maximization of
expected utility reduces to ranking MV portfolios using (l,R;k) in model (1).
Classical portfolio selection uses least-squares estimates of (l,R) in model (1).
However, MV portfolio selection based on estimates of population moments leads
to a problem of estimation risk that arises from the difference between the estimates
and the true parameter values. It has been well documented that the problem of estimation
risk is significant (Dickinson, 1974; Putnam and Quintana, 1991; Pari and
Chen, 1985; Frankfurter et al., 1971; Jobson and Korkie, 1980). Empirical studies
of estimation risk associated with least-squares estimates appear in Levy and Sarnat
(1970), Solnik (1982), Board and Sutcliffe (1992), Chopra et al. (1993), Chopra and
Ziemba (1993). All of these studies conclude that resulting portfolios involve either
extreme volatility or lack of diversification.
The use of Bayes and empirical Bayes estimators to estimate (l,R) have been
advocated by several researchers (Brown, 1976; Bawa et al., 1979; Jorion, 1986;
Frost and Savarino, 1986). Jorion (1986, 1991) employs Bayes modifications of
James - Stein shrinking formulas (James and Stein, 1960) to estimate l, while Frost
and Savarino (1986) employ empirical Bayes estimators of l, assuming R has intraclass
structure. They show through simulated and historical data that MV portfolios
using their respective Bayes estimates in model (1) dominate MV portfolios using
] classical least squares estimates. See also Kadiyala and Karlsson (1997), Kandel
et al. (1995), and Shaken (1987).
This paper examines a fully hierarchical Bayes model for (l,R). These models are
multivariate and thus can capture more complete information on the interdependence
between assets than previous models. Although these models are dependence
between assets than previous models. Although these models are cross-sectional,
one-step forward forecasts based on the posterior predictive distribution of returns
are available for ranking portfolios. The posterior predictive distribution has been
proposed for forecasting univariate ARMA models since Zellner (1971); also see
West and Harrison (1989). This paper will empirically demonstrate that Bayesian
forecasts are superior to moment estimates in portfolio ranking. Moreover, this approach
applies to any utility function.
Marriott et al. (1993) show how to obtain the predictive distribution for a vector
of future values via the Gibbs sampler and Monte Carlo integration. Kim et al.
(1998) exploit MCMC sampling methods to provide a practical likelihood based
framework for the analysis of stochastic volatility models. These methods are used
to compare the fit of stochastic volatility and GARCH models. Nakatsuma and Tsurumi
(1996) compare small-sample properties of Bayes estimation and maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) of ARMA-GARCH models using MCMC sampling.
McCulloch and Tsay (1994) use the Gibbs sampler for Bayesian analysis of AR models.
This paper also exploits MCMC sampling methods to obtain a practical stochastic
approximation to the posterior predictive distribution and its moments.
This paper is structured as follows. The definition of posterior predictive distributions
is given in Section 2. Maximum expected utility is defined in Section 3. In Section
4, we describe data on eleven country-stock index funds provided by Morgan
Stanley Capital International. In addition, designs for comparing the different Bayesian
models are described. Bayesian data models including the fully hierarchical prior
are explained in Section 5. Sections 6 and 7 describe the results and conclusion,
respectively.
Bayes posterior predictive distributions.
Denote observed returns on m assets by y and future, or unobserved, returns by ~y.
Let 0Rp and 0Rq denote p parameters and q hyperparameters, respectively. The
parametric family of the joint likelihood of y and ~y will be denoted by
f(y;~y0)=f(y;y)and depends on the joint parameters only through the lowlevel
parameter h. Denote the prior distribution of (/,h) by p(/,h) = p(/)p(hj/).
Non-hierarchical models fix / and compute posterior distributions using the prior
p(hj/), while hierarchical models compute posterior distributions using the joint
prior p(/,h).
In the portfolio selection problem, h = (l,R) and / will represent a vector of
hyperparameters in the prior for (l,R). Portfolio selection using posterior predictive
distributions addresses two unknown quantities, ~y and (/,h), with the primary
goal being to gain information about ~y with (/,h) as nuisance parameters. The advantage of the hierarchical model, with priors instead of point estimates of
hyperparameters, is that the posterior distributions will reflect the appropriate
uncertainty in the hyperparameters. The disadvantage is that the posterior predictive
distribution will not be analytically tractable usually; however, the method
based on the MCMC sampler provides a stochastic approximation of the posterior
predictive distribution.
According to the likelihood principal all evidence about (~y; /; hÞ is contained in
the joint likelihood function f ðy; ~yj/; hÞ (for an overview see Bjørnstad, 1990). Based
on this likelihood, we wish to develop a posterior predictive distribution for ~y,
pð~yjyÞ, by eliminating (/,h) from the joint likelihood. The Bayes approach for this
problem is to integrate out (/,h) using the joint prior. The resulting predictive distribution
for ~y given the data, y, is the following.
A stochastic approximation of the posterior predictive distribution is generated by
simulation, using the MCMC sampler if necessary, using (h,/)  p(h,/jy) to generate
~y distributed with density f(yjh,/), and repeating these steps to obtain more simulated
observations.
Maximum expected utility.
For the readers convenience, we repeat the basic notation. Let w 2 Rm denote
portfolio weights satisfying wiP 0, i =1,. . .,m; P
i¼1;...;mwi ¼ 1. The inner product
w0~y is the portfolio-return on future investment performance. An investor will choose
a utility for wealth. This utility is denoted by a monotonically increasing, concave
function U(W;k):W ! R, where k P 0 is a fixed parameter denoting risk-aversion.
The posterior expected utility of W ¼ ð1 þ w0~yÞW 0, where W0 is initial wealth, given
the data y is:
E(U(1+wy)W0)y)=fU(1+wy)W0)(yy)dy
This expectation exists under standard regularity conditions.
The direct utility (DU) optimal portfolio model is a solution to the following
model:
Maximize E(U(1+wy)W0y);
subject to we=1;
where wRm. Typically, model (6) must be solved with a non-linear optimization
algorithm. Many standard algorithms exist, such as sequential quadratic programming
(see Gill et al., 1981, p. 237; Schittowski, 1980, 1985) as implemented in MATLAB,
enabling solutions for any utility function that is twice-continuously
differentiable. In case the expected utility is not analytically tractable, it is necessary to contemplate samples from the posterior predictive distribution that can be used to
approximate the expected utility. This is an advantage since portfolio selection can
be carried out with a general utility function. Given a sample, ~y1; . . . ; ~yK, from the
predictive posterior distribution, the direct utility portfolio selection problem (6) is
approximated by the model:
Maximize K-1(U(1+wy)W0)
subject to we=1.
For the empirical study we the use exponential utility, U(W;k) = exp[kW].
Empirical data analysis.
The daily stock market indices for 11 different countries over the period 1975 - 
2002 are used in this comparison of DU and MV using different data models. The
countries include US, UK, Canada, Belgium, Australia, France, Japan, Austria,
Spain, Germany, and Hong Kong. The indices are compiled and provided by Morgan
Stanley Capital International. Monthly returns were computed as the percentage
changes in the index between consecutive last days of the month. Morgan Stanley
Capital International provided two indices per country, one in local currency and
one in $US. Our study is based on the returns in $US.
The data are partitioned into five periods of five consecutive years. This allows a
comparison of the means, standard deviations, within-country serial correlations and
between-country correlations.
Comparison design.
To examine the performance of different models, 276 out-of-sample periods of
one months each, covering the period January 1980 - December 2002, are used. That
is, the first data set is from January 1975 - December 1979 (60 monthly observations)
and the first out of sample observation is for January 1980. Our last out-of-sample
portfolio is for December 2002. For a given model, we run the MCMC sampler independently
on 276 data sets, and use the individual posterior distributions to form the
portfolio. Our procedure can be summarized as follows:
1. Use 60 observations (initially those for months 1 - 60) to generate the joint posterior
distributions of the means and covariances (via the MCMC sampler) and, in
accordance with the decision theory rules, compute the posterior means of these
distributions.
2. For a given k, the risk-aversion parameter, find the investment proportions w.
3. Apply these proportions to the actual returns observed in the next month to
obtain the actual portfolio return for each model and value of k.
4. Roll the sample forward by one month, e.g. months 2 - 61, and repeat steps (1) - (3).
This resulted in 276 sample periods being used. A common value, k = 0.02, of the
risk-aversion parameter was used. Computational time prevented expanding the procedure
to a range of ks in this study. This is planned for future research.
Bayesian data models.
We will examine two hierarchical data models, and apply MCMC sampling to obtain
estimates of the posterior distribution of (l,R) and ~y. These estimates will then
be used to solve models (1) and (6) for MV and DU portfolios respectively.
All models, even non-Bayesian, can be specified within a hierarchical Bayesian
structure. In addition, the MCMC sampler can be used to solve even the simplest
model (while a closed-form analytical solution may exist, it may still be easier to
run the MCMC sampler to generate the posterior distributions). The following three
data models will be tested empirically.
The degrees of freedom parameter, v0, is unrestricted other than m0 P m, where m
is the number of asset, equal to 11 in this application. The values of e1 and e2 are
equal to 0.0001 allowing for a proper, diffuse hyperprior; and j0 is equal to 0.10 n
where n represents the sample size. In addition, P0 is a known correlation matrix
with structure.
In this application, the estimate of the correlation parameter q0 is 0.5.
Results.
We will employ a method of comparison based on portfolio performance. We use
the posterior means of lt and Rt as inputs to the MV framework (1); or the posterior
marginal predictive distribution as inputs to the direct utility framework (6).

</text>
