<text id="J46" category="" words="2001" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The business of food: encyclopedia of the food and drink industries" Author="Gary Allen and Ken Albala" PublicationDate="2007" SampledFrom="ebook -- Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2007.  pp. 1-6 " WebAddress="http://go.galegroup.com/ps/i.do?&id=GALE%7CCX2350400002&v=2.1&u=unilanc&it=r&p=GVRL&sw=w">

Additives
Additives are a substance or combination of substances that are mixed with food products as a result of production, processing, packaging, or storage. The total market for food additives was estimated at $4 billion in 2006 in the United States and grows at an approximate rate of 4.8 percent annually. Additives are included among ingredients for any number of reasons, ranging from improving nutritional value to enhancing quality or consumer acceptability. There are many categories of food additives, including preservatives, processing aids, coloring agents, flavorings, and nutritional supplements. There are also growing concerns over the increasing use of additives and their relation to allergic-like reactions, cancer, and other illnesses. Some additives have been banned outright due to insufficient testing or dangerous problems related to their use.
History of Additives and Legal Background
As with many other elements used in food processing, additives originate very early in human history. For example, people learned in prehistoric times that adding salt to meat would preserve it. Likewise, smoke, which also acts as a preservative, might be considered an early food additive. Over time, additives have come to thoroughly influence our eating habits, our taste preferences, and our sociocultural development.
The earliest legislation controlling the use of food additives took place in Britain in the 19th century, following the work of Frederick Accum, though its original impetus was the prevention of food adulteration. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) oversees the regulation of ingredients that can be added to food. It was not until 1958 that legislation was adopted requiring food and chemical manufacturers to test their additives before they were submitted to the FDA. Before that law, the FDA itself was responsible for testing the submitted additives. Thereafter, Congress established a Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS) list. This list recognized that many substances that had been added to food for a long time were commonly seen as safe by qualified scientists, which exempted them from premarket clearance. This list was revised in 1969 and as of 1980 contained 415 substances that were originally included in the 1958 project. Today, manufacturers are responsible for demonstrating their GRAS status and providing evidence (such as scientific literature) to support it. Approximately 100 new substances are presented to the FDA for GRAS certification every year.
Also included in 1958 law was an amendment called the Delaney Act; it stipulated that "no additives may be permitted in any amount if the tests show that it produces cancer when fed to man or animals or by other appropriate test." Many manufacturers, as well as some FDA commissioners, have criticized this amendment as being unenforceable. Instead, in 2003, the FDA adopted a "no residue" clause; this clause provided that the FDA could approve an animal feed additive or drug that induces cancer if there is "no residue" of the additive found after slaughter. The FDA maintains that the risk is slight or nonexistent if humans consume meat or drink milk from an animal with a minuscule amount of a carcinogen present.
Uses and Categories of Food Additives
Additives are used in foods for a wide array of purposes. Some of these include improving nutritional value, enhancing taste or consumer acceptability, improving storage potential, making the food more readily available, and facilitating its preparation. Food additives can be categorized by function; the main categories explored here are preservatives, appearance additives, and nutritional supplements.
Preservatives are added to food substances to slow spoilage and deterioration. Some sources estimate that there are about 100 common preservatives being used by the food industry. Preservatives are specific to the food being preserved; antioxidants are used in fatty products, for example, while breads often have "mold inhibitors." Other common multipurpose preservatives are familiar ingredients such as salt, sugar, and vinegar. All of these extend the shelf life of food products and reduce the risk of food-related disease. Some preservation techniques, such as irradiated food, aseptic processing, and microwave pasteurization, reduce the need for conventional food additives used to reduce spoilage, but their safety is sometimes debated.
Appearance additives include texturizers, coloring agents, and flavorings. These additives enhance the look, mouthfeel, or taste of foods without changing other characteristics. Texturizers are put into food products to maintain a desired texture, and sodium nitrate is used to develop and stabilize the pink color in meats. Coloring agents are used to increase attractiveness of food to consumers; foods that are frequently colored include candy, soft drinks, and dairy products such as butter, cheese, and cream. Flavoring additives are the most common type of additive approved for human consumption. Of the roughly 3,000 additives currently approved, about 2,000 are flavorings used to replace the flavors lost during processing. Hence this category of additives is used mainly to appeal to user tastes and to enhance purchasing of the target food product.
Nutritional supplements are another major type of additive. Breakfast cereals, which often make extensive nutritional claims, rely heavily on such additives. Many of the additives used are vitamins (such as vitamin C) and are intended to make the product a better source of nutrition. Other uses include moisture control, thickening, and processing aids.
To regulate all these additives, and to help consumers sort through the complex and confusing terminology, each additive is assigned a unique number. This codification (also called E numbers in Europe) is recognized internationally and is managed by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. The Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Health Organization created this commission in 1963. Its mission is to develop food standards and guidelines for identification worldwide. For example, aspartame, a popular artificial sweetener, is coded E951, while monosodium glutamate (MSG) is coded E621.
This classification identifies all existing additives, regardless of whether they are approved for use or not. Hence, an additive might be approved for use in one country but banned in another. This is why universal classification is required. In some cases, a product that is approved in some countries but not in Europe will have a unique number but no corresponding E number. For example, acetic acid, which is approved in Australia, is additive 103, but does not have an E103 number.
Additives can be either synthetic (i.e., chemically produced, artificial) or natural in origin. A 2006 study found that participants significantly preferred foods with natural additives over those with synthetic ones.
Critics and Dangers Related to Additives
Criticisms directed toward food additives are abundant. The most common criticisms focus on allergic-like reactions, carcinogenic properties, and a causal relationship to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Growing concerns have also been related to additive overuse.
Over the years, many people have reported adverse reactions to certain food additives, including aspartame and MSG. To date, no consistent pattern of symptoms can be attributed to the use of aspartame, and carefully controlled clinical studies have shown that it is not an allergen. MSG, sulfites (used as colorants), and FD&amp;C yellow #5 also cause "allergic-like" reactions but have not been given allergen status. For now, agencies require producers using these ingredients to carefully label their products while they continue monitoring the situation.
There are also concerns about food additives and cancer. A few additives have been linked to certain forms of cancer, but some scientists believe that the amount needed to cause harm is so excessive that there is no real danger; most additives that involve risk are allowed in foods only at levels less than a hundredth those at which the risk is still known to be zero. Hence, in these situations, the benefits outweigh the risks. Once the risk is too high, these additives are usually banned from use in food products.
Finally, some people think that certain food additives, especially artificial colors, can cause hyperactivity in children or may exacerbate ADHD. At the moment, there is not enough scientific evidence to support a connection between these additives and hyperactivity or ADHD in children. Research is ongoing.
Although the use of single food additives at their regulated concentrations is believed to be relatively safe, their effects when combined remain unclear. Hence, there are concerns that cytotoxicity (toxicity to the cells) might be amplified when the number of different additives consumed increase. As the number of approved additives grows, the risks of combined cytotoxicity also increases.
Moreover, some believe that if adverse reactions to additives seem statistically rare, it is only because they are underdiagnosed in part due to a low index of suspicion. But once a specific additive is identified as causing an adverse reaction, basically all its forms are avoided and consequently banned.
Advertising
More than in any other nation, American foodways have been formed and nurtured by advertising and media. The birth of the hype machine can be traced to the mid-19th century, when revolutions in transportation, settlement patterns, and cheap newsprint led to enormous changes in eating patterns. In the post-Civil War era, railroads had begun to send oranges from Florida and grain from the Midwest to the urban centers of the northern United States even as those very cities were becoming engorged from an influx of ex-farmers and immigrants. Mass-market magazines were at the ready to instruct the new urban middle classes in ways of preparing the brand-new, industrially produced foods that flooded the market.
The invention of modern advertising can largely be credited to patent medicine sellers of the Reconstruction era. They came up with all sorts of spurious and even dangerous cures for such ill-defined diseases as neuralgia and dyspepsia, which seemed epidemic in that unsettled time. To promote their nostrums, the hucksters scared their customers with "facts" almost guaranteed to induce psychosomatic symptoms, printed advertisements offering miraculous cures (showman P. T. Barnum was a one-time copywriter), enlisted celebrities as spokesmen, and sponsored traveling medicine shows where quack doctors and their accomplices testified to the efficacy of their potions. Early soft drinks were sold and marketed as patent medicines. An 1892 advertisement for Coca-Cola was typical of the genre: the carbonated potion was recommended as "the Ideal Brain Tonic for Headache &amp; Exhaustion." Coffee substitutes were originally promoted in much the same way. As late as 1951, the Federal Trade Commission was investigating the Post Company for running ads for its Postum beverage claiming that drinking coffee discourages marriage or that it results in "divorces, business failures, factory accidents, juvenile delinquency, traffic accidents, fire or home foreclosures.''
Postum, created in 1895 by Charles W. Post, was just one of many new foods concocted around the turn of the 20th century. The most notable of these were breakfast cereals like Post's own Grape-Nuts, Kellogg's Corn Flakes, and the products of the Shredded Wheat Company. Advertising was the heart and soul of the cereal business from the beginning. The pioneer in this regard was Henry Crowell of the Quaker Oats Company. He was the first to register a trademark for a cereal, in 1877, and he promoted his brand by plastering signs on barns, trains, and even the white cliffs of Dover. Crowell came up with the idea of giving away bowls and saucers as a premium. In imitation of the patent medicine sellers, his ads made various unsubstantiated medical claims. Before Crowell's campaign, oatmeal had been relatively rare in the United States, but now who could turn down a food that promised to "supply what brains and bodies need  ...  with more proteids [sic], more phosphorus, more lecithin than any other food''? A generation later, when Kellogg's Corn Flakes hit the market, the advertising onslaught only intensified. In 1912, Kellogg's erected a 50- by 106-foot sign in New York's Times Square - at that time the largest billboard in the world. In Chicago, a moving electric sign was installed atop a building at State and Adams streets. By 1942, Kellogg Company figures showed that they had spent approximately $100 million on advertising. For most of the 19th century, there was no such thing as a breakfast cereal; by the mid-20th century, 50 percent of Americans would be eating an ounce or so of it every day.

</text>
