<text id="J59" category="" words="2023" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Camera Works Photography and the Twentieth-Century Word" Author="Michael North" PublicationDate="2005 " SampledFrom="ebook -- Oxford University Press, Inc. New York pp: 35-40" WebAddress="http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/oso/private/content/literature/9780195173567/p001.html">

The influential role of Alfred Stieglitz's Camera Work in introducing modern art and literature to an American audience has been noted, studied, and celebrated for many decades now.  Despite all this attention, however, the most pertinent question has rarely been asked: why should it have been a camera magazine that played such an influential role in bringing abstract art and experimental literature from Europe to the United States? By some accounts, Stieglitz's initial interest in painting was motivated by nothing more elaborate than his fear that there was not enough good photography to fill his magazine and the gallery associated with it.  On the other hand, Stieglitz often claimed that exhibiting and printing paintings along with photographs would help define photography more precisely and make its place more secure among the arts. 3 And yet, the publications and exhibitions mounted by Stieglitz in the early years of this century are now considered most significant because of the aid they gave to a general attack on the very category of art, as if photography had somehow communicated its own equivocal status to the paintings associated with it, instead of gaining some of their artistic status for itself.
As inconsistent as they are, these various positions all share the basic assumption that photography, art, and literature are independent entities to be put in some sort of relation to one another. Perhaps, on the other hand, modern art and literature appeared in this particular camera magazine because the medium of photography itself had already brought them into a new relation. Stieglitz himself suggested something like this in 1912 when he declared to one puzzled reader that Gertrude Stein's prose portraits of Matisse and Picasso would explain

"What Picasso &amp; Co. have to do with photography."  By this he did not mean that Stein has commented in any explicit way on photography. In fact, she hardly comments in any explicit way on Picasso and Matisse. What Stieglitz may have meant instead is clarified by his editorial statement in Camera Work that Stein's prose provides "a Rosetta Stone of comparison" between the unknown visual language of the modern painters and the common tongue of the contemporary spectator.  The metaphor implies that Stein's verbal portraits of these painters "attempt to fuse word and image," as Marjorie Perloff puts it,  or perhaps that they put word and image in a mutually interpretive context, as the Rosetta Stone did in juxtaposing hieroglyphics and Greek text. But how would this explain what "Picasso &amp; Co. have to do with photography"?
What is most remarkable about Stieglitz's metaphor is that it is perhaps the very oldest to be applied to photography itself. When Francois Arago first presented the daguerreotype to the French Chamber of Deputies in 1839 he invoked the Rosetta Stone and proposed Daguerre's copper plates as superior versions of the stone tablet that had made Egyptian hieroglyphics intelligible to modern Europe.  A variation of this metaphor has become perhaps the most famous to be applied to Stieglitz's own work. As Egmont Arens put it in 1924, Stieglitz captures with his camera "a symbol which is as convincing as any brush stroke, or any arrangement of words, rhythmic or otherwise. These pictures of his are the hieroglyphics of a new speech ... "  More than fifty years later, writing of the same photographs, Rosalind Krauss is drier and more technical, but she uses the same metaphor: 
In calling this series Equivalents, Stieglitz is obviously invoking the language of symbolism, with its notions of correspondence and hieroglyph. But what is intended here is symbolism in its deepest sense, symbolism as an understanding of language as a form of radical absence - the absence, that is, of the world and its objects, supplanted by the presence of the sign.  
Krauss's purposeful invocation of the hieroglyphic metaphor of another era is a reminder that photography has always seemed to promise a new sign system, a medium neither precisely alphabetic nor pictorial.
The idea that photographs are somehow hieroglyphic was conventional even in Arens's time, and it seems quite likely that Arens would have been familiar with the most famous contemporary version of the idea, for he published poetry by its popularizer: Vachel Lindsay. The first issue of Playboy, Arens's magazine of "Art and Satire," which appeared in 1919, contained Lindsay's hymn of praise to Mary Pickford, who was one of his most cherished cinematic hieroglyphs.  The throne she uses in the 1914 film Such a Little Queen figures in the chapter entitled "Hieroglyphics" in Lindsay's pioneering book The Art of the Moving Picture, which made widely influential the idea that "American civilization grows more hieroglyphic every day."  In Lindsay's mind, and for those like D. W. Griffith who eagerly accepted his analysis, the movies revived a primitive unity of pen and brush, lost when writing split itself off from decorative painting.  The picture language Lindsay thus imagined for the screen was certainly supposed to be more direct and concrete than alphabetic writing, but it was at the same time more abstract and conventionalized than mimetic painting. Movies mattered so much to Lindsay because they brought pictures and writing into contact, to make a continuously unrolling Rosetta Stone that translated back and forth between images and linguistic constructs.
However, the most significant connection between Lindsay's polemic and Stieglitz's magazine would not become apparent until long after both men were dead. Invited out to Hollywood in the mid-1920s, Lindsay was overwhelmed by the movies he saw in production, especially Douglas Fairbanks's Thief of Bagdad, of which he wrote a lengthy analysis, delivered as lectures at the University of California, Los Angeles and then forgotten.  Lindsay found in this reworking of the Arabian Nights a self-reflexive parable of the hieroglyphic ancestry of the movies. The three treasures on which the drama turns - a magic crystal, a flying carpet, and a golden apple - are at once emblematic summaries of the conflicting aims of the characters and simultaneously shorthand symbols for the film medium itself, "a new alphabet, or a very, very old one," as he puts it.  In one sense, these treasures are instances of a kind of picture language mythologized in European accounts as old as Herodotus. In another sense, they are self-reflexive representations of the powers added to human experience by photography: the power of the crystal to see far away, of the carpet to travel to distant places, of the apple to revive the dead.
Lindsay puts special emphasis on the apple, which, together with a scepter containing a poisonous serpent, provides a perfect shorthand illustration of the "hieroglyphic method," one of the "fundamental, structural principles of the motion picture play,"  and this emphasis, quite unbeknownst to him, brings his discussion back to the hieroglyphics of Stieglitz and Camera Work. For the Court Magician, who enacts the "hieroglyphics of death" by finding the magic apple and then testing it on an innocent fisherman killed by the snaky scepter, is played
by Sadakichi Hartmann, who had published in Camera Work what is close to the earliest aesthetic appreciation of the movies to appear in the United States, preceding even Lindsay's own (fig. 2). 
After a long career spent in close association and sometime rivalry with Stieglitz, Hartmann had come to Hollywood himself, where he knew Fairbanks well enough to be offered a part in Thief of Bagdad. It is a more appropriate part than anyone involved could have known, for Hartmann, deploying his apple and scepter, becomes a kind of hieroglyph himself, which is fitting, since he had long been referring to photography as "a new kind of writing." 19 Perhaps Lindsay is so impressed by the hieroglyphic power of the apple and scepter because they are wielded by a fellow critic, one who had long since recognized in still photography the symbolic possibilities that Lindsay found so exciting in the movies.
The presence of these two figures, poet and art critic, on either side of the screen, joined together in their hieroglyphic situation, suggests how various and complex was the photographic context in which words and images met in the early years of this century. The advent of photography as a representational medium inevitably altered the relation of the visual arts to language, sending Lindsay back to ancient times for an analogue to this new situation in which the two seemed to merge. The arrival of moving photographs as the single most influential mass medium of the modern age also altered the relation of art to its audience, in so fundamental a way that understanding the new relation became one of the defining tasks of modernism. Camera Work achieved the iconic position it still enjoys not just because it published Picasso, Matisse, and Stein but also because, as a magazine devoted to photography, it offered a conceptual space in which the relations between them could be realized, in polemics and in works of art. Though it is impossible to take literally the idea that photography is hieroglyphic, the insistence that it is represents the radical change it brought to the relation between language and image, a change that Camera Work helped to advance in a number of ways, some of them hidden even from Stieglitz himself.
Throughout his long career, in all his publications and at each of the several galleries he directed, Stieglitz tirelessly sought to clarify and solidify the status of photography, first in relation to the other arts and then in relation to its audience. It is all the more remarkable, then, that his ideas on both of these relations should have been so inconsistent and so poorly defined. Perhaps this very vagueness was the source of his 
influence, however, for it reflected what was truly exciting about photography in the early years of the twentieth century, that it could not be easily inserted into the traditional economy of the arts, that it was modern in a very basic sense, since it demonstrated how new inventions could require a wholesale reorganization of the artistic and cultural apparatus. That Stieglitz had no idea what that reorganization would look like did not prevent him from becoming indispensable to its beginnings.
Perhaps the simplest and most straightforward of all the positions taken in Camera Work on the aesthetic and representational nature of photography is that which also conflicts absolutely with Lindsay's notion that it is essentially hieroglyphic. When Roland Rood insists, in the very title of his 1905 article, on "The Evolution of Art from Writing to Photography," he means to put photography at the furthest remove from writing, at the very end of an inevitable evolutionary process that has faithful mimesis as its goal. Rood agrees with Lindsay that in ancient times art was barely distinguishable from writing, but he insists that as humanity developed it left behind the schematic, conventional representations of its infancy for faithful reproductions of the actual sensuous qualities of things. Photography, since it most fully and faithfully reproduces these qualities, stands at the pinnacle of human aesthetic evolution: "it can not possibly be denied by anyone who has studied the evolution of the art of any country, that this evolution unfolds itself in but one manner: from literature (picture-writing) at the one end, to full tonality (photography) at the modern (more civilized) end."  It is hard to imagine from this account how Camera Work could have helped anyone to discover modern literature, because for Rood literature is by definition primitive, even savage, while all good modern art strives toward a "non-literary, non-savage, photographic quality."  
Rood's is an extreme and somewhat eccentric version of a common, obvious, and straightforward opinion about art, which was especially congenial to photographic polemicists at this time because it made all art essentially photographic. As Charles Caffin put it in 1908, "the point of view of all painters who affect truth to nature is photographic and has always been so." 
Caffin is certainly aware that there have always been painters who do not "affect truth to nature," but these, in such accounts, are held to be sports and side shoots, deviations from the essential development of art toward complete mimesis, which is often thought to have brought photography into being.

</text>
