<text id="J63" category="" words="2003" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Critical thinking and informal logic " Author="Crews-Anderson, Timothy A. " PublicationDate="Tirril, Penrith : Humanities-Ebooks, 2007. " SampledFrom="e-book" WebAddress="http://lib.myilibrary.com/Open.aspx?id=204061&loc=&srch=undefined&src=0">

Introduction: Thinking Skilfully.
Try for a moment to imagine a field of human endeavour that does not require reasoning. This is likely to be impossible as there is little that human beings do that does not involve our ability to think. Many philosophers over the years have postulated that if there is anything essential to the human being, it is the capacity for reason. Indeed, thought is so fundamental to the human experience that it is only rarely that one is without it. The operations of the mind come so naturally and so easily that one scarcely realizes that they are going on. It is perhaps for this reason that the notion of thinking skilfully may seem strange. The goal of this book is to consider thought as an activity, as an act or series of acts that a person deliberately, intentionally and wilfully undertakes. In simpler terms, the present purpose is to think about thinking. Close attention will be paid to the process of thought with the aim of evaluating reasoning and cultivating good thinking skills. This project falls within the confines of logic , which is the branch of philosophy that studies the reasoning process and seeks to understand the differences between good and bad reasoning . Human beings naturally reason well when they take the time to do so, and if their attention is properly directed, they are, in the vast majority of cases, capable of great insight. If there is one fundamental difference between a person who is an incisive critical thinker and one who is not, it is that the critical thinker takes the process of thinking seriously, consciously attends to that process and asks the right questions. The focus, therefore, will be on the concerns that one should keep in the forefront of the mind and on which questions should be asked. It is also worth noting that this book does not introduce much that the average person does not already do. Everyone has carried out all of the described reasoning activities countless times. What the book offers is a careful cataloguing of the various types of reasoning with a discussion of which of them are reliable and which are not. It is, in a sense, a guided tour of the human capacity for reasoning along with instructions for its use. With most human activities the development of skills does not come without practice, and it is no different with thinking. It is probably unreasonable to expect them to come easily, but it is almost certain that time and effort will pay a hefty dividend. Considering the length of this book, its scope is perhaps somewhat larger than it should be. The idea is to present the basics of critical thinking and informal logic and to point the way towards further study, so it is perhaps best to consider the book as a primer. It will provide a solid introduction to the fundamental concepts and considerations as well as links to other resources on the web and in print.
Chapter 1: The Basics.
Before delving into definitions of the basic elements of critical thinking, a brief overview of the structure of these elements will perhaps be helpful. The discussion offered in this book will focus primarily on the argument , which itself consists of at least two propositions . All arguments are either deductive or inductive , and an understanding of this distinction is required for criticism. The success of deductive arguments is evaluated in terms of what philosophers call validity and soundness , while inductive arguments are rated along a spectrum from weak to strong. Many of these words are familiar to most, but it is likely that they are associated with a number of different possible meanings. To remove these potential ambiguities, precise definitions will be introduced. The importance of a thorough familiarity with these concepts cannot be overstated.
Propositions.
The precise nature of propositions is a matter of some philosophical debate, but for present purposes, it will suffice to define a proposition as a claim or assertion that affirms or denies that something is the case . All propositions are either true or false, and no proposition can be both true and false. Furthermore, they are the only sort of thing that can properly be called true or false. Put simply, propositions are the sole bearers of truth and falsehood, and as will become clear shortly, this feature is of crucial importance for identifying them in ordinary language. Here are some examples of propositions.
All triangles have three sides. 
Either George W. Bush won the U.S. election, or John Kerry won it. 
People ought not to lie.
If today is Wednesday, then tomorrow is Thursday. 
All circles are squares. 
The majority of propositions that one encounters come in the form of a declarative sentence, but it is important to note that a proposition is not identical to the sentence that expresses it. A proposition is that to which a declarative sentence refers. For this reason, multiple sentences may express or refer to the same proposition. George W. Bush won the U.S. election. The U.S. election was won by George W. Bush. George W. Bush was the winner of the U.S. election. It is perhaps helpful to think of a declarative sentence as pointing to a kind of abstract object. It is this sort of object that philosophers have termed a proposition. Non-propositional language: exclamations, commands, and questions There are many uses of language that do not express propositions. As noted above, all propositions are either true or false, so whether a particular phrase or sentence can be considered to be true or false will determine if it indeed expresses a proposition. Consider the following.
What are we doing here? To decide whether this question expresses a proposition, simply ask whether it makes sense to say that, 'what are we doing here?' is either true or false. Clearly it does not, and just as clearly this sentence does not express a proposition. Another tactic is to add, 'It is the case that...' in front of the phrase in question and consider whether this new construction makes sense. If it does, then it is very likely that the phrase expresses a proposition. If it does not, then it is likely a non-propositional use of language. Consider. It is the case that, 'what are we doing here.' This is, of course, nonsensical. By contrast, consider the following propositions.
It is the case that, 'all triangles have three sides.' It is the case that, 'either George W. Bush won the U.S. election, or John Kerry won it. 'It is the case that,' people ought not to lie.' It is the case that, 'if today is Wednesday, then tomorrow is Thursday.' The concern here is not whether the constructed sentence is true or false but whether it makes sense. Consider a false proposition. It is the case that, 'all circles are squares.' Obviously this claim is false, but it does make sense, and thus the phrase 'all circles are squares' expresses a proposition. Other non-propositional uses of language include commands and exclamations. Go to bed. Oh, no! A quick consideration of each of these constructions reveals that they are neither true nor false and thus do not express propositions. Note that the following do not make sense.

It is the case that, 'go to bed.' 
It is the case that, 'oh, no!' 

This provides the basis for a general rule. Questions, commands, and exclama- tions do not express propositions . They are non-propositional uses of language. Questions of interpretation: rhetorical questions as assertions and commands as normative claims It should not come as a surprise that there are exceptions to this rule. In some cases certain questions or commands can be interpreted as actually expressing propositional language. A rhetorical question is a question that is meant to have an obvious answer and can be interpreted and reformulated as a declarative sentence that expresses a proposition . Consider the meaning of the question 'who won the 2007 election?' in the following.
Marie: I think it is clear that France is moving to the right politically. Thomas: I'm not so sure. Marie: And who won the 2007 election? Thomas: It's a good point, but I am still not entirely convinced. In this dialogue, Marie is not really wondering who won the French election in 2007. She is, rather, asking a question that is entirely rhetorical. The meaning of this phrase should be interpreted as 'Nicolas Sarkozy won the 2007 French election' which is clearly a propositional use of language. Like rhetorical questions, it is sometimes possible to interpret and reformu- late a command as a proposition. Consider. Don't lie. In some contexts, this command is simply a non-propositional command that is neither true nor false. In others, however, it can be interpreted as a normative claim that contains 'ought' or 'should.' If this is the case, then it can be refor- mulated as one of the following declarative sentences, both of which express a proposition. You should not lie. You ought not to lie.
Unfortunately, the correct interpretation of language is seldom a straight-forward task. It requires constant and careful thought about what the author or speaker actually means. Rhetorical questions and commands that express normative claims are fairly common, and when critically analyzing an argument, it is important to recognize them and to reformulate them as clear and concise declarative sentences. Simple and compound propositions A simple proposition makes only one claim or assertion , and a compound proposition contains two or more simple propositions . There are three distinct types of compound propositions, and it is important both to recognize them and to understand the conditions under which they are true or false (truth conditions).
The first type is a conjunctive proposition, which consists of two or more simple propositions that are connected by the conjunctions 'and' or 'but.' While these two words carry somewhat different connotations, they have the same truth value, so for present purposes, they will be treated as synonyms. Here are some examples of conjunctive propositions. Nicolas Sarkozy won the French election, and Segolene Royal lost. All triangles have three sides, and all circles are squares, but all squares have four sides. A conjunctive proposition asserts each of its simple parts, so such propositions are true just in case all of the simple propositions that it contains are themselves true. If one or more of the constitutive simple propositions is false, then the entire conjunctive proposition is false. The first example above is true because both simple propositions are, in fact, true claims. With respect to the second, while it is the case that all triangles have three sides and that all squares have four, it is not the case that all circles are squares. Thus, the second example is false.
Disjunctive propositions. 
The second type of compound proposition is a disjunctive proposition . Such propositions contain two or more propositions that are connected by 'or.' There are actually two possible meanings of the word 'or' and for reasons that will become clear later, it is important to carefully distinguish between the two. The 'inclusive or' means 'one or the other or both' while the 'exclusive or' means 'one or the other but not both.' In this book, the inclusive meaning will be assumed, and any use of the exclusive will be noted. Following are some examples of disjunctive propositions. Either George W. Bush won the US election, or John Kerry won it. Either George W. Bush is the US President, or Nicolas Sarkozy is the French President. All circles are squares, or all triangles have three sides. A disjunctive proposition is false if and only if all of the constitutive simple propositions are false. If one or more of them are true, then the entire disjunctive proposition is true. Consider now an implication of these truth conditions.
Assume that the following disjunctive proposition is true. 
All gadgets are widgets, or all widgets are sprockets.

</text>
