<text id="J71" category="" words="2003" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Zonal Ship Design" Author="Capt. Norbert Doerry" PublicationDate="WINTER 2006" SampledFrom="Naval Engineers JournalVolume 118, Issue 1, p. 39-43 " WebAddress="http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1559-3584.2006.tb00407.x/pdf">

Modern ships typically have a number of distributed systems. Distributed systems are used because it's simpler, cheaper, and better to centrally produce a commodity such as electricity or chill water, than to locally produce it with the users of the commodity. For naval warships, in addition to cost, two measures of performance are very important: Survivability and quality of service. Survivability relates to the ability of the distributed system, even when potentially damaged by a threat, to support the ship's ability to continue fulfilling its missions to the degree planned for the particular threat. Quality of service measures the ability of the distributed systems to support the normal, undamaged operation of its loads. This paper defines a number of key terms, details a number of different zonal architectures, describes the situations where the architectures are best suited and proposes a framework for zonal ship design that promises to satisfy survivability performance requirements and quality of service requirements.
Introduction.
The advantages of zonal systems design have
long been recognized and documented (Petry and
Rumburg 1993), (Shiffler 1993). Since then, zonal
a.c. electrical distribution systems have been used
in the DDG 51 class, LPD 17 class, and LHD 8.
The next advance in zonal electrical distribution,
integrated fight through power (IFTP) featuring
d.c. zonal electrical distribution is being developed
for the Navy and is a candidate for future
installation on DD(X) and CG(X). (Ciezki and
Ashton 1999), (Roberts 2002), (Hiller 2003),
(Walsh 2003), (Zgliczynski et al. 2004)
To date, zonal design concepts have been applied
to distributed systems (usually just the electrical
system) in an ad hoc fashion. A systematic study
of zonal architectures has not been published.
Likewise, the impact of zonal system design
on total ship design has not been adequately
addressed. This paper defines a number of
key terms, details a number of different zonal
architectures, describes the situations where
the architectures are best suited and proposes a
framework for zonal ship design that promises
to satisfy survivability performance requirements
and quality of service requirements.
Background.
Modern ships typically have a number of distributed
systems. Distributed systems are used
because it's simpler, cheaper, and better to centrally
produce a commodity such as electricity
or chill water, than to locally produce it with the
users of the commodity. For naval warships, two
measures of performance are very important:
survivability and quality of service.
Survivability relates to the ability of the distributed
system, even when potentially damaged by
a threat, to support the ship's ability to continue
fulfilling its missions to the degree planned for
the particular threat. The threats for which a
ship is designed to are its design threats, and the
residual capability following exposure to the
design threats is the design threat outcome.
While survivability measures the ability of the
ship to continue to function during damage,
quality of service measures the ability of the distributed systems to support the normal, undamaged
operation of its loads. Quality of service
is measured in terms of a mean time between
failure (MTBF) where a failure is defined as any
interruption in the supply or deviations outside
of normal bounds of commodity characteristics
that prevent the load from performing its assigned
function.
Although survivability and quality of service are
usually not the source of design conflicts, design
features may impact one more than the other.
For example, the routing of cables in an electrical
distribution plant will have little impact on
quality of service, but will have a tremendous
impact on survivability. On the other hand, the
reliability of generator sets has a bigger impact
on quality of service than on survivability.
In the design of distributed systems, cost is always
a major consideration. Because the relative
costs and capabilities of different distributive
system components differ from system to system,
a universal zonal design that applies to all cases
does not exist. In selecting an architecture, the
following strategies for reducing acquisition
costs (while still meeting performance requirements)
should be considered:
a. Eliminate hardware and software
b. Substitute expensive hardware and software
with cheaper hardware and software. This includes
increasing cost and capability of device
A to enable the reduction in cost and capability
of device B as long as there is a net savings.
c. Enable the hardware to be installed more
easily
d. Enable the hardware to be tested before
installation onboard ship
e. Reduce the engineering effort needed to design
the ship
Because this paper does not address specific distributed
systems, these cost reduction strategies
will be addressed only in general terms.
Definitions.
Zone.
A zone is a geographic region of ship. In a general
sense, the boundaries of the zone can be arbitrary,
but to maximize survivability, the zones of
multiple distributed systems as well as damage
control zones should be aligned. For shipboard
distributed systems, this typically means the zone
boundaries are the exterior skin of the ship and
selected transverse watertight bulkheads. The
zone boundaries may rise above the watertight
bulkheads into the superstructure, or the superstructure
may be composed of one or more zones
independent of the zones within the hull.
Adjacen t Zones.
Adjacent Zones are zones that could simultaneously
be damaged by a design threat. Zones
are typically sized so that usually only 2 zones
are simultaneously damaged by a design threat,
although in some cases a third zone (such as the
superstructure) may also be damaged.
Zona l Survivability.
For a distributed system, zonal survivability is the
ability of the distributed system, when experiencing
internal faults because of damage or equipment
failure confined to adjacent zones, to ensure
loads in undamaged zones do not experience a
service interruption. Zonal survivability assures
damage does not propagate outside the adjacent
zones in which damage is experienced. For many
distributed system designs, zonal survivability
requires that at least one longitudinal bus remains
serviceable, even through damaged zones.
At the ship level, zonal survivability facilitates
the ship, when experiencing internal faults in
adjacent zones due to design threats, to maintain
or restore the ships primary missions as required
by the design threat outcome. Ship level zonal
survivability focuses restoration efforts on the
damaged zones, simplifying the efforts required
of the ship's crew to maintain situational awareness
and take appropriate restorative actions.
Ship level zonal survivability requires sufficient
damage control features to prevent the spreading
of damage via fire or flooding to zones that were
not initially damaged.
Compartment Survivability.
Zonal survivability only addresses loads outside
of the damaged adjacent zones. For some
important loads, including those implementing
mission systems, providing redundant capability
across multiple non-adjacent zones may prove
to be infeasible. This situation often arises in the
superstructure where the sensor masts are located
in the same or adjacent zones. In some cases,
these loads may be perfectly functional although
damage has reached into its zone. Likewise, maximizing
the probability of maintaining loads that
support damage control efforts within the damaged
adjacent zones also assists in preventing the
spread of damage to zones not initially impacted.
Examples of such loads include emergency lighting
and power receptacles for portable dewatering
pumps. In these cases, providing compartment
survivability for the distributed systems for the
specific loads is warranted.
Compartment survivability requires that every
distributed system required by a specific load
provide independent normal and alternate sources
of its commodity (power, cooling water, etc.). For
the specific design threat, one of the sources of the
commodity should be expected to survive if the
specific load is expected to survive. The point at
which the in zone distribution of the commodity
merge (such as with an automatic bus transfer
- ABT) from the normal and alternate sources
should be within 1/2 of the expected damage
radius of damage centered at the specific load.
Mission System,
A mission system consists of the hardware and
software dedicated to the performance of a primary
or secondary mission of the ship. Examples
of mission systems include aircraft launch
and recovery equipment (ALRE), propulsion
systems, combat systems, and C4ISR systems.
Ideally, the mission systems of a ship should be
designed such that the capability to perform
the ship's missions is not lost if mission system
equipment in adjacent zones are not operational.
Unfortunately, ship design constraints will often
preclude the level of redundancy required to ensure
continuous capability. If mission capability
can not be assured continuously, then the ability
to restore capability to achieve the desired threat
outcome must be provided.
Distributed System.
A distributed system moves a commodity
from one or more sources to multiple loads
distributed through-out the ship. Examples of
commodities include electrical power, cooling
water, firefighting water, and fuel. For a given
commodity, distributed systems can generally
be described by an architecture consisting of the
following functional elements:
Generation.
A generation element produces the commodity.
Examples include gas turbine generator sets,
firepumps, and chill water plants. Generation
elements for one distributed system are generally
loads for other distributed systems.
Distribution.
A distribution element transports the commodity
between other functional elements. For zonal
distribution systems, the longitudinal buses are
instances of distribution functional elements.
Conversion.
A conversion element converts the commodity
from one form to another. An example of a conversion
element is a transformer in an electrical
system. A transformer changes the voltage level
of its commodity, electrical power.
Load.
A load is a consumer of the commodity. A load
for one distributed system can be a generation
element for another distributed system. For example,
a chill water plant is a load to the electrical
distribution system and a generation element
for the chill water distribution system.
Storage.
A storage element stores the commodity for
later use. In some systems, such as fuel systems,
storage elements (fuel tanks) functionally replace
generation elements. In other systems, such as
electrical systems, storage elements (uninterruptible
power supplies) serve as buffers to prevent
power disturbances from propagating to loads.
Control.
A control element coordinates the other elements
of a distributed system to enhance quality of
service and to facilitate the restoration of service
following a casualty. For new designs, the control
element typically consists of software that resides
within the total ship computing environment.
For an example of this architecture as applied
to an integrated power system, see Doerry and
Davis (1994) and Doerry et al. (1996).
Design Threat.
A design threat is a threat to the ship where a
design threat outcome has been defined. Examples
of design threats could be specific cruise
missiles, torpedoes, guns, explosives, weapons
of mass destruction as well as accidents such as
main space fires, helicopter crashes, collisions,
and groundings.
Design Threat Outcome.
The design threat outcome is the acceptable performance
of the ship in terms of the aggregate of
susceptibility, vulnerability, and recoverability,
when exposed to a design threat. Possible design
threat outcomes include:
a. Ship will likely be lost with the loss of over
25% of embarked personnel.
b. Ship will likely be lost with the loss of 25% or
under of embarked personnel.
c. Ship will likely remain afloat and not be capable
of performing one or more primary mission
areas for a period of time exceeding one day.
d. Ship will likely remain afloat and be capable
of performing all of its primary mission areas
following restoration efforts not exceeding
one day using only that external assistance
that is likely available within the projected
operating environment.
e. Ship will likely remain afloat and be capable
of performing all of its primary mission areas
following restoration efforts not exceeding
two hours using only organic assets.
f. Ship will likely remain afloat and would be
capable of performing all of its primary mission
areas following restoration efforts (if needed) not
exceeding two minutes using only organic assets.
g. Ship will likely remain afloat and would likely
be capable of performing all of its primary
mission areas without interruption.
h. The threat weapon is not considered a significant
threat because the probability that
the threat weapon would have been defeated
before striking the ship is greater than 98%.
Note: The term "likely" should be assigned a
specific probability of occurrence.

</text>
