<text id="J76" category="" words="2001" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Dictatorship of the air: aviation culture and the fate of modern Russia" Author="Scott W. Palmer" PublicationDate="2007 Cambridge University Press.  Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo" SampledFrom="ebook" WebAddress="http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=acls;idno=heb90033.0001.001;rgn=div1;view=text;cc=acls;node=heb90033.0001.001%3A1">

Imperial Aviation, 1909 - 1917
The Dawn of Russian Aviation
Tsars of the air in the land of the Tsars [para. 24-38]  
From the Russian State Duma, 22 February 1910:

At a time when every country has flown by airplane and when private enterprise has taken part in [developing aviation] what have we done in Russia? Not a single one of our nation's people has flown, and yet police laws against the use of airplanes already exist and aviation is already under police surveillance. 

 -  Vasilii Maklakov, Duma Deputy

Duma member Maklakov is indignant that no one in Russia has flown and yet laws governing aviation have already been established. What is so bad about that? We all understand that before we can allow people to fly, we must first teach the police to fly after them. [Applause from the right, laughter from all benches]

 -  Nikolai Mar'kov, Duma Deputy

On the morning of 25 July 1909, Louis Blériot piloted a twenty-four-and-a-half-horsepower Blériot XI monoplane across the English Channel from Baraques, France, toward the Shakespeare Cliff just west of Dover, England. The thirty-six-and-a-half-minute flight was not easy. Blériot's "heavier-than-air" craft was just barely so, and the wooden and canvas structure was continually buffeted by the strong air currents that swirled across the Channel. Wrestling to maintain control of his plane as it shuddered and swayed over the surface of the water, Blériot challenged his aircraft (and the force of gravity) in an attempt to bridge the narrow divide that separated England from the Continental mainland.
 
Blériot was not the first pilot to undertake this feat. Emboldened by a £1,000 prize offered by London's Daily Mail, numerous fliers had made public their intentions to become the first individual to achieve the Channel crossing. The most recent attempt had taken place six days earlier. It ended in near tragedy when an Antoinette IV flown by Englishman Hubert Latham experienced mechanical failure and plunged some 300 feet into the waters below. Miraculously, Latham survived with only minor injuries. Although he vowed to renew his efforts as soon as he could obtain a new aircraft, fate smiled on the Frenchman.
 
After crash-landing in a field not far from Dover Castle, Blériot was treated to a hero's welcome. Hastily assembled and well-attended receptions in London and then Paris celebrated the "miraculous flight" of the "aviator - genius" as both British and French public opinion succumbed to an air-minded delirium. For weeks, French newspapers trumpeted Blériot's exploit as "a great French victory" and compared the "conqueror of the English Channel" to such cultural icons as Lavoisier, Pasteur, and Curie. Paris was "seized by a violent attack of Blériot fever." Captivated by "the most magnificent enterprise a century had ever seen," one daily proclaimed Blériot's flight an expression of the "imperishable genius" of the French race. The Times of London was more reserved. While acknowledging the "merit" of the "plucky" Frenchman's flight, the paper observed that Blériot "had been, so to speak, shown the way by Latham." Without the example set by the English flier, the Times suggested, the French aeronaut would never have met with success. Even so, the glory belonged to Blériot.
The feverish excitement that gripped England and France quickly spread to Russia. For weeks the St. Petersburg and Moscow press had paid only passing attention to the race for the Channel, but with word of Blériot's accomplishment the nation's newspapers rushed to cover the historic event. Reporters sent daily telegrams from London and Paris recounting details of the flight and the countless receptions held in honor of the aviator. As exhilarated newsmen proclaimed the triumph of the "Tsar of the Air," it became increasingly obvious that Blériot's flight had "opened a new chapter in the annals of human history." No less so than the British or French, the Russian press acclaimed Blériot's achievement as an adventure of the ages.
 
The enthusiastic response to Blériot's exploit was only the most recent expression of the nation's long-standing curiosity with technologies of flight. As early as the reign of Catherine II (1762 - 96), Russian observers had looked with considerable interest at Western European aeronautical advances. While the brothers étienne and Joseph Montgolfier entertained French crowds with demonstrations of their machine aérostatique during the summer and fall of 1783, tsarist officials stationed in Paris speculated on the political and commercial revolutions that might result once aerial travel became a practical reality. Inspired by the Montgolfiers' example and informed through lectures organized by visiting French and German scientists, Russian inventors undertook their own experiments, successfully launching a small unmanned hot-air balloon in St. Petersburg in November 1783. Although this first effort to duplicate European successes produced no new scientific advances, it testified to Russians' clear desire to participate in the emerging new field.

Russian interest in things aeronautical was not confined to scientists and statesmen. In the years that followed the Montgolfiers' first ascent, thousands [Page 13] turned out to witness the wonders of ballooning as touring exhibits were undertaken by Frenchmen Jean-Pierre Blanchard and Jacques Garnerin, who performed manned and unmanned launches in St. Petersburg and Moscow. Accompanying the arrival of the foreign aeronauts, publishers edified and entertained Russia's small reading public with treatises, poems, and stories dedicated to aeronautical themes. Although most of these were reproductions of recently published European texts, a few were original Russian compositions. Typical was the 1787 short story "Arrival of an Air-Balloon in Olympus," which recounted the collective effort of a group of aeronauts to ascend into the heavens by means of a balloon. Affronted by the humans' impudence, Jupiter prepares to strike them down with bolts of lighting only to be dissuaded by his daughter, the goddess Minerva. In the end, the aeronauts reach the heights of Mount Olympus, where they are feted by the gods and proclaimed the "new Argonauts." The convergence of public spectacle and popular fiction, together with the production of imported stage pieces like the German opera Die Lufte-Bälle, would lead one contemporary to conclude that, by 1805, aeronautics had become all the rage in the Imperial capital.

As was true in the West, lighter-than-air travel was a recurrent (if not necessarily predominant) preoccupation of Russian scientists and state officials throughout the nineteenth century. Unfortunately, hampered by the nation's nonexistent industrial base and the inherent limitations of the technology itself, early Russian efforts to develop practical devices for commercial and military applications fell far short of their lofty goals. By the 1860s, however, as advances in textile manufacturing and the production of hydrogen made aerostats more reliable and effective, Russian officials began to devote more attention to aeronautics. Intrigued by the appearance of tethered balloons during the American Civil War and the Franco - Prussian War, the Russian War Ministry established a series of commissions to explore the systematic use of lighter-than-air craft in battle. Within a generation these commissions had produced tangible results. In 1890 an Aeronautical Training Park was established in St. Petersburg, and manned balloons were used by the Imperial armed forces to conduct aerial reconnaissance during the Russo - Japanese War (1904 - 5).

The institutionalization of Russian aeronautics at the end of the nineteenth century meant that by the summer of 1909 residents of Russia's urban centers, like their Western European counterparts, were already familiar with the new language of flight. Still, the popular excitement generated by news of Blériot's exploit was unprecedented. As the nation's newspapers raced to keep track of the most recent developments, even casual readers in St. Petersburg or Moscow could not help but be informed of the changes taking place in the "century of speed." From regular features discussing the potential profits (and possible perils) associated with the art of flying to documentary reports on the latest technical innovations and fanciful essays on the future of flight, the nation's press devoted increasing coverage to the battles being waged for the "conquest of the air." In response to the overwhelming demand for more information on the science of aviation, one major daily inaugurated a weekly column titled "Aeronautical Mail-Pouch" in which a resident aviation expert answered questions sent in by curious readers. For months queries poured in from all over the Empire, requesting definitions of general terminology, explanations of specific technical problems, and clarifications concerning current world aeronautical records. The paper even received an appeal from a peasant of Novgorod province, who wrote to request technical assistance for the flying machine that he was constructing. Unfortunately, the imprecise and muddled descriptions sent in by the half-literate peasant prevented the paper's specialist from providing the finishing formulae for what might otherwise have been a native Russian airplane.


The outbreak of Russia's air-minded delirium was not confined to the reading public. Vacationing in southwestern France at the time of the Channel crossing, Grand Duke Aleksandr Mikhailovich hailed the flight as an "epochal event." After telegraphing congratulations to Blériot, he sent a hastily written letter to the editors of leading Russian newspapers requesting their support in establishing a public subscription for the construction of a national air fleet. Convinced that the airplane was the weapon of the future, the grand duke would labor unceasingly for this new-found cause. Ultimately, he became the central patron of Imperial aviation. Similarly, one newly appointed member of the War Ministry, General Bren, proclaimed his own optimistic faith that aviation would quickly develop into a useful  military resource. Interviewed shortly after the flight, Bren announced his certain belief that the airplane represented the future. Much more so than the dirigible, he noted, "the airplane promises possible service to the army as it is less vulnerable, faster, and less expensive to build." As testament to his faith in the latest technology, the minister concluded his commentary with assurances that "once they are produced in sufficient numbers, [our] army will be well equipped with airplanes. I am a man of progress."

The progressive faith in the promise of flight revealed in the responses of the grand duke and the minister was not shared by every member of the Imperial state service. Less than a week after Blériot's flight, the Russian secret police [Okhrana] took decisive steps to forestall the introduction of flying machines into the land of the tsars. "With the goal of hindering criminal elements from accomplishing their projects with the aid of aeronautical devices," the Department of Police instructed the nation's border guards "to maintain strict surveillance in preventing the importation of aeronautical machines and their parts across the frontiers of the Russian Empire." Fearful that airplanes might be employed by revolutionaries to wage a campaign of terror against the state and its representatives, the Okhrana established a "Special Commission on the Means of Battling the Possible Implementation of Criminal Designs With the Assistance of Aeronautical Machines." The Commission convened a series of meetings during the late summer of 1909 to familiarize members of the Interior and the War Ministries with recent advances in aeronautical technology and to design a comprehensive policy for thwarting airborne crimes. Although the ban on the importation of airplanes to Russia was later overturned by the Ministry of Finance, the police did succeed in establishing a series of covert measures designed to restrict and control the Russian public's access to aeronautical technology. Among the more notable policies adopted by the state were instructions requiring all aeronautical clubs to register with police authorities in order that their members and airships might be more easily tracked. In addition, broad directives were issued to local gendarmes instructing them to "strictly monitor all flights as well as aviators and those attempting to learn to fly" within their jurisdictions. Similar commands were sent to the tsar's foreign agents, who were ordered to compile dossiers on the activities of European air clubs, especially those believed to possess ties to revolutionary organizations in Russia. The state's determination to impose control over private aviation was made further evident in late July 1909, when the secret police banned a newspaper advertisement that promised to deliver Blériot monoplanes ("the same plane that flew the Channel") for 5,000 rubles each to Petersburg purchasers.

</text>
