<text id="J80" category="" words="2001" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="BIOLOGICAL INVASIONS: RECOMMENDATIONS FOR U.S. POLICY AND MANAGEMENT" Author="DAVID M. LODGE" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Ecological Applications" WebAddress="http://www.esajournals.org/toc/ecap/16/6">

Invasions by nonindigenous species are a growing global problem, costing U.S. taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars annually in environmental degradation,
lost agricultural productivity, expensive prevention and eradication efforts, and increased health problems (Vitousek et al. 1996, Mack et al. 2000, Sala et al. 2000,
Mooney et al. 2005). The only study to attempt a nationwide estimate of the economic costs to the United States of nonindigenous species concluded that annual
costs exceed $120 billion (Pimentel et al. 2005) or about $1100 per household annually. While Pimentel et al. (2005) did not account for the economic benefits that
some of the species provide, they also examined only a small subset of harmful species, and did not include many environmental damages caused by the species that were examined. Including these other factors would likely mean that the net costs of invasive species are much higher, and they are clearly growing.
Zebra mussels alone cost each infested large power plant $3 million annually (Leung et al. 2002), and are still spreading throughout the waterways of the United States
(Drake and Bossenbroek 2004). In two Californian lagoons, more than $5 million were spent in the first three years of an on-going eradication program for the seaweed Caulerpa taxifolia. At least $3 million annually are spent
in Florida to control the Australian melaleuca tree (Melaleuca quinquenervia; Pimentel et al. 2005). These and many other expenditures occur because the damages that result from inaction are more costly. Without management, the populations of these species grow and spread so that damages accelerate over time. In contrast to many other forms of pollution, such widespread invasions become irreversible because often the technology does not exist to selectively eradicate species. Relative to the economic and ecological costs of other forms of environmental pollution, the costs of nonindigenous species are therefore of particular concern because they are likely to be borne over very long time frames.
Many long-term changes in ecosystems and the goods and services that they provide to humans are driven by nonindigenous species, including, for example, degradation of U.S. western rangeland and increased fire damage caused by the widespread invasion by Bromus tectorum (cheatgrass; Grace et al. 2001). Some nonindigenous species were introduced intentionally and continue to be highly valued by humans, e.g., agriculture and aquaculture species. Many other species, e.g., West Nile virus, were introduced as by-products of human travel and international commerce, have no utility for humans, and have strong net negative impacts on the environment, industry, and human health.
We highlight in this report the policy and management recommendations that follow logically from recent scientific and technical advances in our understanding of biological invasions (Table 1). These recommendations are especially timely because U.S. state and federal agencies are developing new approaches to reduce the negative environmental, economic, and human-health impacts of nonindigenous species. The National Invasive Species Council (NISC), advised by the Invasive
Species Advisory Committee (ISAC), published the first edition of a National Management Plan (NMP) for invasive species in January 2001 (available online).Our
recommendations are consistent with the NMP, but we emphasize some priorities among its many recommendations.
The science of ecology and the expertise within the Ecological Society of America, in particular, can offer much guidance in the implementation of the NMP's goals at state, federal, and international levels. In this paper we focus on recommendations that require U.S. federal leadership to better coordinate international, federal, state, and local governmental responses.
Definitions 
A potentially confusing set of terms has developed around biological invasions. In this report, nonindigenous means a species that by human influence occurs
outside its native range. Synonyms include ''nonnative,'' ''alien,'' and ''exotic''; alien is the term used in the NMP and in many discussions involving U.S. federal agencies (see footnote 14). Species that spread widely beyond the location of initial establishment, become locally abundant, or spread into natural areas, are
referred to as invasive. Clearly, then, the definition of ''invasive'' depends on time and spatial scale, which must therefore be specified.
In many policy and legal documents in the United States and other countries, another component is added to the definition of invasive: the species causes or is
likely to cause net harm to the economy, environment, or human health. The definition of ''harm'' is a function of human values, which often differ in different regions, and may change temporally. Overall then, scientists
can - with specified temporal and spatial scales - define nonindigenous status and spread, and can describe the loss of native species and other ecological changes
caused by nonindigenous species. However, deciding whether such ecological changes or impacts on industry or human health constitute net harm requires additional input through a broader democratic process that
includes economists, public-health experts, and ecologists (National Research Council 1996, Hayes and Sliwa 2002, Lodge and Shrader-Frechette 2003, Andow 2004, Drake and Keller 2004).
While some species native to a given region are invasive (Van Auken 2000), these species are not the focus of current policy discussions, and not the topic of this report. Thus, we focus in this report on the subset of nonindigenous species that are invasive; that is, we focus on invasive nonindigenous species, which we will
hereafter abbreviate as invasive species. Additional discussions of terminology and related issues are available in Davis and Thompson (2000), Richardson et al. (2000), Lodge and Shrader-Frechette (2003), Colautti and MacIsaac (2004), Donlan and Martin (2004), and Pysek et al. (2004). Process of invasion
At one level, the issue of invasive species is well illustrated by thousands of different examples, replete with idiosyncratic biological details, from brown tree snakes on Guam to snakehead fish in Maryland to monkey pox in the Midwest. At another more basic level, such catalogs of examples obscure the biological processes that are common to all invasions, and that hold the key to scientific analysis and appropriate policy and management responses (Fig. 1). Species are carried
in a pathway, the purpose of which may be to transport species (e.g., the pet and horticultural trades) or in which the transport of species is incidental to the primary
human purpose (e.g., insect pests in lumber shipments, many different kinds of organisms in ballast water of ships, viruses carried by humans themselves). Depending on the conditions and the duration in the pathway, some proportion of the organisms will be alive when they are released or escape at a location outside the geographic area where they previously occurred. Many such nonindigenous species subsequently go extinct in a new location, but a proportion, about 50%
for animal species (Jeschke and Strayer 2005), establishes a self-sustaining population (Mack et al. 2000). At the next stage of invasion, many established species remain localized, and most are probably not even
detected by humans. Yet a proportion of established species, about 50% for animals (Jeschke and Strayer 2005), spread widely and become abundant at many new
locations, sometimes after a lag phase of many years in which populations remained small and localized (O'Dowd et al. 2003). Such species are then classified
as invasive, and because of their abundance, they cause detectable ecological changes, which are often viewed as harmful. Human health is sometimes affected, and economic costs are often incurred (Pimentel et al. 2005).
Policy and management implications become clear when these common processes and probabilistic transitions during invasion are recognized. The possible human management responses narrow as any invasion progresses (Fig. 1). Prevention is possible only early in the process, before a species arrives in a new range or at
the point of entry. Once a species is well established, eradication is costly and sometimes impossible. Eradication therefore depends on the rapid convergence of appropriate technology, political will, and resources.
In the United States, most eradication attempts occur when direct risks to human health loom. The arrival via international travel and trade of viral pathogens of
many organisms, including humans (e.g., West Nile virus, monkey pox, SARS, and HIV) (Breiman et al. 2003, CDC 2003, Chan-Yeung and Yu 2003, Check
2004, Lingappa et al. 2004) and parasite vectors (e.g.,
Asian tiger mosquito, Aedes albopictus, that can carry dengue and yellow fever; Reiter and Sprenger 1987, Moore 1999, Linthicum et al. 2003) have all prompted substantial management and policy responses in the
United States. Nevertheless, only monkey pox and SARS have been eradicated, while West Nile virus, Asian tiger mosquito, and HIV are now widespread. We are not addressing human diseases in this paper, but we do consider management and policy responses to diseases as an instructive example for responses to other invasive species. The activities of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) are especially relevant. The processes of emergence of human diseases are often the same as those for other invasive species, including wildlife diseases, which we evaluate here.
Indeed, many parasites, including West Nile virus and monkeypox, affect both humans and many other domestic animals and wildlife species. The management and policy responses to disease therefore offer a touchstone for evaluating current societal responses to other invasive species. For both human parasites and
other invasive species, once the opportunity for eradication has passed, few options remain: control of populations in selected locations, slowing the spread of
species, and adaptation by humans.
Even when the technology and political will for control efforts exists, resources must be made available in perpetuity, unlike many other types of pollution abatement. For example, expenditures in response to
West Nile virus in Louisiana alone for just nine months in 2002 - 2003 were $20 million (Zohrabian et al. 2004).
For non-health related species, the costs of control are typically lower, but still substantial. The United States and Canada have spent at least $16 million annually
since 1956 to reduce sea lamprey populations to a level at which losses to the Great Lakes fisheries are acceptable, and Florida spends $14 million annually
for control of nonindigenous aquatic plants (Schmitz et al. 1993). While these and other control programs are successful, similar efforts are too rarely attempted.
Instead, the default response in U.S. policy is adaptation -  passively adjusting to the damages caused by new species  -  even when, as is often the case, eradication or control would be a more cost-effective response.
Overall, only a fraction of introduced nonindigenous species establishes, and only a small proportion of those species pose a direct threat to human health or are otherwise invasive (Williamson 1996; Fig. 1). Nevertheless, the number of invasive species in the United States and elsewhere is large and continuing to grow because of increasing global movements of humans and goods.
For example, the numbers of nonindigenous plant pathogens, insects, and mollusks discovered in the United States since 1920 are strongly correlated with importation of goods over the same time period, and are forecast to increase by 16 - 24% over the next 20 years (Levine and D'Antonio 2003). As the world's largest economy and home to many of the world's richest ecosystems, the United States is particularly vulnerable to additional biological invasions. We therefore emphasize
the urgent need for more effective efforts of prevention, eradication of newly established nonindigenous species, and control of currently invasive species.
We assess general policy approaches in light of recent scientific advances (Table 1), and make six recommendations requiring policy and management action.
PREVENTION
Policy makers should focus on early steps in the invasion process because that is where the most costeffective responses are possible (Fig. 1): preventing organisms from entering a pathway, and preventing organisms that are transported from being released or escaping alive. Thus, prevention efforts must include a focus on pathways (Ruiz and Carlton 2004). Once a highly invasive species arrives, it is difficult to prevent rapid spread. For example, many introduced
plant species disperse freely by wind, water, or animals, and via roads and riparian zones, to many new ecosystems. One purple loosestrife plant (Lythrum salicaria) can produce thousands of seeds that are readily transported downstream by water to new locations along river networks, establishing new populations (Malecki et al. 1993, Galatowitsch et al. 1999), while terrestrial species invade roadways and highway edges (Randall and Marinelli 1996).

</text>
