<text id="L03" category="" words="2007" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Tomb of the Golden Bird. HarperCollins Publishers Inc." Author="Elizabeth Peters" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="/">

"I have finished," said David John, moving a piece. "Checkmate, sir."
After the children had been removed, I said to Sethos, "You
shouldn't have let him win."
"I didn't let him win," said Sethos.
F ROM M ANUSCRIPT H
It could not be said that many of their seasons in Egypt had lacked
distraction, but to Ramses this was one of the worst. Not only did they
have a wanted fugitive hiding out with them, but the discovery of Tut-
ankhamon's tomb would bring half the world to the small town of
Luxor. There was no question of keeping the find a secret. It had been
known, and exaggerated, by the citizens of Luxor almost from the first
moment. Arthur Merton, the Times correspondent, had been allowed
into the tomb on November 30, and had wired his dispatch the same
day. Representatives of the Cairo newspapers had begun to arrive. The
hotels were full and some of the dragomen were wooing tourists by
telling them about the great discovery and offering to show it to them.
By December 3, there was nothing much to see, since Carter had re-
filled the tomb, but that didn't deter the curious. The sheer numbers of
strangers provided perfect cover for assassins. If Sethos's adversaries
hadn't become suspicious of "Anthony Bissinghurst" by now, they
weren't the professionals Ramses believed them to be.
His premonitions turned out to be correct, but not in the way he ex-
pected. One night shortly after the tomb had been refilled, they were sit-
ting on the veranda after dinner when they heard hoofbeats
approaching.
"Someone's in a hurry," Ramses said, going to the door. "Good
Lord, it's Bertie. What's wrong?"
"Can Nefret come? Right away?"
"Of course." Nefret rose without haste, her voice taking on its note
of professional calm. "Who is ill, Bertie? Your mother?"
"No, thank God. That is . . ." He removed his hat. "Sorry. I'm
afraid I rather lost my head. It's not a matter of life and death, I sup-
pose, but he's an awful sight, covered with blood and - "
"Cyrus?" Emerson demanded.
"Nadji. He went over to Luxor this evening, and we were just starting
to worry about him when he staggered in, covered with blood and - "
"Let me get my medical bag," Nefret said.
"I will start the motorcar," Emerson exclaimed.
"We will take the horses," his wife said, putting her embroidery back
in its bag.
"Now, Peabody, the motorcar is in perfect condition. Selim and I
had it out for a spin yesterday."
"The steering apparatus came loose."
"But the brakes worked," Emerson said triumphantly. "And Selim
has repaired - "
"No, Emerson. Not in the dark and along that road."
Ramses slipped out. By the time the others reached the stables he
had roused Jamad and saddled Risha and Nefret's Moonlight. Nefret
hurried in, bag in hand, while, at his mother's insistence, several other
mounts, including hers, were being saddled. He had known it was a for-
lorn hope that she would remain behind.
"We'll go on ahead," Nefret announced. "With Bertie."
"Aren't you coming?" Ramses asked Sethos.
Hands thrust into his pockets, he stared unenthusiastically at the
mare Jamad was saddling, and then shrugged. "I suppose I ought."
Ramses left them to it, following his wife out the open gate and
along the road. Nefret set a rapid pace. The Castle shone through the
dark like a public monument, and the gates were open. Hastily dis-
mounting, they hurried into the house, where Cyrus was waiting.
"Sorry if we scared you," he said. "Cat says it's not as bad as it
looked, but Bertie got worked up and - "
"Don't apologize, Cyrus," Nefret said. "Where is he?"
Nadji had been put to bed in his own room. Though Katherine had
sponged off his face and bared chest, he was still a nasty sight. When he
saw Nefret he smiled apologetically.
"They should not have bothered you. Mrs. Vandergelt is a good
nurse and I am not much hurt."
"You look like hell," Ramses said, studying the bruises and cuts and
the blood matted in his hair. "What happened? Should he talk, Nefret?"
She had given the exposed parts of his body a quick inspection. Now
she pulled down the sheet that covered him to the waist. He was wear-
ing loose drawers, but he let out a cry of protest.
"I'll go," Katherine said tactfully. "You mustn't mind Dr. Emerson,
Nadji, she is accustomed to - er - this."
Cyrus or one of the male servants must have helped him undress and
change clothes, Ramses thought. Brick-red with embarrassment, Nadji
looked even younger than his real age, which was probably in the early
twenties, but he swallowed and tried to pretend he was accustomed to
being examined by a woman. "Aywa. Yes. Of course, I understand."
Fortunately Nefret had finished checking the lower part of his body
before the rest of the party burst in. Nefret smoothly raised the sheet as
Nadji started convulsively.
"It could be worse," she reported, before her mother-in-law could
demand details. "He got a nasty thump on the head, but there's no sign
of concussion. Looks as if someone went at him with a club and another
someone with a knife."
"What happened?" Emerson demanded, looming over the bed.
"Just a minute, Father." Nefret stirred drops into a glass of water and
held it to Nadji's lips. "Drink this, it will help the pain while I disinfect
these cuts."
"I will assist," said her mother-in-law eagerly.
"Not necessary, Mother."
Nadji let out a sigh of relief and let his head fall back on the pillow.
Obviously the Sitt Hakim terrified him even more than her formidable
husband.
"I will tell you, Father of Curses, what little I know. I had gone to a
coffeeshop in Luxor, and when I started back toward the landing two
men attacked me. I do not know who they were, their faces were cov-
ered, but I took them for ordinary thieves. At first I fought back, but I
was losing and no one answered my calls for help, so then I thought, if
it is my money they want, let them take it. I fell on the ground. They
went on kicking and pulling at my clothing, and I had visions of Par-
adise and believed I would die. Then . . ." His brow furrowed. "Then I
thought I heard a far-off voice say, 'Fools. A man may increase his
height but not lessen it.' It must have a been a dream, for the words
make no sense."
Not to him, perhaps. Ramses looked at his uncle, standing silently in
the corner.
"What happened then?" Emerson asked.
"I fainted," Nadji said simply. "When I woke no one was there. So I
came here. I am sorry, Mr. Vandergelt, that I was late."
Cyrus patted him on the shoulder. "Not your fault, my boy. How do
you feel?"
"Sleepy." He flinched a little as Nefret dabbed antiseptic on the head
wound.
"The worst is over," she said. "You should have been wearing your
turban."
"They pulled it off." Nadji let out a weak giggle. "They pulled at my
hair too. It hurt."
He had talked more that night than in the entire time they had
known him, Ramses thought. Talked sensibly . . . even glibly. As if he
had thought his story out in advance.
"Sleep now." Nefret pulled the sheet up to the patient's chin. "I will
leave more medicine. You'll need it tomorrow morning, because you will
be stiff and sore."
"How is he? What happened to him?" Suzanne was waiting outside
the door. She had kept out of the way until then, and Ramses couldn't
help thinking her inquiry sounded somewhat perfunctory. They assured
her that the attack had been an ordinary attempt at robbery, and that
Nadji had not been much hurt.
"Can I do anything to help?" The question was directed at Cyrus,
and accompanied by one of her sweetest smiles.
Picturing Nadji's face if the girl was allowed to sit by his bedside,
Ramses assured her that her assistance was not needed.
They refused Cyrus's invitation to stay for a drink. He was eager to
discuss the revelations of the evening, but it couldn't be done in the
presence of Katherine and Suzanne. Ramses knew they would have to
take Cyrus into their confidence before long. His mother had told him
what Cyrus had said about Sethos: "Whenever that fellow turns up it
means trouble." Ramses couldn't have agreed more. They had managed
to put their old friend off so far, but Cyrus was too shrewd to miss that
revealing statement Nadji had overheard from his attackers. It could
only mean that they had mistaken the young man for someone else.
And, given his checkered past, Sethos was the logical suspect.
They held the horses to a walk so they could talk. Sethos edged close
to his brother.
"Congratulations," said Emerson, who had observed this maneuver.
"Once again an innocent took the beating meant for you."
Sethos didn't bother to deny it. "They're getting closer. Why did
they pick on him?"
"Because not even you could disguise yourself as a petite French-
woman," Nefret said.
"Then that only leaves Anthony Bissinghurst, doesn't it?"
"Not necessarily," Ramses said grudgingly. He didn't at all mind see-
ing his uncle in a state of nerves. "I wonder if attacks on male tourists
have increased recently?"
"I wouldn't be at all surprised if they had," Sethos said, cheering up.
"I could be anybody, even a tourist."
"Until Margaret turns up," Ramses said. "I can't imagine what's
been keeping her."
"She may not have been in England when the rumors about the
tomb began," Nefret said.
"She'll certainly have heard the news by now," Emerson said. "Mer-
ton's article was in the Times on the thirtieth. If she left right away she
could be here any day now."
"Hmmm," said his wife.
"What's that supposed to mean?" Emerson demanded.
"It means that we will deal with Margaret when the time comes.
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof."
The day wasn't over. Daoud and Selim were waiting on the veranda.
The former's face was grave.
"Now what?" Emerson demanded. It took a great deal to wipe the
smile from Daoud's face.
"Bad news, Father of Curses."
"We know about the attack on Nadji. We've just come from there,"
Ramses said. "He isn't much hurt."
Daoud shook his head. "Not that, Ramses. It is worse, much worse."
"You make it worse," Selim said emphatically. "It was an accident,
meaningless - "
"For God's sake," Emerson shouted. "What has happened?"
"The golden bird," Daoud intoned. "It has been eaten by a cobra,
the defender of the pharaoh. It means death to those who invade his
tomb."

FROM MANUSCRIPT H (CONTINUED )
LORD CARNARVON AND HIS DAUGHTER LEFT FOR CAIRO AND ENGLAND
on the fourth of December. Ramses happened to be in Luxor that day
on business of his own, so he was privileged to see their procession
sweep through town with all the fanfare of a royal progress, surrounded
by admirers and followed by the press. Carnarvon passed him without a
glance. Perhaps he didn't see me, Ramses thought charitably. Carter did
see him. He raised one hand in a half-hearted salute before hurrying on.
Carter followed his patron to Cairo two days later. According to
Daoud, he was saddened by the loss of his bird, but refused to understand
the dire implications, which were evident to every sensible individual.
"Bah," said Emerson. "It was only a bird, and cobras are not uncom-
mon."
"But the omen of the golden bird was true," Daoud replied. "The
golden tomb was found. And is not the cobra the symbol of the
pharaoh?"
"He has you there, Father," said Ramses.
"So you should be grateful to God that you are not the one who
found the tomb," Daoud said earnestly. He bade them a ceremonial
farewell and went off in something of a hurry.

</text>
