<text id="N07" category="" words="2017" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Telegraph Days" Author="Larry McMurtry" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="/">

We were just south of the Cimarron River, in a part of
the plains populated by no one, other than Jackson and
myself - and I, for one, didn't plan to slay.
"Use some of this worthless barn," I told my
brother. "It's only half a barn anyway, and we won't be
needing it now." Father had first supposed that the
prairies beside the Cimarron might be a good place to
start a Virginia-style plantation, but he wisely discarded that notion while the barn was just half built.
Now, with Father dead, we were down to Percy, our
strong-minded mule, and a flea-filled cabin with glass
windows. Ma had insisted on the glass windows - it
was her last request. But she was dead and so was our
gentle, feckless father. We had no reason to linger on
the Black Mesa Ranch - the name Father had rather
grandly bestowed on our empty acres.
I was twenty-two, kissable, and of an independent
disposition. My full name was Marie Antoinette
Courtright, but everyone called me Nellie. Mother told
me I got named after Marie Antoinette because Father
happened to be reading about the French Revolution
the night I was born - my own view is that he anticipated my happiness and was secretly hoping the people
would rise up and cut off my head.
Jackson began to rip boards off the barn. He handed
me a pick and a spade, implements I accepted reluctantly.
"Being a lady, I try to avoid picks and spades," I mentioned.
"I guess you've kissed too many fellows to be calling
yourself a lady," Jackson remarked, picking up a crowbar - or half a crowbar. At some point, mysteriously,
our family crowbar got broken in two; this setback
annoyed Father so much that he threw the other half in
the Missouri River.
"It's not my fault you're off to a slow start in the kissing derby," I told him.
"Where would I get a girl to try and kiss, living way
out here?" he asked.
For once Jackson had a point. My various cowboys
could always slip away from their herds long enough to
provide me with a spot of romance, but very few young
ladies showed upon the Cimarron's shores.
"I expect you'll get your chance once we gel settled
in Rita Blanca," I assured him.
Jackson looked a little droopy as he laid out Father's
coffin. We Courtrights are, in the main, not a very sentimental lot. But burying brother after brother, sister
after sister, and now parent alter parent, as Jackson had
been required to do, was the kind of work that didn't
put one in the whistling mood. I marched over and gave
my brother a big hug - he didn't sob aloud but he did
tear up. "I expect I'll miss Pa more than you will," he said,
with a catch in his voice. "Pa, he always had a story."
"It's just as well he didn't hear you call him Pa," I
reminded Jackson.
Father had no patience with abbreviation, localisms,
or any deviation from pure plantation English; but
Jackson was right. Father always had a story.
When we were at home, he was always reading stories to the little ones, hut once we left Virginia and
headed west, the little ones soon commenced dying - a
common thing, of course, for westering families, but a
heavy grief nonetheless. It broke our mothers heart. All
along the Western trails, in the years after the Civil War,
families that got caught up in westering died like gnats
or flies. Santa Fe Trail, Oregon Trail, California Trail - 
it didn't matter. The going was deadly. The brochures
the land agents put out made westering seem easy - 
sparkling water holes every few miles, abundant game,
healthy prairie climate with frequent breezes - but in
truth, there were no easy roads. Death traveled in ever)'
wagon, on every boat. Westering made many orphans,
and picked many parents clean.
Jackson and I were young and healthy - that was our
good fortune. Neither of us shied from hard work. I set
aside being a lady and had the grave half dug by the
time Jackson finished the coffin. We buried Father in a
buffalo robe lie had bought from an old Osage man.
Then we rolled him in the coffin and eased the coffin
into the earth. Dust was on its way to dust.
"We ought to sing a hymn at least," Jackson suggested.
Hymn singing makes me money - I have a good
voice but a poor memory for the words of songs. Since
Jackson and I had not been churchly people we could
not quite string together a whole hymn, but we did sing
a verse or two of "Amazing Grace," and then we sang
"Lorena," in memory of the thousands of fallen heroes
of the South. Since our vocal chords were warmed up
we finished with a rousing version of "The Battle Hymn
of the Republic." It was a Yankee hymn, of course - 
Father, who fought with Lee at the Wilderness and elsewhere, might not have approved, but Father was dead
and his fight was over. Maylx- it was time to let bygones
be bygones - singing one another's songs was a start.
Across the Cimarron, to the northwest, the July sun
was shining hard on Black Mesa, the only hill anywhere
around. Rila Blanca, the little town we had decided lo
head for, was more than thirty miles away. Percy, our
strong-minded mule, hated long stretches of travel and
would balk and sulk most of the way. But Percy would
just have to put up with a lengthy travel, since neither
Jackson nor I fell like spending another night in the
flea-filled cabin.
"Let's go partway and camp," Jackson suggested. "It's
a full moon. It'll stay light till almost morning."
Having no one lo keep us, or say us nay, that is
exactly what we did.


2

In early July, along the Cimarron, the summer sun
takes a good long while to go down. Percy began to pretend he was worn out before it was even good dusk.
Fortunately we struck a little trickle of a creek, whose
water was a good deal less muddy than what could be
had from the river itself.
Seven or eight buffalo were standing around a wallow, and one was even wallowing in the dust, exactly
as he was supposed to. Jackson and I had with us all
the Courtright weaponry: Fathers old cap-and-ball
pistol, and a ten-gauge shotgun, and a rusty sword.
Jackson had killed three geese and a turkey or two
with the shotgun, but neither of us had ever fired the
pistol.
The buffalo stared at us, and we stared back at them.
Percy indicated, by a series of snorts, that he didn't care
for their company.
"Buffalo liver's said to be mighty tasty," Jackson
observed.
Of provisions we had none.
"I suppose we could bring one down with Fathers
pistol," I said. "But I don't know that I fancy trying lo
cut up a buffalo this late in the day."
"Be bloody work, wouldn't it?" Jackson said, in a
lone that was none too polite.
I had long ago learned to ignore impolite remarks,
and I ignored Jackson's pettish lone.
"I suppose you're afraid that if you ride into Rita
Blanca all bloody, that sheriff you're so keen on might
not want to marry you, after all," my brother said.
The sheriff he was referring to was named Bunsen, a
sturdy young man about my age. Sheriff Bunsen had
ridden out to propose to me half a dozen limes.
Each time I politely turned him down. One of my
grounds for refusing Ted was that he sported a silly looking walrus mustache that I suppose he probably
thought made him look important - ignoring the fact
that it tickled when he kissed me. Of course, if Teddy
Bunsen had been really important he would have been
sheriff of a town better than Rita Blanca, a dusty place
on the plains where people stopped when they just
absolutely didn't have the strength lo travel another
step toward Santa Te or wherever they thought they
wanted to get to.
Father had hoped to hire a full complement of servants in Rita Blanca - after all, what plantation lacked
servants? - but nobody in that miserable community
even came close to meeting Father's standards. We were
servantless our whole time on the Cimarron, which was
probably a good thing, since it forced Jackson and me to
acquire skills such as gardening and carpentry which we
never would have been allowed to use if we had been
stuck in Virginia, being minor gentry.
Be that as it may, we were, for the moment, camped
on the prairie with nary a bite to eat.
"There's bound to be prairie chickens around here
close," I told Jackson. "If you were to hurry up before it
gets dark you could probably knock one over with a
rock. If you do, I'll cook it."
"I'm a near orphan now," Jackson said, plaintively.
"If you marry that dern sheriff I'll have no family at all."
"Wrong, you'd have more family - a new brother-inlaw," I pointed out.
But Jackson was just in a mood to gloomy - alter
all, we had buried Father that day. The buffalo had
drifted off in the dusk. I walked over toward the river,
armed with a couple of good rocks; within five minutes
I had knocked over two slow-moving prairie hens.
These I promptly dressed and spitted.
While we were finishing off the birds, that huge yellow prairie moon came up, and soon the coyotes were
making their yippy, rackety music. Jackson hobbled
Percy, a mule that could not be trusted. After supper, I
suppose, I must have nodded off. When I woke up my
little brother was curled up in the buffalo wallow, snoring like a sow, and that moon that had been so big and
yellow was high up in the sky and while again.


3

The not-so-distant booming of a buffalo gun
brought me out of my restless slumber, though it failed
to wake up Jackson, who could have slept through
Shiloh. We got on our way in time lo observe lhat the
buffalo we had surprised at twilight didn't make it
much past dawn.
Father's good friend Aurel Imlah, die smelly but
neighborly local hide hunter, killed every one of the
buffalo while they watered from the Cimarron. Two of
them, both bulls, had actually fallen in the water, which
presented something of a challenge for Aurel's two-man
skinning crew. They were muttering and upbraiding
one another in a language I could not understand.
"It's Polish," Aurel informed me, when I inquired.
Aurel's heard was so long and filthy lhat I wouldn't have
been surprised to see a small bird fly out of it. Aurel's
brother Addison was the postmaster in Waynesboro,
Virginia, ancestral seat of the Courtrights. The actual
"seat" was a big yellow manor house whose fields
hadn't been properly tilled since before the war.
I like Aurel Imlah, though I did my best to stay
upwind of him when he came to play chess with Father.
He had gentle eyes and a bemused expression.
"Mr. Imlah, Pa hung himself to death!" Jackson
blurted out, at which news Aurel frowned.
"Damnit!" he said. "I expect you'd welcome breakfast."
Looking at the eight skinned corpses of the buffalo
dulled my appetite for a minute - the poor dead beasts
looked so nude somehow, now that their skins were off.
"I suppose you've heard about General Custer," Mr.
Imlah added.
"Georgie Custer, what about him?" I asked.
"The young fool overmatched himself, finally," the
old hunter informed us. "He was wiped out with some
two hundred and fifty men at the Little Bighorn, which
is a creek in Montana. I believe."
"Who got him?" I asked - I was not at all surprised
that someone had.
"A huge passel of Indians got him," Aurel told us,
before turning his attention to his Polish skinning crew.
One of them was waving a knife in a manner that his
boss did not care for.
"Poke a hole in that skin and you're fired," he told
the man.

</text>
