<text id="N11" category="" words="2013" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="One Night Stand" Author="Roland S. Jefferson" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="/">

The car was followed by the banshee scream of LAPD sirens, flashing red and blue lights of a half dozen black and whites in dogged pursuit.

Overhead drama. The familiar low-pitched coughing drone of an LAPD helicopter playing hopscotch with its halogen beam spotlight joined in the chase, followed by the higher-pitched whine of news helicopters approaching in the distance. Without braking, the driver attempted a tire-punishing right turn onto a one-way street. His lights off, he misjudged his speed and plowed into the side of a parked car, shearing off its door and sending it flying through the air like a Frisbee. The explosive force of the collision sent the Mustang skidding sideways across the street. The driver manhandled the wheel, brakes, and gearshift all in a single motion, careened into the glaring headlights of an oncoming pickup truck, near-certain lethal impact in the making. But skill and luck were still with the driver. He regained a measure of last-second control and prevented a head-on collision, but not the slamming impact with a parked car that left the mangled white door with streaks of blue. The chase continued -- with the shrill, ear-splitting squeal of tortured rubber, whiffs of smoke from rear wheel wells, and a whining transmission through five forward gears of acceleration down the one-way obstacle course -- as the Mustang approached a spike strip visible at the corner.

Show-and-tell.

The driver downshifted, avoided the spike strip, hit the curb and sidewalk, and took a shortcut across a vacant lot that kicked up clouds of dust and clipped the rear fender of another parked car as it exited, sending pieces of metal, red plastic, and shards of glass clattering across the pavement. Tires screamed for relief. Near-deserted Market Street an LAX runway as the Mustang approached liftoff speed. Suddenly the halogen light of the helicopter caught up to the pony, painted it in a circle of daylight like the tractor beam of the Enterprise.

Inglewood.

Family Bloods.

Hard choice: spike strip or Bloods. Both lethal.

He gambled on Inglewood, made a tight last-second tire-shredding turn onto a tree-lined street of graffiti-covered apartment buildings. Hoping to become invisible in a world of infrared sensors and global positioning satellites, the driver raced down a darkened corridor toward the next intersection. But there was no intersection.

There was a cul-de-sac.

Downshifting and locking disc brakes put the muscle car in a screeching, out-of-control skid that destroyed a pair of expensive twenty-inch rims with all the blunt force of its five thousand pounds slamming headfirst into a curb, up, over, and into the immovable mass of a concrete light pole that brought the 5.0 to a crashing, bone-jarring stop. A swirling cloud of coolant hissed and seeped from the radiator like steam from a teapot.

One way in. No way out -- unless the Mustang could fly. Black and whites swarmed in like a flock of helicopter gunships on a search-and-destroy mission.

All they needed was a declaration of war.

Bail or assume the position. Only partial halogen sunlight through the trees. He could've run for it, lost himself in the massive apartment complex, found a sympathetic tenant who didn't like cops. Waited it out till the K-9 squad gave up. Only problem: graffiti-covered apartments were not friendly. Driver read the gang graffiti, knew his blue scarf was the wrong color to wear in a Blood neighborhood. Bloods in a war with LAPD on a daily basis, battling Crips on a second front. Driver figured his odds were better with the cops.

Tractor beam of the helicopter, blinding spotlights on top of a dozen black and whites turned the battered Mustang into a show car, optical reflections from whirling spinners on damaged rims bathing the perimeter like strobe lights in a disco. Drawing beads on the driver with their nine-millimeters, twice as many cops cautiously approached the car from all sides like hunters on safari stalking their prey.

The chase was over. Five-O won. Ignition key off, deep-throated mufflers fell silent, all too familiar command on the charged-up bullhorn barking orders. He knew the routine. Both hands out of the window, open the door from the outside, step out slowly. Don't make any sudden moves. Don't even sneeze. Cops on edge after a chase, adrenaline rush, hair-trigger index fingers itching for exercise. Hands over his head, walk to the center of the tractor beam. Slowly. Down on both knees, then flat on the pavement with both arms outstretched, wait for the pat-down, wrists handcuffed behind his back.

Sleepy-eyed South Central LA residents fell out of bed, crowded into barred front windows, porches, and litter-filled streets to see the latest inner-city reality show as if on cue from a Marine Corps drill sergeant. A group of curious residents, some men, more women, ten times as many teenagers, all wearing red in some combination -- shirts, scarves, sweats -- began hurling insults across the street, as much at the driver as at the police, his blue head scarf to the growing crowd what a red cape is to a bull. Angry youths gave the finger to helicopters above, hitting up gang signs behind arriving TV commentators who were interviewing police and spectators. Drifting in and out of the tractor beam, shouting profanities over the loud popping of helicopters circling overhead like buzzards waiting their turn to feed, amid the constant chatter of police traffic on radios and walkie-talkies, the gathering crowd began to make a block party out of the event. The aroma of blunts, primos, and weed daring police to say a word or risk Rodney King time. Boom boxes started to blare. Teenage girls wearing scarcely more than hair curlers began wiggling, bouncing, and dancing in a wild sexual frenzy to the beats as if auditioning for a Dr. Dre music video. Gangbangers rapping along with 50 Cent, Jay-Z, OutKast. A few got out lawn chairs, ice chest full of forties. All they needed was barbecue. Three o'clock in the morning. Someone should've sold tickets.

A pair of hands jerked the driver roughly to his feet, brought him eye level with a small white face, blond mustache, name tag that read MONROE. Rifling the driver's wallet, he asked, "Your name Napoleon Booker?" looking first at the photo on the driver's license and car registration, then at the driver.

"If that's what it says."

"I can't read. Suppose you tell me. I run a check, what name's coming back?"

"You can't read, go take a special-ed class."

The cop shook his head and mumbled to no one in particular. "Comedian, huh? Okay, Napoleon, here we go," he said, and he withdrew a small card from his shirt pocket. "You are now under arrest," he began formally. "Anything you say can and will be used against you in a court of law. Do you understand these rights?"

Napoleon shook his head and said, "Whatever, but whose court and whose law?"

"Got any warrants, Napoleon?" Monroe said, ignoring the comment.

"What do you care, muthafucka. You can't read!"

"Smart-ass, huh," the cop spit out, not really looking at Napoleon, expecting little more, like it would be unusual if he cooperated. He ripped the blue scarf from Napoleon's head, revealing a field of cornrows in need of attention. "What set are you in, Napoleon?" the cop droned on, fingering gold chains around Napoleon's neck, going through zippered pockets of baggy pants hanging miraculously at his butt line as if by some unseen force, lifting up his shirt, turning him around, inspecting prison tattoos on both arms. "Who do you bang with -- Fruit Town Crips? Rolling Sixties? Hoover Crips? What do they call you? What do you go by?"

"Fuck you."

"That's good," Monroe said, then called out to the clan, "Hey, fellas, says his name is Fuck You, but his license says Napoleon, if you can believe that. Any you guys know him, what set he belongs to, his gang name?" Several cops walked over, took cursory looks at Napoleon, shook their heads, drifted away.

"You Mirandize him?" The name tag said CALVIN. The razor-bumped face was black, nose broad, the beady penetrating eyes cold and deep-set, a vicious mouth that snarled like a rabid dog when it opened. Attitude pure Gestapo. Not waiting for Monroe to answer and not really caring, he said to Napoleon, "Homeboys never learn, do you? Trying to drive like Mario Andretti. Don't you know you can't outrun a computer, or the ghetto-bird up there?" He pointed toward the helicopter, nine-millimeter still in his hand. "Or did you keep your black ass in school long enough to learn that?!" he said, attitude on full throttle, words hostile and venomous, absent any kinship with the suspect. "You don't have three strikes," he went on, face inches from Napoleon's, spray of spit a fountain between them. "You will when we get through with you. Won't need them gold chains on your neck where you're going. Know what I'm saying? You feelin' me, homey?" The cop slammed the nine-millimeter into his chest several times, like Tarzan declaring himself king of the jungle. Only thing missing was the yell.

Napoleon said, "Why don't you get the fuck outta my face!"

Calvin bristled at the challenge, put both hands on his belt, brought his broad nose, razor-bumped face, malignant stare, and rabid dog's mouth a hair's breadth from Napoleon's, like he was Mike Tyson squaring off with an opponent in the ring, and said, "'Cause I don't want to. So what you gonna do about it? Huh? I'll tell you what you're gonna do -- nothing! You ain't gonna do a goddamn muthafucking thing 'cause I'm the man, see." He waved his nine-millimeter in Napoleon's face like a flag. "And you ain't nothin' but a little punk-ass bitch. Know what I'm saying, homey? You feeling me?"

Mindful of news commentators broadcasting live, restless crowd watching the exchange, Monroe thought it best to intercede before Tarzan lost control. He said to Napoleon, "Why'd you run, Napoleon?"

"Why'd you stop me?"

"'Cause you were driving with no lights and had no plates."

"I just bought the car!"

"I can understand the plates," Monroe said. "What happened, they forget to install the lights?"

"Whatever."

Calvin looked over at the mangled muscle car, back to Napoleon. He laughed.

"Really? You just bought it, and you with no visible means of support," he said, knowing from instinct and experience he spoke the truth. "Let me see that," he said, and without asking he snatched the registration from Monroe's hands. "Who's Mary Booker?"

"My moms."

"That's what I thought." Calvin handed the registration back to Monroe and said, "How's a little punk-ass gangbanger like you gonna pay for a new car -- legitimately?"

"Negro, suck my muthafuckin' dick, why don't you!"

Calvin smiled, said to Monroe, "Hard little punk-ass nigga, isn't he. Wants me to suck his brains." In his face with it -- nigga, what they call black cops behind their backs.

Monroe said, "Man's name is Fuck You, what'd you expect?"

Calvin said to Monroe, "Not very creative, was she, his mom...name her kid Fuck You." And with an expression of utter disdain, beady eyes looking Napoleon up and down as if appraising a contaminated rat, he said, "Then again I can see why. I mean what else do you call garbage. Know what I'm saying." And he stepped back, wiping his hands on his uniform as if he had just touched a dirty rag. "Just look at him."

Monroe's face brightened with amusement but he didn't comment. What he saw was a black youth in his mid-twenties, muscular, well conditioned, skin the color of night. His cherub-looking unshaven face was sprinkled with hair and anchored by a wide mouth enhanced by large African lips that exposed two rows of crooked teeth when it opened. A large, flat nose, heavy lids struggling to stay open over hard brown eyes grown suspicious beyond their years, and a low forehead buttressed by flat ears, pierced with small diamond studs, rounded out its contour.

</text>
