<text id="N15" category="" words="2002" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Sagebuster's Domain" Author="Frederick Ransom Gray" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="/">

Chapter 1

After bathing in Banner Creek, Judith Anne, Rachel,
Abigail and Samantha dried their hair and warmed
themselves by the roaring bonfire. The young ladies
mingled blissfully near the round stock tank full of very cold
mountain water, which was located in front of Johnson's battered cabin on Banner Mountain. The canopy of monumental
conifers that guarded the blissful young ladies was magnificently blanketed with virgin powder from the heavens. The longstemmed grass on the surrounding hillsides had faded into dry,
brown waves of decay. Windblown wildflowers, which were
so radiant just days earlier, wilted in the sunset. The scxl covering Alkali Basin was green and fresh. The alluring scent of the
scraggly sagebrush refreshed the young ladies. They giggled
happily and highlighted their celebration by exchanging storelxmght dresses and ribbon as they sipped warm, fresh cider.
It had been a memorable summer for Abigail and Samantha. It had been a summer full of welcomed improvement and
hope. The young ladies were ecstatic to be rid of the impoverished, pitifully depressing conditions of Wcdlow's orphanage.
They vowed never to reUirn under any circumstances. They
cherished having a place they could consider their home, even
if it was with Johnson Banner. The young ladies loved living
in the majestic security of the mountains. They loved the opportunity to make new friends - friends by choice  - rather than
unsolicited associations by common miser}.
"My dress is lovely, Sam," Abigail mentioned tearfully.
"It's the first dress I've ever owned. It's so adorable. I'll treasure it forever."
"It's adorable, just like you," Samantha replied. Samantha
always appreciated her sister's openness. "I should be so grateful," she thought.
'You're welcome. I like mine, too. I trust that those tears
arc tears of joy."
Abigail gave her little sister a warm hug and kissed her
soft check.
Johnson, as he was accustomed to late in the afternoon,
played his warped guitar and juice harp and sang out of key
while enjoying delightful, home-brewed rvc whiskey from a
precious, handcrafted jug. He was glad to be home. All of the
young ladies successfully ignored Johnson's grating, careless
twang, except Samantha.
"You rival the bullfrogs."
Chickens roamed at will and cackled as they pleased. Goats
wandered around the property at their leisure, eating virtually
anything in sight. Johnson's mangy, yet faithful dog, Mange,
dutifully lay at his master's feet.
"What a sight," Johnson fathomed unashamedly as he
gazed upon the young ladies. "How lucky can one man be?
Ever mornin' I wake up on the green side of the sod I'm a happy
cowboy. This is almost better than being surrounded by a convoy of well-stocked chuckwagons in the dead of winter"
The young ladies enjoyed each other's company.
"Now it's your turn, Johnson," reminded Abigail.
"I don't need any presents, and I ain't huggin' nobody, neither," Johnson crowed.
Abigail placed her hands on her hips and stared into Johnson's hardened eyes. Johnson knew he was in for a bit of trouble.
"You know what I mean," countered Abigail.
"No comprendo, senorita," Johnson quipped defiantly.
"Surely you haven't forgotten your promise already?" Judith Anne chimed in.
"Cain't recall nothin' right off hand," Johnson denied.
The young ladies expected his resistance would be formidable.
'I'll cook your supper for a week," Rachel volunteered,
trusting he would undoubtedly reject the bribe.
"I low long has it been, sir?" exacted Judith Anne.
"Don't rightly know," Johnson defended, "and I fail to see
how that's any concern of yours, thank you, kindly."
Abigail and Samantha knew that his puzzled, reflective
expression was just Johnson's way of showing them he didn't
mind playing along. Johnson didn't think he could hold out
much longer. He slowly eased liis warped guitar to the ground
in case he had to make a run for it. He knew Samantha could
out run him. but he wasn't going to bathe without a worthwhile
protest.
Judith Anne was delighted to act as self-appointed judge.
"All those in favor?"
The young ladies unanimously and simultaneously cast
their collective vote. "Aye."
"Opposed?"
Judith Anne watched the defendant intently. She wanted
to see if he would hold his own or if he would squirm. She debated with herself whether to sneak behind Johnson and shove
him into the round stock lank full of cold mountain water if he
refused to comply with the mock jury's long-awaited verdict.
She didn't really think he would ever concede. But on the other
hand, she didn't really think it would he proper for a judge of
her renowned stature to act so impetuously.
Johnson gazed up at the towering, snow-laden mountains,
stalling, and wondered if he was doomed. "How could they do
this to me?" Johnson mused. Me quietly resigned himself to
the fact that Judith Anne's pronouncement would be swift and
ultimately beneficial, regardless of how dreadful it seemed at
the moment. Johnson consoled himself with yet another long
drink of delightful, home-brewed rye whiskey from his precious, handcraftcd rye whiskey jug. lie immediately lost his
fragile equilibrium, falling over backwards. The rye whiskey
jug landed in back of him, unbroken. However, the delightful,
home-brewed rye whiskey spilled onto the cold, wet sod.
'The odds of a full-grown, reasonably sensible, upstanding, certified, world champion cowboy who possesses heroic
aspirations takin' a legitimate, outdoor bath this time of year
without good cause arc slim to none," Johnson announced sclfassurcdly. "No muv possible'. Way too risky."
Johnson staggered as he stood, attempting to regain his wavering dignity. lie turned and bent over to retrieve his precious
rye whiskey jug, which was now only partially full of delightful, home-brewed rye whiskey. An alert ram of formidable size
suddenly charged the unsuspecting target, butting him violently
into the round stock tank full of cold mountain water. The audience immediately exploded with hysterical laughter and applause.
Johnson stood up in the stock tank full of cold water, dripping witli embarrassment, but yielding to good sportsmanship
by allowing the young ladies to share their little victory.
"You win," Johnson conceded, raising his hands helplessly.
"Remind me later to barbecue one ornery critter," he added,
pointing to the aggressor. "You just sealed your fate, ya hardheaded, contrary bag of aggravation. You crossed over the line.
You're as good as cooked."
Mange dutifully chased the bully away.
Johnson climbed out of the stock tank, staggered into his
battered cabin and grabbed the hot kettle on the stove with his
bare hand. "Yaooo!"
"Careful, Johnson!" Abigail warned belatedly. 'The kettle
is hot."
The young ladies whispered among themselves. Johnson
scurried back toward the slock tank and submerged his slightly
scalded hand.
As Johnson was preoccupied, Judith Anne boldly poured
out the remaining home-brewed rye whiskey from the precious
whiskey jug onto the cold, wet sod.
'You're not getting out of it that easy," Judith Anne proclaimed.
Feeling a bit self-conscious and increasingly obligated,
Johnson cursed as he stripped down to his long johns. He removed liis bent eyeglasses and set them on the little, rickety,
wooden table next to the stock tank. Judith Anne and Abigail
began drying his clothing by the roaring bonfire.
"We're proud of you, Mr. Banner," Rachel offered in between giggles.
"You don't know how thankful we'll be," Samantha added,
as she and Rachel snickered playfully.
"Sounds like a chorus of mockingbirds," Johnson thought.
"This could've waited 'till spring," he argued unsuccessfully.
The young ladies noticed the irritation in his voice.
Abigail suddenly heard a faint scream from a distance.
"Did you hear that?"
'Hear what?" Johnson questioned. "A bunch of conniving,
schemin', indulgent, indignant. . ."
Another scream echoed from below.
'There's nobody up in these parts except us and a few other
wild things," Johnson announced. "I'm not exactly takin' pleasure in this, ya know."
"Ssshlih, someone is in trouble. It sounded like it came
from the basin."
"YVell, aren't you going to do anything?" Judith Anne asked
as she stared impatiently at Johnson.
"Seems like I recollect bein' persuaded against my will to
take a long-awaited, rejuvenating bath by a misguided collection of young maidens and their four-legged conspirator."
The screams grew louder.
"Speaking of maidens," Johnson continued, "sounds like a
distress signal. Did you hear that? Maybe a full-grown, reasonably sensible, upstanding, certified, world champion cowboy
who possesses heroic aspirations ought to investigate somethin'
like that. Know any?" he asked while grinning.
"Johnson!" Samantha demanded. She gave Johnson "the
look."
Abigail couldn't find Johnson's favorite Nanook of the
North hat, so she grabbed his squished hat instead.
"Okay, okay. Do you want me to bathe now or in the
spring?"
Judith Anne threw his crusty boots at him, hitting him in
the chest.
"I get the message. Where's my eyeglasses?"
Abigail handed the bent eyeglasses to him, while Rachel
squashed his squished hat on his head.
Abigail and Samantha rushed into the battered cabin while
Johnson trotted to the corral. I Ie whistled for his favorite quarter
horse as he opened the gate. Sagebuster nestled next to him, as
was his custom. The full-grown, reasonably sensible, upstanding, certified, world champion cowboy who possessed heroic
aspirations haltered his big mount with surprising brevity. Johnson led him out of the corral as the orphans quickly delivered
his essentials. Johnson strapped his dirty scabbard around his
waist, slipped into his heavy, brown duster, which had a torn
collar, and shoved his dented bugle and cartridges into a pocket.
He checked his carbine and mounted his chestnut gelding.
"Sorry, boy, no time to saddle ya."
Johnson grasped the reins with his aching hand and led his
horse to the table next to the stock tank. He grabbed his rye
whiskey jug, which he thought was full of delightful, rye whiskey, and lifted it to his mouth. He tilted it up high, then lowered
it in disappointment and glared hard at the young ladies.
"Who drank all my stuff?" he asked accusingly. "How do
you expect a cowboy to wet his whistle if ya guzzled everthin'
already?"
"Can I go?" Samantha asked.
"Adios, mi jovencitos." He waved gallantly as he turned
his horse. Then he turned his horse back around toward the girls
once more.
"Uh, would one of you be so kind as to point the honorable
horse in the correct direction?" he asked playfully.
"Hie basin!" the young ladies shouted in unison.
"Ah." Johnson raised his aching hand in the air.
"Sound your silly bugle if you need help," Judith Amie
suggested.
"Save me some pie.
"Heya, giddyup, mosey down the basin." Johnson genlly
spurred his chestnut gelding into action. As Sagebuster began
to trot, Johnson led him in a southerly direction, which caused
Sagebuster to step on his master's warped guitar. The instrument
exploded into countless splinters. Johnson failed to notice.
Judith Anne thoroughly enjoyed burying Johnson's empty
whiskey jug.
"Be careful!" Abigail yelled worriedly. Johnson couldn't
hear her as he rode haphazardly toward Alkali Basin.
When Judith Anne wasn't looking, Mange dutifully dug up
his master's precious whiskey jug.
"Even if he's somehow able to stay on horseback, he will
probably just get lost," Abigail predicted dejectedly.
"But at least he will be easy to find," Samantha quipped.
"All we'll have to do is follow the vapor trail."
Mange responded to his master's whistle.
Samantha Saxson gladly helped herself to the last piece of
homemade blackberry pie.


Chapter 2

Billy Stockman was the disputed ringleader of the socalled Boys of Thunder. Most of the group couldn't
figure out how he came to be their leader. Some figured he was self-appointed. The misfortunate members who
challenged him usually ended up with broken bones or mangled
body parts.
Some disillusioned folks claimed he was a good boy who
just needed a little guidance. Others contested he was definitely
the most wayward soul the territory had ever produced. Most
everyone who knew Billy Stockman or knew of him rested a
little easier at night when he was resting in jail. And that was
happening with increasing regularity.
Folks complained that they had never known a less civicminded person in all their born days.

</text>
