<text id="P13" category="" words="2007" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="The Book of True Desires. Jove Book, New York" Author="Betina Krahn" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="/">

"He didn't lay a fang or a claw on me," she said, realiz-
ing that chewing and mauling were just two of several
stomach-churning possibilities she had faced. Her knees
went weak. She wanted to throw her arms around his big
body and feel the warmth and safety of his arms wrapped
tightly around her.
"Why didn't you just shoot the damned thing?" Good-
night planted a hand between her shoulder blades to propel
her back along the path and suddenly realized her hip was
bare. His eyes widened and he halted. "Where the hell's
your gun?"
"I . . . I think I . . ." she said, mirroring his disbelief.
"You what? Forgot it?" He pulled his hand from her as
if she'd scorched it and backed away, emotion swirling in
his face. She couldn't tell if he was disappointed, contemp-
tuous, or just plain outraged. He stalked off down the path,
stopped, then came stomping back to grab her hand.
"Dammit, just when you think you can rely on a woman - 
she starts forgetting her bloody gun!"
An hour later she sat on a fallen tree trunk, clutching a
tin cup containing a shot of brandy. They had walked, then
run back through the jungle along the path she had forged
earlier. By the time they reached the vanilla grove, it was
empty, and they headed straight for the jungle road and the
rest of their party. Between gasps, she managed to tell the
others about her encounter with the jaguar. Itza and Ruz
crossed themselves and clamped their hands over Rita's
long ears. Hedda threw her arms around her niece, and the
professor went straight for the medicinal brandy.
"I've never seen anything like it," Cordelia said, her
sense of adventure recovering more quickly than her
nerves. "It was magnificent. Jaguars are larger than I
thought. At least this one was. And it just stared at me with
those big golden eyes." She looked at Goodnight. "It was
beautiful, wasn't it?"
"Not the word I would use for it." He downed another
shot of brandy."What do you think it means?" Hedda asked, settling
beside her.
Cordelia was unsettled by the question; she had been
asking herself that very thing. A jaguar. Looking her over.
While she was searching for the Gift of the Jaguar. A chill
went through her leaving gooseflesh in its wake, and she
prayed no one noticed.
"It means we're definitely in the right area for jaguars,
probably for ancient jaguar worship and artifacts. It means
that our decision to follow this river was right on target."
She struggled to sound more sensible and objective than
she felt. "It certainly means we push on. I want to see those
'hills with the doors in them.' I can't help thinking one of
those doors will have a carved jaguar head on top."
Determined to put some space between themselves and
the jaguar and hoping to make the promised ruins by night-
fall, they traveled through the heat of the afternoon, stop-
ping only for water and to distribute some hardtack and
jerky from their supplies. Cordelia was once again wearing
her revolver on her hip, Hedda had pulled out her own pis-
tol and loaded it, and the professor hauled out and strapped
on a long-barreled Colt revolver with ivory handles. Every
snap and rustle of vegetation had their trigger fingers
twitching.
As the sun set, shadows spread out over the forest and
the hunters' trail they followed faded into a tangle of un-
dergrowth. Itza and Ruz, unsettled at the prospect of camp-
ing in the deepest part of the jungle, nervously agreed to
push on. The ruins couldn't be far now.
Unfortunately, the burros had other ideas. As the light
faded, they balked and had to be tugged, coaxed, and bribed.
Goodnight finally got the stubborn Rita to move by walking
ahead of her. But every time he slowed enough to come
within range, she nipped at his rear. Cordelia happened to be
looking when Rita finally made contact, sending Goodnight
bolting into some bushes. When he climbed back onto the
path, she spotted something sticking out of his back pocket
and pulled out forgotten twigs and leaves that had been
warmed by his body to an alluring, edible aroma.
"She wasn't being fresh." Cordelia laughed, dangling the
leaves before the ravenous Rita, who began to nibble them.
"She was being hungry." Hedda, the professor, and the Pla-
tanos joined her in laughter, relieved to have a lighter mo-
ment in what was becoming a dark end to a stressful day.
Quiet descended over the party as they plunged over the
final slopes, where recent rains had made footing treacher-
ous. Every member of the party was tensed and trying to
pick out sounds of a big predator's movement from the or-
dinary buzz and rustle in the brush around them. Tension
mounted as the vegetation thinned and they glimpsed a
haze of moonlight ahead.
The high canopy ended and they emerged into a clear-
ing in which a number of strange, cone-shaped hillocks
rose ten to twenty feet and were covered with a rolling
blanket of grasses. The mounds exuded the mystery and
menace of strange shapes glimpsed in a moonlight grave-
yard, especially so when Cordelia spotted odd-shaped
shadows tucked into the sides of some of them. It struck
her that if these were the "hills" the village hunters referred
to, then they were part of a graveyard - one that held the
remains of a civilization.
Lacking both light and energy to begin explorations,
they made a fireless camp in the middle of the mounds and
agreed to start work the first thing in the morning. It wasn't
easy going to sleep in the middle of an eerie ruin that might
hold the key to a great mystery, but as they found their
beds, exhaustion finally took hold of them, one by one.
Cordelia sprang up some time later in the moonlit glow
of her tent with her heart pounding. Without knowing quite
why, she reached for the pistol hanging on the corner of her
cot and sat with her nerves taut and senses straining. It
came again . . . from behind her . . . causing her blood to
still in her veins.
A sniffing, snuffling sound. Loud. Animal-like. Only a
scrap of canvas away. Her hand tightened on the grip of the
pistol as it came again . . . sniff, sniff . . . moving around
the tent . . . on her side . . . sniffing . . . then panting.
She clamped her free hand over her mouth to stifle her
gasp. She glanced over at Hedda, who had turned on her
side and was soughing softly, still very much asleep. Wak-
ing her - startling her and probably whatever was outside
as well - was a bad idea.
She pushed back the mosquito bar and slid her legs over
the side of the cot. Fortunately she had gone to sleep in her
breeches; all she had to do was pull a shirt over her
camisole. Then she reached under her sheet for her boots,
giving thanks again for the old guide who had taught her to
sleep with her boots on her cot. She had taken two steps to-
ward the flap when she saw a shadow moving on the tent
wall to her left. It was low and indistinct, but substantial
enough to be solid.
It didn't have to be a jaguar, she tried to tell herself. It
could be something else.
She slipped outside and turned right, holding her gun in
her right hand and cupping both gun and wrist with her
left. Her heart was in her throat as she rounded the oppo-
site corner, intending to sneak around the tent and come up
behind whatever - 
A gun barrel appeared right before her eyes!
"Aghhh!" She jumped back with a cry.
"George Almighty!"
As Goodnight jerked his gun up, he lurched backward
and tripped over a tent rope. The rifle landed nearby. As he
hit the ground, with his legs tangled in the collapsed rope,
he nearly took the tent down with him.
"What are you doing skulking around my tent this time
of night?" she demanded in a loud whisper, jabbing the air
with her gun.
"Will you point that bloody thing someplace else?" he de-
manded, still tangled but determined to rise. "My nightmare
come true - nearly shot in the middle of the night while com-
ing back from - " He made it to his feet. "Two legs. Count
'em." He pointed toward his feet. "One, two. Not four."
"I heard something," she declared defensively, still
whispering.
"Of course you did. At night this place turns into a
bloody lover's lane for the local four-, six-, and eight-
legged populations." He brushed himself off.
"It sounded like a large animal. Sniffing."
He retrieved his gun and glanced at the ghostly terrain.
"It's probably just this place. It's a little unnerving by
moonlight. And after what happened - "
"I'm serious, Goodnight. There was definitely sniffing.
And panting. The same kind of panting I heard yesterday
when - " She was suddenly distracted by the rifle in his
hands. "You were - you're holding a gun."
"So it would seem." He looked at it as if it had some-
how magically appeared there, but then rearranged his
grip, claiming it. "Our benighted guides have guns, and
even your aunt is packing a firearm. After yesterday, I
didn't think it fair that I was the only member of this expe-
dition unarmed."
"You're prowling around in the dark with a rifle?" She
choked on the last word. "Talk about nightmares. Do you
even know which end to point?"
"I'll have you know, I have more than a passing ac-
quaintance with guns. I am the terror of the grouse popu-
lation of the Lake District." He raised his nose to look
down it at her. "Pheasants quake at the sound of my name."
She erupted in a noise somewhere between a snort and
a giggle.
"Laugh if you will, but someday, you may have to depend
upon my marksmanship." He raised a lofty finger in blatant
parody of himself. "And then I shall have my revenge."
Her giggle became laughter that released something
pent up inside her. The next minute she was smiling at him,
and he was smiling back. It felt good. Very good.

Twenty-one

"I need to check out the rest of the camp," she said. "Are
you coming?"
"I suppose someone has to keep you from shooting at
moons in the forest."
They walked around the tents, checking, listening.
Other than the professor's snoring, all seemed quiet and
peaceful - until they got to the area where the burros were
grazing. There, a ragged panting sound was coming from
the far side of one of the hillocks. Guns cocked and ready,
they inched their way around and found Rita standing with
her back bowed and her belly contracted into an odd point,
panting heavily with each breath.
"Did your 'panting' sound anything like that?" Good-
night scowled.
Suddenly, Rita brayed loudly, sank onto her knees, and
rolled over onto her side. They rushed to see what was
wrong and Goodnight - muttering to himself - checked
her rear quarters and issued a diagnosis.
"She's foaling." He laid his gun against the nearest
hillock and went around to the animal's head. "You'd bet-
ter get the 'banana boys.' "
Minutes later, the Platanos were on their knees beside
Rita, one stroking her head and the other checking the
progress of her labor. Ruz declared the feet were com-
ing . . . he could see a membrane bubble . . . which burst as
a sharp little hoof emerged. But there, all progress stopped.
"Only one leg!" Ruz called to Itza, clearly panicked.
"Only one comes!"
Cordelia knew the word for "one" and "leg" wasn't dif-
ficult to figure out. Goodnight picked up the same informa-
tion and grabbed Ruz by the shoulders.

</text>
