<text id="P19" category="" words="2000" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Sin" Author="Sharon Page" PublicationDate="2006" SampledFrom="Middle" WebAddress="/">

Marcus licked his lips. The soft, intimate smile vanished. He looked predatory. Large, male, and dangerous.

For twenty-four years, she'd lived in strict propriety, not raising a ripple of scandal, but, as bold as a jade, she strutted in front of her lovely bed. Then she blushed, and hid her face.

Marcus levered up onto her bed, landing in the middle with a bounce. Beneath the green canopy, his eyes became a richer turquoise. Amusement glowed in them as he held out his hand. "Climb aboard, temptress."

The mattress dipped as she crawled to his side. With one arm beneath his head as a pillow, he reached out in invitation. She tumbled on top, and he pulled her into his commanding kiss. She met his open mouth with her lips parted, dueled her tongue with his. Her hands roamed - over solid chest, hard nipples, tracing the beautiful planes of ribs and muscle.

She let her fingers play over his stiff cock, touching stickiness and finding a damp trail on the curls below his navel. Wrapping her hand around him, she gently squeezed. Her hand barely closed around him, her fingernails grazed the soft heel of her hand.

She bent, enticed by his scent, by the fascinating beauty of his cock, and explored with her tongue. So velvety, but hard. A luscious taste - his fluid sour, the light hint of his urine, and such a heady scent. She flicked her tongue over veins, along its intriguing spine. Then stopped.

He groaned as though in pain. "Don't stop now, my sweet." His lids half-covered his eyes, his mouth tense. Sharp lines framed his lips, deep sexy lines. Dark stubble shadowed his jaw.

Her heart lurched in her chest as she gazed at his handsome face. "But am I doing it as I should? As good as Rosalyn?"

"Rosalyn is a professional. You, my dear, are a goddess."

Venetia kissed the tip, licking up the salty, rich fluid there. "You aren't in pain, are you?"

"Repeated erections without relief cause a lot of pain. Nature's way of encouraging a man to get on with it and make love to a woman."

"I want you to make love to me - the way you said."

He slid off the bed and she watched him walk across the room, to the box of toys on the secretary. The sheets were heavenly soft against her bare skin. He rifled through the box as her breathing sped up.

"What are you looking for?" she asked.

"This." What he held between his fingers was too small for her to see.

He lifted the candle that stood there. The flame licked toward him as he carried it.

"Are you going to put it out?"

"No, light another. I want to see you, temptress." He lifted the white taper from the brass holder and put the wick to the candle on the bedside table. It sputtered and caught. Two flames from one fire.

Even the way he dripped the wax to the saucer on the table was elegant. Hot, white, molten droplets splattered. He set the base of the candle into the puddle. Then he sat on the edge of the bed. "Do you know I was so jaded I once visited a woman who bound me up and dripped hot wax on my chest."

She shouldn't be shocked - she'd seen Belzique's pictures - but she was. Marcus seemed to be waiting for her reaction. He stroked the sheets beside her shoulder, plucking at the cream silk, not touching her. As though he would not dare touch her until she spoke.

Even with the candlelight, she couldn't see his shadowed eyes.

Keeping her voice even, she asked, "And that was arousing?"

"Not in the least. Highly recommended by Swansborough but I didn't see the fun myself. But I was willing to try anything."

She glanced at the candles. "You don't want me to drip wax on your person do you?"

He smiled ruefully. "Never, Venetia. And I'd never hurt you." He turned his hand palm side up. A glass vial rested there. "Oil. To ready you for me. Are still willing to trust me?"
CHAPTER TEN

"O f course, I trust you, Marcus. You've protected me, denied yourself pleasure to be with me." From beneath a tumble of sherry-red curls, Venetia's hazel eyes glowed with innocence.

"Denied myself pleasure?" Mystified, Marcus repeated what she'd said, trying to understand it. "I've denied myself nothing." He hadn't meant it to sound curt. Abrupt. Surprise showed in her eyes, confusion in the tremble of her lip.

Silk whispered as he drew the sheets down from her body, displaying her like an exquisite work of art. Dropping them in a puddle just below her feet, he bent and kissed her expressive mouth. Her fingers slid up into his hair.

But she broke the kiss. Her bare breasts rose and fell with frantic breaths. "What do I do?"

"Turn over and display your lovely bottom to me."

She rolled over onto her tummy, onto folded arms. Golden light bathed her plump cheeks, her smooth, full thighs. Shadows enhanced the curve of her spine.

He held the vial of oil under the candle's flame until the glass was warm to his touch. He drew it back, flicked open the stopper. A spicy scent filled the room.

"Mmmm." Venetia breathed in and squirmed seductively on the bed. He watched her lush derriere sway over the shimmering sheets and his throat parched.

She knew how to tempt. She knew it instinctively.

Marcus tested the oil with his baby finger, which actually shook. His heart had never pounded so hard before sex. Tipping the vial, he watched a droplet gather, then fall. It splattered on the shadowy cleft beneath Venetia's cheeks, rolled into the warm, dewy valley

He parted her cheeks, revealing her puckered entrance, tightly closed. He poured a stream of oil there. It flashed like molten gold and she arched her hips off the bed with a happy squeal.

"Oh, that tickles!"

He massaged the oil, circling and stroking until her muscles relaxed enough to let his fingertip within. A considerate lover would start slowly with the first finger, working with great patience to ready her ... 

She twisted to look at him. Lust and need and a plea for more burned in those entrancing eyes. He winked as he straddled her smooth thighs.

"Now?" she whispered. So much tension in her voice.

"Relax, temptress." A caress of his hand down her spine and she purred once more. "There will be pain, because of your innocence, but it will vanish, and you will know the most exquisite pleasure. My experience," he added wryly, "has to be good for something."

That left her bewildered, he saw. Braced on his arm, he stretched out, balancing his weight. His cock bumped her slippery cheeks. Blood drained from his brain, filling his prick to bursting.

He rasped, "Touch yourself."

Her hips lifted, her slender hand slid along silk sheets, dove down between her thighs. "I'm soaked," she confided.

God, yes. "Stroke your clit as I enter you. The pleasure there will ease any pain. I'll start with fingers - "

"I want your cock."

Her bold words set him on fire. He fought for control.

Her leg slid up the sheets, knee bent, as his finger went deep. In and out into her tight heat until it was swallowed up to the last knuckle. Over the spiciness of oil, the smoky scent of the crackling fire, Marcus breathed in the musk of her pussy, the earthy scent of her ass.

Venetia rubbed her fingers over her quim. "Oh! When I stroke myself as you do that - it's wonderful!" She was grinding her finger over her clit - no shyness about touching herself. He dared to try two fingers.

She arched her head back and moaned. Her tumbling curls shivered over her back, glinting red and gold like flickering flame. On a whimper, she took both his fingers in.

He shouldn't do this - he could pleasure her with his mouth. His cock throbbed but - 

"Oh, it's good now."

All the air squeezed from his chest. He pumped his fingers in and out with slow, steady strokes, her muscles clutching him tight. His throat was raw from panting as he fucked her derriere with his fingers. She was slick and open now.

Ready for more.

Three fingers. Almost the thickness of his cock.

He'd expected her to lay still, to be cautious and demure. Instead she thrust her bottom up to him, sawed her fingers against her pussy, turned and clawed tangled hair from her face. God, he'd no idea she would be so driven by lust. So wild.

Heavy-lidded, her eyes burned with lust. "Give me your cock," she moaned. "I want you inside. Oh, please."

Bone-hard, his cock hurt as he pushed it down, forcing it to touch her slick, hot entrance. He had to pause, his hand on her bottom, to steady himself. But she drove back into him, almost bending his cock for one excruciating instant before the head surged by the tight rim with a pop. Pleasure roared over him like a flame. He heard her cry, his deep groan of heartfelt pleasure.

He drew back, pulling his throbbing tip back to her rim. Not enough to withdraw, enough to let her grow used to him. His biceps bulged, his forearm was rigid with the strain of supporting his weight.

"Move with me, temptress," he urged, "Rock with me."

There was no shake of her head. No plea that he stop. He eased in, one more delightful inch. Then another. Her moans encouraged. She began to chant, "Yes, yes, oh yes."

Yes. Muscles quivering, he gave slow fluid strokes.

Her curvaceous bottom was in the air, her legs splayed, her pose receptive. Welcoming. Three long thrusts and his cock was buried deep, engulfed in fire and velvet. His groin struck her cushioning cheeks with each plunge. She cried loud with every thrust.

She wrapped her hand delicately around his forearm, slid down and found his hand. Her fingers, sticky with the rich honey from her quim, twined with his.

It was his undoing.

His controlled veneer fell away like his dripping sweat. He thrust like his goddamned life depended on it. His mouth twisted with grunts, growls, and fierce moans. His sweat rolled down his brow, coated his back, ran down to his lips.

Beneath him, Venetia was a wanton, fiercely pounding her bottom along his prick, ravaging her quim with one hand, holding his fingers with the other. Even half-mad as he was, crazed with the fight not to come, even as he hovered on the brink of orgasm, he reached down, joined his hand with hers at her pussy and rubbed her clit.

She screamed his name. Shattered beneath him. Inside her scotching derriere, her muscles clutched at him. Control, control, control. He clung to the mantra as he watched her come. Exquisite. Beautiful.

Between her thighs, her hand stilled and he knew she was feeling the climax pulse around her fingers.

The thought had him almost over the edge.

He drew his hands away from hers, splayed them on the bed as he slowly withdrew. His cock twanged upwards once free, glistening in the candlelight, drenched in oil.

She turned her face to the side. Tears spilled on her cheeks but a smile touched her lips. His heart lurched. Damp with sweat, her red hair spilled over her shoulders, a wash of dark fire over perfect, flushed curves. Her eyes were dreamy. As though he'd given her a glimpse of heaven.

"It was so ... so intimate, so perfect having you inside."

"I want to make it even more intimate, Venetia." He stroked the sensual curve of her naked back, unwilling to stop. He didn't want this to end. "I want to do more. I understand if you don't want to. If you need to rest."

"More intimate? Of course I want to try!"

Venetia reached out for Marcus' hand again.

</text>
