<text id="R08" category="" words="2005" checkedby="" modifiedby="" Title="Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close' Houghton Mifflin Harcourt" Author="Jonathan Safran Foer" PublicationDate="June 2005" SampledFrom="Beginning" WebAddress="http://search.barnesandnoble.com/Extremely-Loud-and-Incredibly-Close/Jonathan-Safran-Foer/e/9780618711659/?itm=7&USRI=humor+2006#EXC">

What about a teakettle? What if the
spout opened and closed when the 
steam came out, so it would become a
mouth, and it could whistle pretty 
melodies, or do Shakespeare, or just
crack up with me? I could invent a 
teakettle that reads in Dad's voice, so
I could fall asleep, or maybe a set of 
kettles that sings the chorus of "Yellow
Submarine," which is a song by the 
Beatles, who I love, because entomology
is one of my raisons d'être, which 
is a French expression that I know.
Another good thing is that I could train 
my anus to talk when I farted. If I
wanted to be extremely hilarious, I'd
train it 
to say, "Wasn't me!" every time I made
an incredibly bad fart. And if I ever 
made an incredibly bad fart in the Hall
of Mirrors, which is in Versailles, 
which is outside of Paris, which is in
France, obviously, my anus would 
say, "Ce n'étais pas moi!"

What about little microphones? What if
everyone swallowed them, 
and they played the sounds of our hearts
through little speakers, which could 
be in the pouches of our overalls? When
you skateboarded down the street at 
night you could hear everyone's
heartbeat, and they could hear yours,
sort of 
like sonar. One weird thing is, I wonder
if everyone's hearts would start to 
beat at the same time, like how women
who live together have their 
menstrual periods at the same time,
which I know about, but don't really 
want to know about. That would be so
weird, except that the place in the 
hospital where babies are bornwould
sound like a crystal chandelier in a 
houseboat, because the babies wouldn't
have had time to match up their 
heartbeats yet. And at the finish line
at the end of the New York City 
Marathon it would sound like war.
And also, there are so many times when
you need to make a 
quick escape, but humans don't have
their own wings, or not yet, anyway, so 
what about a birdseed shirt?
Anyway.
My first jujitsu class was three and a
half months ago. Self-
defense was something that I was
extremely curious about, for obvious 
reasons, and Mom thought it would be
good for me to have a physical activity 
besides tambourining, so my first
jujitsu class was three and a half months 
ago. There were fourteen kids in the
class, and we all had on neat white 
robes. We practiced bowing, and then we
were all sitting down Native 
American style, and then Sensei Mark
asked me to go over to him. "Kick my 
privates," he told me. That made me feel
self-conscious. "Excusez-moi?" I 
told him. He spread his legs and told
me, "I want you to kick my privates as 
hard as you can." He put his hands at
his sides, and took a breath in, and 
closed his eyes, and that's how I knew
that actually he meant 
business. "Jose," I told him, and inside
I was thinking, What the? He told 
me, "Go on, guy. Destroy my privates."
"Destroy your privates?" With his 
eyes still closed he cracked up a lot
and said, "You couldn't destroy my 
privates if you tried. That's what's
going on here. This is a demonstration of 
the well-trained body's ability to
absorb a direct blow. Now destroy my 
privates." I told him, "I'm a pacifist,"
and since most people my age don't 
know what that means, I turned around
and told the others, "I don't think it's 
right to destroy people's privates.
Ever." Sensei Mark said, "Can I ask you 
something?" I turned back around and
told him, " 'Can I ask you something?' 
is asking me something." He said, "Do
you have dreams of becoming a 
jujitsu master?" "No," I told him, even
though I don't have dreams of running 
the family jewelry business anymore. He
said, "Do you want to know how a 
jujitsu student becomes a jujitsu
master?" "I want to know everything," I
told 
him, but that isn't true anymore either.
He told me, "A jujitsu student 
becomes a jujitsu master by destroying
his master's privates." I told 
him, "That's fascinating." My last
jujitsu class was three and a half months 
ago.
I desperately wish I had my tambourine
with me now, because 
even after everything I'm still wearing
heavy boots, and sometimes it helps to 
play a good beat. My most impressive
song that I can play on my tambourine 
is "The Flight of the Bumblebee," by
Nicolai Rimsky-Korsakov, which is also 
the ring tone I downloaded for the cell
phone I got after Dad died. It's pretty 
amazing that I can play "The Flight of
the Bumblebee," because you have to 
hit incredibly fast in parts, and that's
extremely hard for me, because I don't 
really have wrists yet. Ron offered to
buy me a five-piece drum set. Money 
can't buy me love, obviously, but I
asked if it would have Zildjian cymbals. He 
said, "Whatever you want," and then he
took my yo-yo off my desk and 
started to walk the dog with it. I know
he just wanted to be friendly, but it 
made me incredibly angry. "Yo-yo moi!" I
told him, grabbing it back. What I 
really wanted to tell him was "You're
not my dad, and you never will be."
Isn't it so weird how the number of
dead people is increasing even 
though the earth stays the same size, so
that one day there isn't going to be 
room to bury anyone anymore? For my
ninth birthday last year, Grandma 
gave me a subscription to National
Geographic, which she calls "the National 
Geographic." She also gave me a white
blazer, because I only wear white 
clothes, and it's too big to wear so it
will last me a long time. She also gave 
me Grandpa's camera, which I loved for
two reasons. I asked why he didn't 
take it with him when he left her. She
said, "Maybe he wanted you to have it." 
I said, "But I was negative-thirty years
old." She said, "Still." Anyway, the 
fascinating thing was that I read in
National Geographic that there are more 
people alive now than have died in all
of human history. In other words, if 
everyone wanted to play Hamlet at once,
they couldn't, because there aren't 
enough skulls!
So what about skyscrapers for dead
people that were built down? 
They could be underneath the skyscrapers
for living people that are built up. 
You could bury people one hundred floors
down, and a whole dead world 
could be underneath the living one.
Sometimes I think it would be weird if 
there were a skyscraper that moved up
and down while its elevator stayed in 
place. So if you wanted to go to the
ninety-fifth floor, you'd just press the 95 
button and the ninety-fifth floor would
come to you. Also, that could be 
extremely useful, because if you're on
the ninety-fifth floor, and a plane hits 
below you, the building could take you
to the ground, and everyone could be 
safe, even if you left your birdseed
shirt at home that day.
I've only been in a limousine twice
ever. The first time was terrible, 
even though the limousine was wonderful.
I'm not allowed to watch TV at 
home, and I'm not allowed to watch TV in
limousines either, but it was still 
neat that there was a TV there. I asked
if we could go by school, so 
Toothpaste and The Minch could see me in
a limousine. Mom said that 
school wasn't on the way, and we
couldn't be late to the cemetery. "Why 
not?" I asked, which I actually thought
was a good question, because if you 
think about it, why not? Even though I'm
not anymore, I used to be an 
atheist, which means I didn't believe in
things that couldn't be observed. I 
believed that once you're dead, you're
dead forever, and you don't feel 
anything, and you don't even dream. It's
not that I believe in things that can't 
be observed now, because I don't. It's
that I believe that things are extremely 
complicated. And anyway, it's not like
we were actually burying him, anyway.
Even though I was trying hard for it
not to, it was annoying me 
how Grandma kept touching me, so I
climbed into the front seat and poked 
the driver's shoulder until he gave me
some attention. "What. Is. Your. 
Designation." I asked in Stephen Hawking
voice. "Say what?" "He wants to 
know your name," Grandma said from the
back seat. He handed me his card.
GERALD THOMPSON
Sunshine Limousine
serving the five boroughs
(212) 570-7249

I handed him my card and told him,
"Greetings. Gerald. I. Am. 
Oskar." He asked me why I was talking
like that. I told him, "Oskar's CPU is 
a neural-net processor. A learning
computer. The more contact he has with 
humans, the more he learns." Gerald
said, "O" and then he said "K." I 
couldn't tell if he liked me or not, so
I told him, "Your sunglasses are one 
hundred dollars." He said, "One
seventy-five." "Do you know a lot of curse 
words?" "I know a couple." "I'm not
allowed to use curse 
words." "Bummer." "What's 'bummer'? "
"It's a bad thing." "Do you 
know 'shit'?" "That's a curse, isn't
it?" "Not if you say 'shiitake.' " "Guess 
not." "Succotash my Balzac,
dipshiitake." Gerald shook his head and 
cracked up a little, but not in the bad
way, which is at me. "I can't even 
say 'hair pie,' " I told him, "unless
I'm talking about an actual pie made out of 
rabbits. Cool driving gloves." "Thanks."
And then I thought of something, so I 
said it. "Actually, if limousines were
extremely long, they wouldn't need 
drivers. You could just get in the back
seat, walk through the limousine, and 
then get out of the front seat, which
would be where you wanted to go. So in 
this situation, the front seat would be
at the cemetery." "And I would be 
watching the game right now." I patted
his shoulder and told him, "When you 
look up 'hilarious' in the dictionary,
there's a picture of you."
In the back seat, Mom was holding
something in her purse. I 
could tell that she was squeezing it,
because I could see her arm muscles. 
Grandma was knitting white mittens, so I
knew they were for me, even 
though it wasn't cold out. I wanted to
ask Mom what she was squeezing and 
why she had to keep it hidden. I
remember thinking that even if I were 
suffering hypothermia, I would never,
ever put on those mittens.
"Now that I'm thinking about it," I
told Gerald, "they could make an 
incredibly long limousine that had its
back seat at your mom's VJ and its 
front seat at your mausoleum, and it
would be as long as your life." Gerald 
said, "Yeah, but if everyone lived like
that, no one would ever meet anyone, 
right?" I said, "So?"
Mom squeezed, and Grandma knitted, and
I told Gerald, "I kicked 
a French chicken in the stomach once,"
because I wanted to make him 
crack up, because if I could make him
crack up, my boots could be a little 
lighter. He didn't say anything,
probably because he didn't hear me, so I 
said, "I said I kicked a French chicken
in the stomach once." "Huh?" "It 
said, 'Oeuf.' " "What is that?" "It's a
joke. Do you want to hear another, or 
have you already had un oeuf?" He looked
at Grandma in the mirror and 
said, "What's he saying?" She said, "His
grandfather loved animals more than 
he loved people." I said, "Get it? Oeuf?"
I crawled back, because it's dangerous
to drive and talk at the 
same time, especially on the highway,
which is what we were on. Grandma 
started touching me again, which was
annoying, even though I didn't want it 
to be.

</text>
